* 1849607
* Doctoral Dissertation: Genetic Screening at Home: Interpretive Policy Analysis of Direct-to-Consumer Genetic Testing
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2019,08/31/2021
* Abby Kinchy, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Wenda K. Bauchspies
* 08/31/2021
* USD 16,020.00

This project examines federal regulations regarding direct-to-consumer
advertising of genetic testing. It asks two main questions: (1) How are US
federal regulatory agencies like the Food and Drug administration categorizing,
analyzing, and regulating direct-to-consumer genetic testing; and (2) What
influence do other groups such as professional organizations, advocacy groups,
and research institutes have on the regulation of direct-to-consumer genetics?
While scholars have critically examined how genetic tests perpetuate certain
identities and social categories, we know little about the processes by which
genetic testing is being regulated. The present study advances our understanding
of this issue in relation to three major trends occurring in biomedicine. These
include a shift from genetic diagnosis to genetic risk, the redefinition of the
patient as a consumer, and the de-medicalization of genetics. This project thus
increases our scholarly understanding of direct-to-consumer genetic testing as
it is unfolding within broader social and cultural transformations occurring in
medicine and health. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a multi-method social science
investigation of factors shaping federal regulations regarding direct-to-
consumer genetic testing. Primary data for the project come from archival
documents, interviews, and participant observations. The main goal of the
project is to understand how federal agencies conceptualize and regulate direct-
to-consumer advertising of genetic tests, and the relative power of outside
stakeholder groups to shape federal regulations surrounding commercial genetic
testing. Undertaking this research enables an enhanced understanding of ethical
issues surrounding direct-to-consumer genetic testing and of how the concepts of
risk, diagnoses, and genetics are used in these contexts and in the context of
current transformations in medicine and health. Results will be shared with the
broader community to educate citizens about the regulation of direct-to-consumer
genetic testing and about the influence of stakeholders in the federal
regulatory process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.