* 1849600
* SBIR Phase I:  A New Bio-based Monomer for the Coatings Industry
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,02/29/2020
* Kevin Barnett, PYRAN INC
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 02/29/2020
* USD 224,752.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project lies in the replacement of key petroleum-based
chemicals used in the paints and coatings industry, representing a $7B industry
that is growing at 7% per year. The total addressable market includes 3 similar
diols: 1,4-butanediol (1,4-BDO), 1,5-pentanediol (1,5-PDO), and 1,6-hexanediol
(1,6-HDO). In this project, 1,5-PDO is produced from furfural, a chemical made
from renewable agricultural residues such as corn cobs and wood chips. Bio-based
1,5-PDO can be readily substituted for 1,6-HDO in many applications due to its
analogous molecular structure and is similar enough to 1,4-BDO that it can be
substituted for it in some applications. Rigorous technoeconomic analysis shows
that this "green" 1,5-PDO can be made at 3x lower costs than oil-derived
1,5-PDO, opening new opportunities for its use as a renewable monomer for
paints, coatings, adhesives and plastics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small
Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase 1 project will allow the technology to
be developed with commercially available fixed bed pellet catalysts to prepare
the technology for scale-up. Thus far, the technology has been demonstrated in
small scale fixed bed reactors with powder catalysts. A commercial scale process
requires the use of pelletized catalysts due to inoperable pressure drops over
powder catalysts in commercial-scale reactors. The higher flowrates inherent
with larger scale reactors cannot flow through the tightly packed powder
catalysts and cause a large degree of backpressure upstream of the catalyst bed;
thus, pelletized catalysts must be sourced from commercial vendors and tested
for activity and stability prior to scaling. The next phase in technology
development is to scale up the process by &gt;100x, enabling testing and
validation of larger amounts of the bio-based 1,5-PDO product in potential
customers' product lines. This SBIR Phase I project will also allow completion
of the process design work needed to estimate the economics at commercial
scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.