* 1849348
* S&amp;AS: FND: Context-Aware Ethical Autonomy for Language Capable Robots
* CSE,IIS
* 02/15/2019,01/31/2023
* Hao Zhang, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* James Donlon
* 01/31/2023
* USD 570,000.00

Robots are being increasingly used across many sectors of society, including
education, eldercare, search and rescue, and space robotics. In all these
domains, it is crucial that robots be able to accept commands through natural
language, so as to enable natural, effective, and understandable interaction.
When commanded through natural language, robots must be able to ensure that the
way that they achieve users' commands aligns with human expectations, especially
the social and moral rules humans agree to by community consensus, known as
social and moral norms. Moreover, if a robot is commanded in a way that cannot
be fully achieved while complying with these social and moral norms, that robot
must be able to explain to the user why it must reject the given command,
offering acceptable alternatives when available. While there has been some
previous work on ethical planning and command rejection, it has largely not
accounted for cases in which robots are uncertain about social or moral norms or
cases in which social and moral norms change between contexts. Research is
needed to give robots the perceptual capabilities they need to identify such
contexts, as well as the rich language understanding and generation abilities
needed to communicate about social and moral norms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research will develop an Intelligent Physical System capable of (1) performing
ethical reasoning using a dynamic set of norms that changes along with the
robot's context, (2) using these reasoning capabilities to effectively reject or
offer alternatives to inappropriate commands, and (3) learning rich
representations of the contexts relevant to its set of moral and social norms.
These capabilities are crucial as robots move into the real world, in which they
(1) may be given unethical commands, either due to malfeasance or ignorance, (2)
may be required to operate in not one context, but a variety of contexts, each
which may have their own relevant social and moral norms, and (3) may need to
learn about new contexts from both human instruction and their own perception.
In order to develop this IPS in consideration of these real-world challenges,
this research will produce the first algorithms for identifying and rejecting
inappropriate commands in uncertain, dynamic, and realistically perceived
contexts, using techniques form (1) natural language understanding and
generation in uncertain and open worlds and Dempster-Shafer Theory; (2) task and
motion planning through constrained inference and constrained optimization; and
(3) representation learning for long-term autonomy and simultaneous localization
and mapping.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.