* 1849997
* CRII: SaTC: Analyzing Information Leak in Smart Homes
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2022
* Anupam Das, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 05/31/2022
* USD 174,995.00

With the rapid adoption of the Internet of Things (IoT), we face a new world,
where we are never alone. At all times, a plethora of connected devices, from
smartphones to home assistants to motion detectors continuously sense and
monitor our activities. While these devices provide us convenience, they are
often backed by powerful analytics to sift through large volume of personal
data, at times collected without our awareness or consent. Such personal data
can reveal a lot about ourselves like our habits and lifestyles, which not only
has great commercial value to advertisers to serve targeted ads, but can also be
misused by insurance companies, repressive governments and cybercriminals. The
goal of this project is to build a foundation for understanding the different
ways in which every day Internet of Things devices can leak sensitive
information about our lifestyles. The proposed work will benefit the society as
a whole as people will become more aware of the security and privacy risks
associated with household Internet of Things devices. The proposal can also help
identify vulnerable communication protocols and consequentially lead to the
design of new privacy-enhancing protocols. Furthermore, this project will expose
both undergraduate and graduate students to cutting-edge analytic tools and help
develop a globally competitive science, technology, engineering and mathematics
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project proposes to build a testbed to
analyze the extent to which household Internet of Things devices can leak
sensitive information about ourselves. The proposed testbed will facilitate
research along the following directions: i) help determine the feasibility of
performing side-channel attacks to infer not only what devices reside inside a
household, but also what higher order activities users may be performing, for
example, inferring whether a user is making a call using Amazon Alexa or taking
a nap, or working out on a treadmill; ii) help determine what data is collected
and with whom it is shared; iii) help build an information dashboard to notify
users about the potential privacy risks. Building a scalable testbed that can
interact with a wide variety of devices will require addressing a host of
systems related challenges. The data analysis will utilize a variety of advanced
statistical, signal processing and machine learning techniques. This project
will provide a much-needed insight into the security and privacy threats imposed
by emerging Internet of Things devices. The proposed work can lead to not only
identifying devices that leak sensitive information, but at the same time foster
the design of new privacy-enhancing technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.