* 1849632
* CRII: SHF: Towards a Cognizant Virtual Software Modeling Assistant using Model Clones
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2021
* Matthew Stephan, Miami University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 07/31/2021
* USD 161,861.00

Software is growing increasingly omnipresent in society. Correspondingly,
software quality, which includes both security and reliability, is more
important than ever. Software failures can cause significant problems to both
individuals and national economies. Security is also a paramount societal
concern. This research project helps address quality by improving software
modeling, a critical stage in software development where engineers specify what
the software does and how it works. It takes the first step in allowing
engineers to leverage knowledge from data in the form of others' experiences and
best practices to incorporate established models for use in their software. This
project tackles the fundamental issues of how to 1) gather this data properly,
2) derive useful insights about that data, and 3) best present these insights
and suggestions to engineers. By providing this assistance and information,
engineers can make better-informed decisions, thus yielding higher quality
software for all society. In addition to helping engineers, software modeling is
an important aspect of the STEM curriculum, including computer science, software
engineering, and other engineering disciplines. Instructors can utilize the
approaches and tools derived from this award as a teaching tool by helping
students think critically about design decisions. This will yield better
computer scientists and engineers who are more comfortable and versed in formal
software modeling.

Model-driven engineering (MDE) is an established formal methodology for building
large-scale secure quality software systems. This award will improve that
quality by realizing a cognizant virtual software-modeling assistant to improve
software design and MDE. This project uses model-clone detection to analyze
models during development, finds similar models from the same domain and/or best
practices, and treats those similar models as training data to reason about in
order to suggest model additions and modifications to users. Such assistance
will yield similar benefits to those afforded by analogous source-code
approaches based on past usage statistics. This involves an exploratory
investigation to develop a new approach and prototype virtual software-modeling
assistant using an established model clone detector. In the first phase of this
research, the investigator will build a prototype with the capability to analyze
incomplete models being constructed/extended by engineers to suggest completed
models for insertion based on similarity to those from the same domain and/or
best practices. In the second phase, the investigator will create an assistant
that produces granular suggestions based on analyzing similar models, and
presents options to engineers of operations they may want to do next based on
those operations' prevalence in the knowledge base formed by those similar
models. This research's insights and data will provide the foundation necessary
to build more advanced modeling assistants, conduct user studies and educational
assessments of the approach, and help lay a foundation for the cognification of
modeling.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.