* 1849243
* Center for the Advancement of Wearable Technologies (CAWT): Engineered (Bio)Interfaces, Energy Harvesting/Storage and Data Analytics for Health and Diagnostic Monitoring
* O/D,OIA
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Brad Weiner, University of Puerto Rico
* Cooperative Agreement
* Chinonye Nnakwe
* 06/30/2024
* USD 13,572,700.00

This project aims to build significant research capacity in Puerto Rico (PR) in
the wearable technology field by forming the Center for the Advancement of
Wearable Technologies (CAWT). The center will build on the research capacity
developed by prior nanoscience research activities funded by the NSF Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR) and managed by the PR EPSCoR
office. CAWT is structured around three goals: 1) advance the fundamental and
applied science of biosensors, portable power and storage, and data analytics;
2) provide an engaged and diverse workforce for the nation's wearable technology
sector; and 3) stimulate economic development together with PR's medical device
industry. PR EPSCoR will utilize a rich network of academic, industry, and
government partnerships to access state-of-the-art equipment, research
opportunities for trainees and build a robust innovation ecosystem. The project
will also leverage established infrastructure in PR for education, outreach,
workforce development activities to make significant strides towards developing
a diverse, next-generation STEM workforce that is well-aligned with the science
priorities of the jurisdiction. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PR EPSCoR will build a
Center for the Advancement of Wearable Technologies (CAWT) to leverage the
jurisdiction's research strengths in nanotechnology towards advancing the
wearable technology field. Providing easy access to new types of wearable
devices that sense and monitor health conditions and provide consistent,
reproducible, and personalized medical information is essential for continued
growth within the wearable technology sector. Wearable devices face three
fundamental research and development challenges: 1) ensuring that functional
components made of materials that are fully compatible with end users; 2)
generating adequate and lasting power; and 3) updating data analytics to utilize
and manage steady streams of data generated wearable devices. The CAWT motivates
its research agenda by these challenges and is thus organized into three
Interdisciplinary Research Groups (IRGs). IRG1 focuses on the design of optical
and electrochemical sensors, microfluidic platforms, and characterization
studies of materials components that come in direct contact with biological
materials. IRG2 aims to harness existing low-level energy sources to drive low-
power wearable devices and investigate new multicomponent battery materials.
IRG3 aims to develop big data tools to address materials design problems and
support the experimental design of projects within IRG1 and IRG2. The CAWT seeks
to build a research agenda that creates novel and sustainable research lines
while also building up a workforce that can address needs within the local
medical device industry. This project will realize PR EPSCoR's goal of building
research capacity, advancing scientific discovery in wearable technology,
developing a well-trained and diverse scientific workforce, and promoting
economic development throughout the region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.