* 1849264
* S&amp;AS:INT:COLLAB: Aerodynamic Intelligent Morphing System (A-IMS) for Autonomous Smart Utility Truck Safety and Productivity in Severe Environments
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2023
* Nasim Uddin, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* James Donlon
* 04/30/2023
* USD 651,260.00

Utility trucks are the first responders in areas of extreme weather situations
for tasks such as rescuing people from disaster areas, cutting trees to restore
traffic, and repairing electric posts and restoring power. This study
establishes a scientific framework for maintaining the productivity and safety
of emergency response vehicles while eliminating accidents. This is implemented
via a novel integrated framework to monitor and predict weather conditions and
feed that information into intelligent mechanisms that autonomously shape the
aerodynamic surfaces of utility trucks. The project includes recruitment efforts
and activities to integrate high-school students, as well as students from
multiple cultures, and disciplines into autonomy research. This project is
expected to contribute new scientific knowledge and engineering techniques for
next generation transportation infrastructure resiliency, and to facilitate
economic growth in the state of Alabama.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Unlike
conventional approaches, the A-IMS will integrate model-free shape-morphing
learning mechanisms with model-based interactive design to manage air-fluid
flows, based on the road conditions, meteorology, speed limit, wind speed, and
direction. This potentially transformative framework for A-IMS will: (1) bring
new perspectives of learning to enhance the adaptability and intelligence in
natural-engineering systems that leverage physical and information processes;
(2) establish an integrated design framework for hazardous environments to
achieve resilience, and productivity through integrated adaptation of
morphological properties while also mitigating the effects of potentially
adversarial learning agents that can exist in the cloud; (3) investigate the
interactive physical components of the A-IMS, that will simultaneously operate
in two different mediums of multi-phase fluids, and solids (i.e., the air/fluid
and road). The A-IMS framework will be evaluated through hardware/software
implementation, as well as in real-world conditions in the unique test
conditions available at Wall of Wind at Florida International University. The
project's education and outreach component include integrated research and
education plans that will lead to technology transfer and summer camps with a
special focus on reaching out to underrepresented minorities and
women.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is jointly funded by the Division of
Information and Intelligent Systems in the Directorate for Computer &amp;
Information Science &amp; Engineering and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR)in the Office of Integrative
Activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.