* 1849526
* Doctoral Dissertation: From Documents to Data: The Politics of National Biometric Identification Systems in the 21st Century
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2020
* Jennifer Light, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 04/30/2020
* USD 13,032.00

This doctoral dissertation research project will use historical and ethnographic
methods to examine how national biometric identification programs are
politically rationalized, technologically designed, and publicly contested in
two distinct contexts: the United Kingdom, where such a program was legislated
in 2006 and then cancelled in 2010, and Israel, where one was legislated in 2009
and implemented in 2017. Both the UK's and Israel's programs entailed the
creation of compulsory national biometric ID cards and databases for their own
citizens. The dissertation project conceptualizes biometric data as
simultaneously biological and digital sites of individual and national identity
construction, and it explores how national biometric identification programs
create new forms of states, citizens, and the relationships between them. The
results of this project will speak to the social, political, and ethical stakes
of creating technological infrastructures of personal information collection. It
may serve as a useful resource for future deliberations about whether, and how,
personal data should be collected and stored; in addition, it will expand
conceptualizations of surveillance to include a plurality of government
motivations, public concerns, and social implications.

This project uses national biometric identification as a lens for probing the
politics of technology, surveillance, and identity in the UK and Israel; it will
explore how and why biometric identification did (or did not) become these
states' preferred technique for verifying the identities of their citizens. The
results of this research will contribute to STS literature on the relationship
between technology and identity, the co-production of technology and forms of
governance, and the relationship between the politics of technology and national
politics. A key conceptual innovation of the project is its introduction and
elaboration of a new concept, the "biometricization of identity," which concerns
the ways that people contend with the placement of the locus of individual
identity onto digital, numerical representations of the human body. The project
will make use of this new concept as a window for exploring a second theme, the
technological and political development of the "biometric state," by drawing on
a key STS insight, that the ways people relate technologies to themselves also
shape the ways technologies are governed.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.