* 1849053
* EAGER: AF: Collaborative Research: Weak Derandomizations in Time and Space Complexity
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2018,12/31/2020
* Pavan Aduri, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 12/31/2020
* USD 49,806.00

Computational complexity theory classifies natural computational problems into
various complexity classes based on the amount of resources needed to solve
them. Typical resources are time, memory, amount of randomness, and circuit
size. This project aims to advance the state of the art in understanding the
power and limitations of randomness and circuit size, using two new, previously
untested, techniques. Intuition gained from this project will enhance our
understanding of practical computational problems arising from fields beyond
computer science. The project's exploration has the potential to solve central,
longstanding, open questions in complexity theory. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
first part of the project will investigate unconditional de-randomization of
probabilistic time via de-randomization of multi-pass, probabilistic space-
bounded computations. In particular, this project will explore a new approach to
obtain an asymptotically better deterministic simulation of probabilistic linear
time than what is currently known. The second part of this project aims to prove
new fixed-polynomial size circuit lower bounds via designing pseudo-
deterministic approximation algorithms for certain counting
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.