* 1849136
* NSF Student Travel Grant for 2018 International Workshop on String Algorithms in Bioinformatics (StringBio)
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2019
* Sharma Thankachan, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 09/30/2019
* USD 20,000.00

The emerging string analytics problems from bioinformatics introduce new
theoretical challenges and necessitate researchers to re-engineer already well-
established solutions to cope with big data issues. Consequently, string
matching algorithms and related data structures are gaining an ever-increasing
interest as they form the backbone of many current genomic data processing
tools. This project supports primarily undergraduate student attendance at a
workshop focused solely on string matching algorithms in bioinformatics
(StringBio). The workshop primarily aims to gather researchers, practitioners,
and students with a different format that is composed of short tutorials and
research talks. The travel award will provide partial support to 15-20 students,
with preference to students from under-represented groups in order to inspire
these participants to pursue higher studies not only in Bioinformatics and
related interdisciplinary areas, but also in algorithms, data structures, and
their applications in the newly emerging trends of big data.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The concise tutorials to be given by experienced
researchers on foundations of string processing will cover related algorithms
and data structures from standard to advanced levels. These tutorials aim to
help students and computer science researchers who would like to make a quick
start in bioinformatics challenges by addressing the basic building blocks and
current state-of-the-art. Different from standard conference presentations of
already achieved progress, the research talks by experts in StringBio will
describe current and ongoing research studies to which, the attendees can join
by expressing their interests and potentials. The talks are expected to provide
an excellent opportunity, particularly for the beginners in the path to their
research experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.