* 1849943
* I-Corps: A microfluidic technology for drug testing on small nematodes
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2018,05/31/2019
* Siva Vanapalli, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Pamela McCauley
* 05/31/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broad impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is an innovative
high throughput technology for screening drugs in small animals including the
popular model organism C. elegans, a millimeter-sized nematode. Age is a
significant risk factor for a variety of diseases including cancer,
cardiovascular ailments and neurodegenerative disorders. It is projected that by
2030, 20% of the US population will be 65 years or older indicating that with
the growing aging population the incidence of these diseases is expected to
rise. Likewise, soil-transmitted helminthic infections are prevalent worldwide
and there is increasing evidence that parasitic nematodes are becoming resistant
to available drugs. C. elegans is a low-cost and high throughput animal model
for identifying drug candidates for age-related diseases and parasitic
infections. The I-Corps project has the potential to address current bottlenecks
in conducting high throughput drug assays in the C. elegans model, thereby
paving the path for a drug discovery pipeline. The impact of this project is on
alleviating the socio-economic burden associated with age-associated diseases
and parasitic infections.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project seeks to
develop a microfluidics-based technology for automated drug testing on small
nematodes. Current approaches to drug testing on C. elegans involve tedious
steps of manual picking and transferring animals cultured on agar plates and
moreover do not allow flexible control of culture environment. The proposed
technology builds on basic principles of microscale flows, locomotion of active
swimmers and crawlers, and low-cost wide-field imaging. Novel features of the
technology for drug testing include an optimized microfluidic pillar arena that
forms a habitat for growing animals, with unprecedented control over reagent
delivery and culture environment. The low-cost wide-field imaging allows facile
video recording of animal response to different drugs. The proposed innovation
will markedly advance the throughput of in vivo drug and toxicity assays in an
established, high throughput and low-cost animal
model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.