* 1849092
* A symposium on sediment dynamics in geophysical flows using two-phase flow methodology
* GEO,OCE
* 12/01/2018,11/30/2019
* James Kirby, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 11/30/2019
* USD 15,000.00

This award will provide funding to the University of Delaware to facilitate the
participation of young researchers and to support travel for young scholars as
invited speakers to the 4th Symposium on Two-phase Modelling for Sediment
Dynamics in Geophysical Flows will be held on September 17 ? 19, 2019 in the
University of Delaware, Newark, DE, USA. The symposium aims at accelerating
advances in sediment transport by bringing together fluid physicists,
oceanographers, geologists, geomorphologists, and engineers in terrestrial,
coastal and marine systems. In addition to oral and poster presentations, the
symposium will feature achievements of young researchers and a workshop for
open-source modeling tools. The participation of oceanographers,
geomorphologists and geologists, especially those early career researchers
(graduate students, postdoctoral researchers and early career scientists and
faculty) will be facilitated by reducing participation costs. Furthermore, this
symposium will be expanded to cover more field observation, laboratory
experiments and instrumentation for measuring multiphase flow in geophysical
flow. A balanced coverage of terrestrial, coastal and marine applications and
including multiphase flow applications beyond sediment transport, such as air-
sea interaction and flow over vegetation is planned. This activity seeks to
complement the tremendous progresses made in the past two decades benefited
significantly from regional scale open-source models and facilitate the
dissemination and development of similar open-source models for wave-scale and
turbulence/grain-scale processes that started to emerge recently. This symposium
will promote the creation of open-source community-driven numerical modeling
tools for small-scale processes by hosting a 3-hour clinical workshop for an
opensource Eulerian two-phase model for sediment transport, SedFoam.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sediment transport dynamics involve complex nonlinear
interaction between waves, currents, turbulence, and sediment particles with a
range of particle inertia and concentration. It has been one of the most
challenge fluid mechanics problems attracting many researchers interested in
turbulent flows, multiphase flows and granular flows. In the context of earth
surface processes, additional challenges arise from vastly different temporal
and spatial scales to further address pressing issues such as sediment source to
sink, impact of sea-level rise and increase storm intensity on shoreline
evolution, coastal habitat and the sustainability of infrastructure and coastal
community resilience. To accelerate the progress in understanding the physical
mechanisms controlling coastal changes and earth surface processes, it is
important to bring together communities from the areas of fluid mechanics,
physical oceanography, geomorphology and geology into a symposium to share their
findings, nourish collaboration and to provide new perspectives. The symposium
will focus on: (1) Addressing cross-scale modeling challenges in geophysical
flows. (2) Identifying mechanisms behind several intriguing field observations
and develop benchmark problems for high-fidelity, fluid-mechanics-based
investigations that the community can address in the next couple of years. (3)
Advancing sediment transport modeling and promote existing and new open-source
community modeling tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.