* 1849287
* S&amp;AS: INT: Smart And Autonomous Systems For Repair And Improvisation
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2023
* Christopher Atkeson, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* James Donlon
* 05/31/2023
* USD 670,000.00

Robots will be more useful to society as they respond to more natural teaching
paradigms similar to the way people learn. It is hard to tell robots what to do,
and even harder to tell robots how to handle all possible errors, unanticipated
events, and accidents that might happen. This project focuses on enabling robots
to understand instructions from users, to fix errors and repair broken
processes, objects, and tools, and to improvise and find new and better ways to
do tasks. A key part of the research is to enable robots to learn from
educational kits and instructional material typically given to children. The
researchers plan to use these instructional materials to provide robots with
"physical common sense" about how the world works, in a similar way we expect
children to learn. The research will make programming robots easier and cheaper,
and make robots more useful, particularly for domestic and care robots
supporting everyday life activities; repair, construction, and decommissioning
robots; and exploration and worker robots in the oceans and
space.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technically, this integrative project addresses a
longer-term vision and intellectual challenge of developing a library approach
to robot behavior generation and learning. The researchers will build a large-
scale long-term intelligent physical system that can repair and improvise
desired processes and devices. The system will learn from instruction in the
form of a curriculum of training tasks, watching humans do tasks, coaching,
practice, less directed play, and reflection. Evaluation of the proposed work
will focus on how well robots can perform suggested activities from the
instructional material, repair broken processes and devices, and create
processes and devices that achieve new task specifications. The following
hypotheses will be tested: 1) appropriate libraries can be built in practice and
grown over time, 2) relevant experience can be accessed from a large library and
combined to exhibit rich behavior comparable to humans, and 3) such a library
can support life-long learning for many tasks, rather than a single
demonstration of one task in one domain. Key ideas include the use of task and
strategy-specific quantitative models, the development of strategy graphs that
combine both symbolic descriptions of how to do a task as well as task-level
models, and the use of learned simulators to support mental practice,
exploration, and learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.