* 1849739
* CRII: NeTS: Real-life modeling for EFficient RESource management in Heterogeneous multi-user systems - REFRESH
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2022
* Eirini Eleni Tsiropoulou, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 06/30/2022
* USD 174,987.00

The economic and societal potential of emerging 5G and cyber-physical social
systems is vastly greater than what has been realized so far, and major
investments are being made worldwide to develop the corresponding science and
technology. Though significant achievements have been obtained in the
development of various architectures to study such interconnected systems, one
barrier to further progress is the lack of appropriate science and technology to
conceptualize and design for the deep inter-dependencies among users behaviors,
interactions, and decisions. This project, called REFRESH, promotes a novel
research agenda, where the proposed resource management framework and the real-
life modeling approach go beyond the classical settings. The proposed approach
allows for the creation of a user-centric framework that brings significant
benefits for (a) the end-user, in terms of reduced power consumption, lower
prices and reduced communication and computation overhead; and (b) for the
network or service provider, in terms of energy savings and increased number of
satisfied customers. The proposed research will influence not only the
corresponding scientific directions but will stimulate changes in the emerging
economies of scale, creating the basis for societal growth and paradigm shifts.
Concrete plans to maximize the broader impacts of the project include
educational activities, outreach actions, minority student recruitment,
diversity, and data dissemination actions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In REFRESH a
novel approach to resource allocation in wireless networks is considered, based
on the following ideas: (a) Instead of maximizing the Quality of Service (QoS),
it is argued that better energy-efficiency is achieved by targeting satisfactory
QoS levels only. This is treated by a game-theoretical solution concept referred
to as satisfaction equilibrium; (b) The theory used so far has not managed to
properly address the fact that individuals in real-life do not behave as neutral
expected utility maximizers, but they tend to exhibit risk-seeking or loss-
aversion behavior under uncertainty. To deal with this, Prospect Theory and the
theory of the Tragedy of the Commons are exploited. The realism of the
introduced novel resource allocation paradigm is complemented by integrating
learning approaches to reduce the impact of communication and computing
environment dynamicity and lack of information. Expected findings have the
potential to lay the foundations of a solid theoretical and pragmatic resource
management framework.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the
Computer and Network Systems (CNS) program and the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.