* 1849921
* The use of remote sensing in landscape and social reconstruction
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2024
* Angelica Almeyda Zambrano, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 01/31/2024
* USD 263,353.00

An interdisciplinary and international team of researchers, led by the
University of Florida, will conduct research on the history of land use and
landscape resilience under different land use regimes and settlement patterns in
the Maya lowlands of southern Mexico. Specifically focused on terraced
landscapes, the scientists will investigate how key cultural (e.g., population
density), ecological (e.g., soil and topography), and climatological (e.g.,
annual precipitation) factors influence changing patterns of agrarian land use.
Previous research has documented discrete systems of terracing in parts of the
lowlands, importantly demonstrating that these landscapes were sometimes
intensively curated and cultivated. Combining soil science, paleoethnobotany,
remote sensing, and archaeology with existing "big environmental data" (LiDAR
surveys of Above Ground Carbon Storage), the research will investigate these
agrarian systems across ecologies and settlement patterns, critically evaluating
the resilience of these systems across the Maya lowlands. Are terraces
constructed only in response to population pressure? Why are terraces built in
particular regions? Why do they endure in certain ecological settings and not in
others? Does terracing in the lowlands increase local landscape resilience? Do
communities maintain terrace systems once they are built? Throughout the world,
questions of landscape resilience, especially related to smallholder agriculture
are vitally important to address, so that we can better design, plan, organize
and maintain systems that are resilient to cultural and ecological change. This
project fosters international collaborations and provides research opportunities
for enhancing student engagement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
investigate the long-term landscape impacts of increasing agricultural intensity
in the Maya lowlands of southern Mexico. It will inventory and analyze remote
sensing (LiDAR) transects extending from the states of Chiapas north to Yucatan
and Quintana Roo. Originally collected for environmental purposes as part of the
REDD+ carbon inventory of southern Mexico, these surveys offer a uniquely
expansive survey of human modified landscapes and landscape resilience.
Specifically, it will explore how the form and spatial distribution of Pre-
Columbian intensive agricultural modifications of the landscape are influenced
by settlement density. The research will also study the influence of local
environmental variability on the form and distribution of terracing. To address
these questions, the team will process, analyze, inventory, and annotate
existing LiDAR transects from across the Maya lowlands. This information will be
combined with regional environmental data, excavation, soil profiles, and new
high precision UAV LiDAR field surveys in order to evaluate land use intensity
and land use change. The project will develop new methods and metrics for
studying agrarian systems and agrarian change through
time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.