* 1849178
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Reconstructing Theropithecus phylogeny and paleobiology
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2020
* Eric Delson, Research Foundation Of The City University Of New York (Lehman)
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 06/30/2020
* USD 1,134.00

This doctoral dissertation project will examine the evolutionary history of
gelada monkeys (genus Theropithecus) based on skeletal and genetic data. Species
of this group occur more broadly and in larger numbers than any other non-human
primate in the fossil record of Africa. Fossils have been found in southern,
eastern, and northern Africa, the Middle East, Spain, and even India, an unusual
distribution for any primate group besides humans. The living representatives of
this group, however, are only found in the highlands of Ethiopia. Because of
their overlap with humans in the past, these monkeys have often been suggested
as a model for understanding human evolution. Therefore, the in-depth analysis
of gelada monkeys will not just provide better insight into the evolution of
this group but will also advance the study of human evolution. This project will
support graduate student training, and results from the project will be
presented to the general public through the American Museum of Natural History
Sackler Educational Laboratory's "Meet the Scientist" program.

The main goal of this project is to fully understand the evolutionary
relationships, taxonomy and paleobiology of the primate genus Theropithecus. All
available cranio-dental data for both living and extinct members of this group
will be compiled. Morphometric data in the form of 3D landmarks and 2D
measurements, as well as morphological data in the form of character states,
will be collected. Genetic data will also be collected, thereby resulting in a
large, integrated dataset for this primate group. This comprehensive dataset
will then be used to: assess the morphological as well as genetic differences
among the living populations of Theropithecus gelada; inform research on fossil
populations; provide a comprehensive phylogenetic reconstruction of the genus
Theropithecus; investigate the dietary trends seen in this genus and their
relationship to cranio-dental morphological trends; and investigate the cause of
the extreme facial morphology exhibited by some species of this genus and
evaluate whether that is related to diet, sexual selection or some other factor.
As part of this study a new and relatively unknown population of an extant
endemic primate will be analyzed and provide new insights for conservation
purposes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.