* 1849658
* Advancing the Science of Social Cyber-Security Around Information Diffusion and Authenticity
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2018,11/30/2020
* Kathleen Carley, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 11/30/2020
* USD 50,000.00

Social cybersecurity is an emerging scientific area aimed at understanding and
forecasting changes in human behavior, social, and economic outcomes that might
arise from threats enabled by online communication platforms. These threats
range from increasingly realistic deceptive messages, such as spear-phishing or
simulated but realistic videos, to manipulation of systems for creating and
distributing content in social networks. This project will conduct a two-day
workshop that brings together social and computer scientists interested in
information dissemination with the goal of going beyond current work that
focuses on labeling the veracity of particular information or actors, or
encouraging information consumers to consider veracity. Instead, the workshop
will take a broader theoretical lens that (a) analyzes how current models of
information diffusion, rumor, social influence, communication, and so on need to
adapt to novel and rapidly changing socio-technical environments and (b) focuses
on the impact of these systems, identifying what is needed to characterize,
measure, and affect the impact of information with different, and not
necessarily consensus, credibility evaluations on the diverse consumers of that
information, a problem of great import in domains ranging from news to health to
crisis response.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop organizers will invite
participants from a large variety of institutions, representing a broad range of
both intellectual backgrounds and participant demographics, to increase the
diversity of perspectives on the problem. After an opening plenary session where
participants can pose key challenges, questions, and gaps, the main part of the
workshop will be devoted to breakout groups organized around those challenges; a
closing plenary session will develop plans for moving forward. These sessions
will be structured to produce three main outcomes. The first is a set of
challenge descriptions that define forward-looking problems in the space of
information diffusion and manipulation, characterize what different scientific
disciplines can provide toward them, and identify the next steps needed to
address these challenges. The second is a plan for developing a larger
conference in the area of social cybersecurity for information diffusion that
brings together researchers from different backgrounds and communities around
the challenges identified. The third is a longer term road map describing a
scientific path toward addressing these challenges, with the goal of
illuminating how stakeholder communities can coordinate to make progress toward
them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.