* 1849854
* Ralph Bunche Summer Institute
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2019,04/30/2024
* Paula McClain, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Lee Walker
* 04/30/2024
* USD 462,567.00

The Ralph Bunche Summer Institute is designed to expand opportunities for
students-of-color by preparing black, Latino, and American Indian undergraduates
to enroll in doctoral programs and become political science college and
university professors. The Ralph Bunche Summer Institute immerses undergraduates
in the summer of their junior year in a five-week intensive program that
includes graduate level coursework, as well as the design, analysis, writing,
and presentation of original research papers. The program simulates the graduate
school experience and focuses on scientific analysis by introducing the students
to research methods, statistics, and the research process in political science.
Those students whose empirical papers are judged to be of high quality are
invited to present their work in a poster session at the annual meeting of the
American Political Science Association. The ultimate goal of the RBSI is to
increase the number of black, Latino, and American Indian political science
faculty in U.S. colleges and universities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Ralph
Bunche Institute provides a five-week intensive program for undergraduate
students-of-color (black, Latino, and American Indian) that prepares them pursue
a Ph.D in political science, with the goal of expanding opportunities for them
in academia as professors and researchers. The program includes graduate level
coursework, training in statistical/quantitative methods, and completion of an
original research project. Outcomes from previous years suggest that the Ralph
Bunche Summer Institute is succeeding in increasing the numbers of students-of-
color in political science graduate programs and the numbers of blacks and
Latinos with doctorates in political science (as well as several cognate social
science fields). The program has also been successful in increasing
substantially the number of students from these underrepresented groups with
masters' degrees in political science and public policy, many of whom have gone
into government service.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.