* 1849578
* MRI:Acquisition of an UV-Vis and X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy (UPS/XPS) for Research and Education in Electronics and Advanced Materials
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2020
* Charles Winter, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 09/30/2020
* USD 501,846.00

The objective of this project is to advance research and education in the areas
of electronics, sensors, nanomaterials, catalysis, and energy at Wayne State
University (WSU) through the acquisition of a state-of-the-art ultraviolet and
X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS/XPS) instrument. Particularly, the
proposed UPS/XPS will be used as an enabling tool for several projects which
urgently need the capability of the proposed instrument to characterize the
physics and chemistry of material surfaces with high sensitivity and spatial
resolution. UPS/XPS will significantly improve the quality and productivity of
research at WSU in a broad range of areas. The acquisition of UPS/XPS will
permit synergistic opportunities for device, material, biomedical, and energy
research at WSU. It will also enhance the quality of research training of
undergraduates and graduate students. Together, this proposed UPS/XPS instrument
is expected to impact more than 100 users from 20 research groups. For local
industry, it will serve as a resource for advanced battery manufacturing
critical to the economic growth of southeastern Michigan. Students from
underrepresented groups including minorities, women, and students with
disabilities will be recruited using existing science, technology, engineering,
and mathematics (STEM) programs at WSU. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;UPS/XPS is a
unique and invaluable tool to understand surface chemistry in material synthesis
as well as physical and/or chemical treatments. It is an essential tool to study
the work function and valence band of new materials and to quantify chemical
elements and the bonding of atoms within the top 2 nm to 10 nm of the sample
surface. The proposed instrument enables 4 unique capabilities, including (1)
sensitive quantification in chemical measurements, (2) scanning XPS microprobe
analysis, (3) UV Photoelectron Spectroscopy, and (4) micro area depth profiling.
Therefore, the acquisition of UPS/XPS will significantly improve the quality and
productivity of on-going research at WSU in a broad range of areas from the
development of next-generation electronics (e.g., 2D materials beyond graphene,
atomic layer deposition) to biomedical applications (e.g., biosensing, point-of-
care devices) and to energy applications (e.g., catalysis, fuel cells, lithium
ion batteries, green chemistry, and sustainability). Our long-term goals are to
strengthen WSU research facilities in order to support research and education,
to offer state-of-the-art characterization equipment to the scientific community
of southeastern Michigan, and to enhance research and education/training of
graduate, undergraduate, and high-school students in the greater Detroit area by
offering hands-on learning experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.