* 1849029
* Engaging Community Colleges in Recruitment of Secondary STEM Teachers Through Early Field Experiences
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2024
* Daniel Chazan, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 06/30/2024
* USD 296,041.00

With support from the NSF Improving Undergraduate STEM Education Program:
Education and Human Resources (IUSE: EHR), this project aims to serve the
national interest by helping to increase the diversity and number of highly-
qualified STEM teachers. It aims to do so by providing teaching experiences for
community college students, to encourage them to consider a teaching career. The
project is a collaborative effort between the University of Maryland-College
Park, Montgomery Community College, and Prince George's Community College. The
expected outcome is recruitment of a diverse pool of students who might not
otherwise have considered becoming a STEM teacher, including undergraduates,
career changers, and non-instructional teaching staff, such as teaching aides.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to research the effectiveness
of using "Step 1," an early fieldwork course model developed through the UTeach
program at the University of Texas at Austin. Step 1 is designed to generate
excitement about STEM teaching as a career, increase awareness of STEM teaching
as an option, and create seamless pathways (transfers) from community college
coursework into university STEM teacher preparation programs. Data will be
collected and analyzed from surveys and interviews of community college
students. T-tests of two independent samples will be used to gauge whether the
availability of the early fieldwork courses on community college campuses
increases STEM student awareness of teaching as a career. The goal is to develop
an "exportable" model so that other four-year colleges with STEM certification
pathways will be able to partner with community colleges to recruit future
teachers and foster diversity in STEM teaching. Reports and data analyses will
be used to prepare conference presentations for organizations such as UTeach,
the American Educational Research Association, the Association of Mathematics
Teacher Educators, and the American Association of Colleges for Teacher
Education. Manuscripts will also be submitted for publication in peer-reviewed
journal articles. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development
projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all students. This
project is in the Institutional and Community Transformation track, which
supports efforts to transform and improve STEM education across institutions of
higher education and disciplinary communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.