* 1849465
* Collaborative Research: Midwest Low KV Collaboration: Continuation of Development of Low KV High Spatial Resolution EPMA Technique to Sub-micron Geological Features
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2022
* Anette von der Handt, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* David Lambert
* 04/30/2022
* USD 99,541.00

This project involves development of new techniques in the use of the electron
probe microanalyzer, to extend its usefulness in chemically analyzing smaller
sized materials than previously possible. This instrument operates by focusing a
beam of high energy electrons at a target sample inside a vacuum chamber, and
then measuring the different X-rays inherently produced by this process. The
rationale for this work is to better understand physical processes - both in
geological and earth materials, but also in man-made materials at smaller and
smaller scales - with a relatively simple instrument that is available in many
universities, industrial and governmental research laboratories. Many times the
very smallest features in a material can give critical information about how the
material was created, and for manmade materials, how it will break or fail.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In a just completed NSF-supported project (EAR-1554269),
to develop a technique for extending the utility of the smaller electron beam
field emission electron probe microanalyzer, we operated at lower accelerating
voltage (i.e., 7 kV) vs traditional 15-20 kV. At these voltages, the higher
energy K-series X-ray lines such those of the transition metals (e.g. Fe), are
not generated - requiring that the lower energy L-series X-rays be measured and
quantified. However, there are series difficulties with using these L-series
X-rays, as they become complex entities due to spectral peak shift/shape
changes, resulting from chemical bonding effects exacerbated by the adjacent
absorption edge which adds more complexity. Thus, one single or simple reference
standard is no longer a valid approach to quantification. In that project, we
developed an innovative procedure to handle these iron L-alpha X-rays--and iron
is an important element in many relevant geological materials. This research
focused on the Fe-bearing mineral olivine and iron-silicides (found in
meteorites and on the surface of the moon). This new project has several
components to extend this technique: (1) extend this low kV Fe-L series work to
other important important minerals such as sulfides, pyroxenes, garnets and
amphiboles, (2) expand to look at L-lines of some Ni-bearing and Mn-rich
minerals, (3) evaluate possible ways to improve measurements with "plasma"
cleaning samples, (4) develop protocols using the innovative Soft X-ray Emission
Spectrometer for the low energy X-rays generated at low kV, (5) investigate the
feasibility of utilizing DFT (density functional theory) to simulate the complex
spectral shapes of the L-series transition metals as well as the M-series of
some rare earth elements (which have a similar set of conditions as the L-lines
of Fe, etc.), and (6) investigate sample damage by the higher-electron-density
field emission beam. This work will be done in a joint collaboration between the
electron microprobe labs of the University of Wisconsin-Madison and the
University of Minnesota-Minneapolis. The project will support a postdoctoral
research fellow.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.