* 1849359
* S&amp;AS: INT: COLLAB: An Intelligence-Driven Patient Care Approach to Reduce Medical Errors (I-CARE)
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Hua Wang, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 03/31/2024
* USD 461,000.00

Imagine that in the near future a patient needing surgery will swallow a small
mobile robot that can autonomously perform the procedure without any external
incisions or pain. Such robots have the potential to make state-of-the-art
surgical concepts a reality by providing an unconstrained mobile platform to
visualize, manipulate and surgically treat tissue. The project's strategy will
also harness the excitement surrounding robotics and computer science, and
leverage it with the investigators' exceptional infrastructure for education
innovation and outreach to provide new, inspirational educational experiences
for students. Finally, the project outcomes can broadly impact a number of other
areas that would benefit from the developed novel methodologies, including
search and rescue, construction and maintenance, and remote imaging, where the
environment is dynamic or changes upon repeated
inspection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to gain a
fundamental understanding of the cognition and adaptation needs of an
intelligence-driven patient care approach to reduce medical errors. Realizing
such an intelligent physical system would allow for augmenting physician
capabilities. If one considers an operating room of the future, one can imagine
scenarios where data is collected from, and shared with, all medical personnel
including the surgeon, the supporting medical technicians, and
anesthesiologists. In addition, artificial intelligence could be harnessed to
look for unseen patterns in patient care. This operating room of the future will
only be possible by establishing a new paradigm that includes medical devices
with embedded smart and autonomous features. Such an intelligent physical system
would gather knowledge from support personnel, sensors and diagnostics, and
interpret physician intent and provide suggestions and diagnostic feedback in
real-time. To provide real-world evaluation of this approach, the project will
focus on robotic capsule endoscopy, with an intent to have immediate impact in
conventional gastroenterology procedures. In pursuit of this goal, this project
addresses three research objectives: the first objective focuses on robotic
capsule endoscopy perception and control; the second objective formulates the
perception and diagnostic support requirements to augment physician performance;
and the third objective integrates multimodal, multi-label, temporal data
analytics for intelligent physician support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.