* 1849638
* Collaborative Research: The Aratus Project on Astronomy and Scientific Writing
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2023
* Enrico Landi, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 05/31/2023
* USD 358,287.00

This collaborative research project in the history of science will produce the
first full English translations of the commentaries and scholia to Aratus's
literary work, Phaenomena, a popular text poem dealing with astronomy of Greek
and Roman antiquity. It presented an accessible summary of star lore based upon
a now lost work of Eudoxus, and it was an immediate and lasting success as an
introductory text to astronomy; an immense exegetical literature grew up around
it. This literature included commentaries written by both experts in astronomy,
such as Hipparchus, and non-expert authors, as well as scholia (marginal notes)
written in copies of his work. The project will explore the reception of
Aratus's work among later commentators, and compare the way that the latter
read, understood, and interacted with this text and the astronomy it contained.
Results of this project will be made public through a dedicated website which
will make available ancient texts with modern English translations for the first
time; they will be made accessible through an innovative and open access online
platform that will display the text of Aratus and of its commentaries and
scholia, along with interactive visualizations of the astronomy they contain. In
addition, the PI will produce a scholarly monograph on Hipparchus' commentary to
Aratus, and she will develop an exhibition and new courses on ancient astronomy
and history of science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is a pioneering
investigation in history of science. It has four main goals. It will bring
Aratus and his under-appreciated exegetical community to light, study the
commentary of Hipparchus under the light of the debate about the nature of
science and of the best genres to disseminate it, discuss the ancient reception
of Aratus among different types of readership, and discuss the different genres
of scientific writing in antiquity. The authors of these ancient texts form an
understudied community of thinkers, who held widely varying opinions on Aratus'
status as an authority on astronomy. The project will highlight this forgotten
intellectual world, and it will broaden the traditional canon of ancient authors
by translating many of these texts into modern English for the first time and
making them freely available through an online digital portal. One key figure
under investigation in the project is Hipparchus, who responds to Aratus and
with whom Ptolemy deeply engages; understanding this missing intellectual link
is critical to studies of ancient science. The PI will produce an edition and
commentary on Hipparchus' commentary to Aratus that will be published as an
independent, scholarly monograph. The project is also innovative for its social
history of scientific writing and of commentary as a genre; the authors of these
texts were all writing sciences but using very different genres and
media.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.