* 1849364
* Very Long Baseline Array Fiber Optics Data Access Supplement
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Anthony Beasley, Associated Universities, Inc.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Joseph E. Pesce
* 08/31/2023
* USD 2,500,000.00

This proposal describes plans to complete the connection of all VLBA stations to
an optical fiber network. Upon completion the VLBA data network capacity will be
increased to 200 Mbps. Such capacity will allow improved diagnostic and time-
critical observing capabilities. Upgrades to the VLBA data network is the first
step in a three-phased approach to allow real-time observations. Improved
connectivity that optical fiber provides will increase the scientific utility of
the VLBA for the US and global scientific community.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Improving the data capabilities of the VLBA by
installing/operating optical fiber to all sites will greatly enhance its
capabilities, opening additional areas of VLBA research and extend the distance
ranges, both within the Galaxy and throughout the Universe, at which the VLBA
can make unique scientific contributions. The VLBA is uniquely situated to
increase participation of traditionally under-served and underrepresented
communities in the full spectrum of fields associated with radio astronomy. With
10 sites located across eight states and the U.S. Virgin Islands, the VLBA
offers research and educational exchange opportunities to a broad cross section
of the U.S. student population, including students who live and study in areas
of the country in which targeted efforts are made to broaden participation of
diverse individuals in STEM education, training, and professional development.
In addition, VLBA observations are vital to maintaining awareness of Earth's
orientation in space, a parameter of key importance in operation of the Global
Positioning System for example.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.