* 1849883
* CRII: CIF: Approximate Message Passing Algorithms for High-Dimensional Estimation
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2023
* Cynthia Rush, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 05/31/2023
* USD 153,597.00

Due a remarkable increase in computational power over the last few decades, the
amount of data collected in fields such as biology, astronomy, and finance has
expanded considerably. Because of this explosion of new data, many modern
scientific and engineering applications require analysis of and learning on
larger datasets and more complex problems than the field has ever considered
before. A major challenge for researchers is to understand how much data, or
information, is necessary to solve such complex statistical problems, and given
that data, how to most effectively use it to gain insight about the real-world
application at hand. This project explores these questions by developing and
analyzing the performance of computationally-efficient algorithms and
statistical procedures for these settings. The research will bring together
tools and ideas from information theory, statistical physics, and applied
probability to use as a framework for understanding modern, high-dimensional
statistics problems and complex machine learning tasks that are core challenges
in engineering and data science. Just as the research in this project is
interdisciplinary, so are the educational activities pursued, which focus on
making research outcomes accessible to non-experts, increasing opportunities for
students from underrepresented communities in computing and data science, and
training a new generation of data scientists with multi-disciplinary skillsets
and research interests.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project studies a class of
computationally-efficient algorithms, referred to as approximate message passing
or AMP, that are used for high-dimensional statistical inference and estimation
tasks that underlie many practical applications such as imaging in healthcare
and security or building autonomous vehicles using artificial intelligence.
Moreover, because AMP allows for exact characterization of its asymptotic
performance, such algorithms have been used to establish theory for estimation
problems in machine learning and statistics. In many of these applications, AMP
outperforms the best competing algorithms in both accuracy and runtime. Drawing
on techniques from information theory, signal processing, machine learning,
probability, and statistical physics, the goal of the project is to
significantly expand and improve the theoretical foundations of AMP algorithms
in order to (i) greatly extend the algorithm's capabilities in high-dimensional
estimation, (ii) characterize the theoretical properties of the existing AMP
algorithms for more general problem settings, and (iii) create new application
areas for AMP algorithms and their supporting theory. The work will lead to the
introduction or greater use of AMP in burgeoning fields like machine learning
and artificial intelligence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.