* 1849946
* CRII: RI: Neuromodulated Deep Vision: Continual Learning and Goal-Oriented Adaptation
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2019,03/31/2022
* Rolando Estrada, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 03/31/2022
* USD 175,000.00

Deep neural networks are revolutionizing many fields and industries. These
systems can learn to solve problems ranging from parsing natural language to
discovering new drugs. However, current networks can only solve individual,
static problems; they cannot learn gradually over time or adapt their
computations in real time. This project seeks to bridge the gap between human
and machine intelligence by modeling a chemical process in the brain that help
humans learn and adjust their behavior based on context. Specifically, the
chemical acetylcholine (ACh) has been shown to modulate responses to visual
stimuli by selectively raising or lowering the activity level of individual
neurons. This chemical is also crucial for visual learning in infants. An
insufficient concentration of ACh in the brain leads to poor visual attention
and has also been linked to memory deficits and Alzheimer?s disease. Thus,
adding ACh-like mechanisms to deep neural networks can potentially allow them to
learn over time and adapt their behavior to rapidly changing conditions--a
growing need in domains ranging from forest conservation to
cybersecurity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In more detail, deep convolutional neural
networks (CNNs) are the state-of-the-art approach for a wide variety of image
processing tasks, such as object recognition and semantic segmentation. This
project will investigate how to add ACh-like regulation to CNNs by modeling the
spatial and temporal dynamics of this chemical process. Specifically, the CNN
will be connected to a set of spatially and temporally heterogeneous sources of
modulation. Each neuron in the CNN will have different receptors that determine
how that particular neuron responds to different ambient levels of ACh. The
system will use two controllers: one to determine the current level of ACh
across different parts of the network and another to set the correct context
(i.e., to model top-down feedback from higher cortical areas). The first
controller will allow the system to quickly adjust its behavior, while the
second will enable long-term learning. This project constitutes an initial step
in developing intelligent systems that, like biological organisms, can
autonomously cope with changing, dynamic environments. In addition to its
technical contributions, this project will allow students at Georgia State
University, one of the most diverse institutions in the country, to foster
interdisciplinary connections between artificial intelligence, neuroscience, and
related STEM disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.