* 1849802
* REU Site: Accelerating New Environmental Workskills (ANEW)
* BIO,DBI
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2024
* Kristina Cammen, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 01/31/2024
* USD 371,786.00

This REU Site award to the University of Maine, located in Orono, ME, will
support the training 10 students for 10 weeks during the summers of 2019-2021.
The REU Site theme implements convergent thinking to solve complex,
interdependent problems in human, animal and environmental health (One Health).
Faculty mentors represent the Schools of Food and Agriculture, Marine Sciences,
Biology and Ecology, Wildlife, Forestry, Economics and Climate Change. REU
students conduct research on topics such as ecology/health of wild animals (e.g.
wild turkey, moose, seals) in relationship to livestock/human health and explore
relevant environmental policy. REU students also participate in workshops on
mentor-mentee relationships, goal-setting, research design/ethics; data
collection, analysis and interpretation; and communication and collaborative
problem solving skills. Students present their results at an annual One Health
symposium. The REU will strive to enroll at least 50% under-represented students
in STEM (African Americans, Hispanics, American Indians, Alaska Natives, Native
Hawaiians or Other Pacific Islanders), veterans, and early-career (freshmen to
juniors, community college) or first-generation college students. Students apply
online and applications are immediately reviewed by the leadership team, with
mentor assignment and discussion of project topic prior to program
start.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is anticipated that a total of 30 students,
primarily from schools with limited research opportunities, will be trained in
the program. Students will learn how research is conducted, and many will
present results of their work at scientific conferences. Each student will be
paired with a secondary broader impacts mentor, who will share the relevance of
One Health research to ?real world? problems and foster career options in their
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A common web-based assessment tool used by all REU
Site programs funded by the Division of Biological Infrastructure (DBI) will be
used to determine the effectiveness of the training program. Students will be
tracked after the program to determine their career paths. Students will be
asked to respond to an automatic email sent via the NSF reporting system. More
information about the program is available by visiting
https://nsfa.umaine.edu/one-health/REU, or by contacting the PI (Dr. Anne
Lichtenwalner at anne.lichtenwalner@maine.edu) or the co-PI (Dr. Kristina Cammen
at kristina.cammen@maine.edu). This award is supported by DBI in the Directorate
for Biological Sciences (BIO) and the EPSCoR program in the Office of
Integrative Activities (OIA).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.