* 1849458
* CUAHSI:  PROMOTING DISCOVERY IN WATER SCIENCE THROUGH DATA, MODELING, AND COMMUNITY SERVICES
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Gordon Grant, Consortium of Universities for the Advancement of Hydrologic Sci
* Cooperative Agreement
* Laura Lautz
* 05/31/2024
* USD 13,692,143.00

The Consortium of Universities for the Advancement of Hydrologic Science, Inc.
(CUAHSI) is a research organization representing more than 100 U.S. universities
and international water science-related organizations. CUAHSI provides water
data services and infrastructure to the interdisciplinary water science
community. CUAHSI services are designed to enable water researchers to more
easily share data and knowledge with each other. Ultimately, the resources
provided by CUAHSI can enhance the understanding of water processes on Earth.
CUAHSI provides training in instrumentation and hosts specialty conferences
relating to field instrumentation and the use of large and complex water data.
CUAHSI provides support and outreach to graduate students, the water science
community and the public via graduate student travel grants, in-person and
online research seminars, and public discussions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Consortium of Universities for the
Advancement of Hydrologic Science, Inc. (CUAHSI) is building on its existing
capabilities to provide critical infrastructure and services to the
interdisciplinary hydrologic sciences community. Three new CUAHSI initiatives
include: (1) integrating of CUAHSI's two data services platforms, HIS and
HydroShare, into a single system with an intuitive user experience; (2)
supporting hydrologic discovery and community modeling through access to a new
and unique set of data services; and (3) lowering the bar for entry to complex
large-scale hydrologic modeling. CUAHSI's expansion of the community's access to
hydrologic data through a simplified user interface is important both for
enriching hydrologic research, but also to support continental scale modeling,
which will increasingly be used to address water-quality and groundwater issues.
Training and outreach activities provide important training and research
opportunities for graduate students to explore meaningful and important
interdisciplinary questions. CUAHSI hosts community meetings on the science of
water prediction and ensemble modeling. Other successful activities from the
past, such as Pathfinder and Instrumentation Discovery student travel grants,
Hydoinformatics grants, Research Cyberseminars, Let's Talk about Water outreach
events, and Biennial Colloquium, are continued under this award. The services
included in this project are selected to provide maximum benefit to the
community as well as to serve as a foundation for the advancement of hydrologic
and related sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.