* 1849101
* EAGER: Pilot Study on Bias and Trust in AI Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2018,02/29/2020
* Jason Borenstein, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 02/29/2020
* USD 74,529.00

Robots and other autonomous systems are proliferating rapidly, and are being
used in the public domain for such purposes as companionship, facilitating
interactive learning, and making recommendations to users. However, little is
understood about how trust, including mistrust and over-trust, and bias develop
as humans interact with these systems. The investigators of this project will
use basic real-life scenarios to understand human-human interaction in the
context of trust and bias, and then will translate these data into quantized
attributes. This data will be used to develop general algorithms that will be
useful in programming robots in ways that ensure human safety and well-being
when interacting with robots. This project will conduct a series of pilot tests
to explore fundamental research questions to find ways to minimize potential
negative impacts and consequences of human-robot interaction. Additionally, the
investigators will integrate the research with teaching and training of graduate
and undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of this project is to
gain knowledge that informs the design of future robot systems by understanding
how trust is established and how bias impacts human perception and algorithmic
performance. As part of this work, the team also aims to establish baseline
algorithms that mitigate the impacts of bias in autonomous systems. The specific
research objectives of this project are to quantify the impact of trust and bias
in human-robot interaction scenarios where the algorithms are designed based on
learned data from human experts; and to develop methods for objectively
mitigating bias, while still optimizing for robot performance. The pilot tests
are designed to contribute to understanding of social cognition in human-robot
interaction. Direct societal befits will be gained as robots and other
autonomous systems proliferate in the public domain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.