* 1849725
* RAPID: Evaluation of Changes to Soil Hydrologic Properties in Response to Wildfire in a Semi-arid Sagebrush Steppe Environment with Abandoned Mine Pollution ? Perry Canyon, NV
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2020
* Scott McCoy, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 07/31/2020
* USD 31,452.00

On July 27, 2018, an uncontrolled brush fire ignited in the Perry Canyon area of
Washoe County, NV 30 miles north of Reno, NV. The fire has burned a total of
~49,000 acres as of August 3 with the fire still in progress. Perry Canyon hosts
an abandoned mine land (AML) study area that is operated in collaboration with
the Bureau of Land Management (BLM). Pollution transport from various sources in
Perry Canyon has been under study for the last three years. The occurrence of
the wildfire has presented an opportunity to collect immediate post-fire
hydrologic data at an AML, and then subsequent measurements over the next
several months to trace the evolution of soil hydrology during the recovery from
the fire. Data on the unsaturated and saturated hydraulic conductivity will be
collected using a combination of dual-head infiltrometers and minidisc
infiltrometers in the field. Laboratory analysis of water retention and
hydraulic conductivity will be performed using the HYPROP and pressure plate
methods. Hydraulic conductivity testing will be performed with appropriate
standardized hydraulic conductivity test methods. Laboratory testing will be on
undisturbed core samples to preserve field structure. Three METER Environment
Inc. ATMOS 41 weather stations will collect precipitation data and record soil
moisture and soil-water potential data over time to evaluate soil-water storage
and retention characteristic changes during post-fire recovery

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.