* 1849454
* REU-RET Mega-Site: Research Experiences for Undergraduates and Teachers in Smart and Connected Cities
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2018,12/31/2022
* John Attia, Morgan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 12/31/2022
* USD 2,884,907.00

The goal of this project, REU-RET Mega-Site: Research Experiences for
Undergraduates and Teachers in Smart and Connected Cities (led by Morgan State
University), is to recruit and train a diverse population of underrepresented
minority students and teachers who work in minority-serving K-12 schools and
community colleges - focusing on highly relevant Electrical and Computer
Engineering research topics. The project involves the development of a combined
Research Experiences for Undergraduates and Research Experiences for Teachers
(REU-RET) Mega-Site that is centered on the following research topics that are
related to Smart and Connected Cities: IoT Security, Renewable Energy, Energy
Storage, Smart Grid, Human Computer Interaction, and Advanced Materials. The
consortium of institutions involved in this effort are 14 Historically Black
Colleges and Universities (HBCUs) and 1 Hispanic Serving Institution (HSI). The
project targets lower division students who are less likely to have the
opportunity to participate in research as undergraduates. Participation in this
type of experience has been demonstrated to be transformative and to have the
potential to increase retention and graduation rates at these institutions. RET
participants will be recruited from local community colleges and high schools
that serve as feeder schools to the consortium
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Providing quality research experiences to an
underserved group of undergraduate students and teachers will lay the foundation
for positively impacting the retention and graduation of engineering students
for years to come, while also increasing the number of minority students who
will eventually pursue graduate degrees. In addition, the program will improve
the quality of science and engineering education at local high schools and
community colleges, further stimulating the interest and imagination of
underrepresented minority students who might not otherwise be inclined to pursue
higher education in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM)
fields. The project will serve as a national model for how to broaden
participation in engineering by successfully implementing multi-institution
undergraduate research programs, which others can adopt/adapt and build upon.
The evaluation of this effort will be conducted by the SageFox Consulting Group
and the project's outcomes will be broadly disseminated through Morgan State
University's website, presentations at conferences, and articles that are
published in peer-reviewed journals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.