* 1849286
* Portrayals and Perceptions of the Supreme Court in a New Media Landscape
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2019,04/30/2023
* Justin Wedeking, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 04/30/2023
* USD 275,000.00

The media is the primary conduit by which Americans learn about the Supreme
Court and the country's most important legal rulings. Yet with the explosion of
online news coverage, Americans now routinely consume information from a wide
variety of sources, including many that did not exist a decade ago. In this new
media landscape, citizens encounter information that depicts the Supreme Court
as deliberative, unbiased, and apolitical; or they may receive coverage that is
very negative, ideologically polarized, and even inaccurate. Because the
authority of the Court rests on the public's understanding of its procedures and
guiding principles, the coverage that citizens encounter has significant
ramifications for the rule of law. This project provides the first large scale
investigation of Supreme Court media coverage across thousands of news outlets
and explores the implications when it comes to support for the Court and the
rule of law.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project consists of three main components.
First, the project develops a web application that allows for the automated
collection of Supreme Court news coverage from a wide variety of mainstream and
non-traditional news sources online, in real time. The project will make text
and image data from the application publicly available in a user-friendly
format, so that scholars will be able to search and refine coverage based on
dates, keywords, and sources, among other features. Second, the project develops
a theoretical framework for understanding the most important features of
coverage in a new media landscape. The framework highlights differences in the
frames, tone, and complexity of coverage across mainstream and non-traditional
outlets, specifically as they apply to Supreme Court news. The insights are
tested by leveraging multiple text analysis tools and applying them to the
coverage corpus. Third, the project explores the effects of both the content of
coverage and media fragmentation more generally. The theoretical framework
highlights the content and number of choices as two key aspects of the new media
landscape. The project highlights how coverage that is simplistic, ideological,
and negative in tone may increase the perception of the Court as a political
institution, affecting the public's support for the Court and the rule of law.
Using an experimental approach, the theory is tested with a series of novel
survey experiments administered to U.S. citizens.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is jointly funded by the Law and Social Sciences program and the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.