* 1849849
* Culturally Relevant Computing Activities and Career Readiness for At-Risk Youth
* EDU,DRL
* 12/15/2018,08/31/2023
* Richard Otto, East Stroudsburg University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Alicia Santiago Gonzalez
* 08/31/2023
* USD 597,531.00

This project will advance efforts of the Innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST) program to better understand and promote practices
that increase students' motivations and capacities to pursue careers in fields
of science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM) by engaging in hands-
on field experience, laboratory/project-based entrepreneurship tasks and
mentorship experiences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is designed to
increase motivation and preparedness to pursue science, technology, engineering,
or mathematics (STEM) careers and develop enhanced instructional and curricular
innovations for underrepresented students at risk. The project investigates the
potential of culturally relevant computing through an Esports (competitive
digital gaming) living-learning community to advance needed computational and
data analytic competencies towards STEM career readiness. The project will
leverage activities within the industry to accomplish four goals: 1) Enhancing
attitudes, awareness, motivation and participation through culturally relevant
computing. 2) Developing learning pathways that provide Esports industry STEM
competencies. 3) Creating a learning model that promotes collaborative knowledge
sharing behaviors. 4) Providing high quality learning opportunities by
establishing STEM enrichment experiences for underrepresented at-risk youth.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will take place on the rural East Stroudsburg
University campus, providing a safe space for peer supported collaborative
interaction and evolution towards self-ownership of STEM skills for this
emerging workforce. The project will partner with a local agency that provides
diversion from more restrictive environments for at-risk youth including foster
care, juvenile probation or delinquency, out of home placement, and out of
community placement. The project will engages participants in two 6-day living-
learning, residential communities designed to leverage the cultural and advanced
technical capacity of the Esports industry to provide a powerful learning
experience to the participants. The youth will participate alongside learning
scientists, digital media technologies faculty, computer scientists, support
staff, and Esports coaches and industry professionals. They will replicate
industry activities, modify in-game features and coding, design and develop
graphics and website content, leverage digital media marketing data analytics,
and produce video content. The research will use a pretest/posttest with a
control and experimental group design that is grounded in the participatory
research of culturally responsive methodology. Culturally responsive methodology
encourages participants to be researcher participants as they self-reflect and
actively participate in their learning pathways. The project will use a mixed
methods approach to collect data and assess attitudes and behaviors which has
the potential to result in powerful research outcomes that promote shared
responsibility for accountability towards educational
quality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.