* 1849375
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: An Empirical Study of Technological Improvisation
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2019,10/31/2020
* Hugh Raffles, The New School
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 10/31/2020
* USD 12,903.00

This doctoral dissertation research project is a historical and ethnographic
investigation of the relationship between improvisation and technological
production in Brazil. It focuses on two sites in Sao Paulo, a contemporary
network of public fablabs and the 1970s-80s electronics industry, and its aim is
to examine the reconfiguration of improvisation in the context of growing
discussions about innovation from the global South. This work will shed light on
how practices commonly considered peripheral to sophisticated technological
production have been used to remake dominant models of technological development
across changing contexts, contributing to current debates on innovation in a
global perspective, improvisation as a technical and sociocultural phenomenon,
and the relationship between skill and expertise. A key impact of this project
will be to expand academic and public discussions about sustainable and
inclusive technologies by attending to the cultivation of improvisational
technical skills associated with fixing, repurposing, and creating technologies.
It will serve to increase the participation of underrepresented minorities in
STEM through its focus on community-oriented innovation hubs and collaborative
methodologies. It will also provide valuable material for governmental and
nongovernmental professionals working in the fields of trade, industrial, and
social policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researcher will conduct participant
observation, in-depth interviews, and media and archival research to understand
how improvisation has been conceptualized, used, and valued by fablab users,
former electronics workers, technoactivists, municipal agents, and policymakers.
The researcher has several specific goals. She will examine what happens when
global corporate logics of innovation meet socially embedded experiences of
improvisation; this will facilitate contributing to an emergent literature in
STS that challenges the typical center-to-periphery arrows of technology
transfer and diffusionist innovation theories. She also plans to investigate
practices of improvisation in two contexts of technological production, one at
the beginning of consumer electronics, where the manufacturing of analog devices
was under strict protectionism; the other focusing on new forms of digital
production in the globalized neoliberal moment, which will provide a productive
genealogy for thinking about improvisation as a contemporary political-economic
project in Brazil. She also proposes to combine ethnographic approaches with a
robust historical framework to be able to provide a cultural dimension to the
study of technology while also advancing discussions of
scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.