* 1849417
* NRI: FND: Scalable, Customizable Sensory Solutions for Dexterous Robotic Hands
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Rahul Kaliki, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Juan Wachs
* 08/31/2022
* USD 421,727.00

This project aims to enhance the sense of touch for robotic hands. The main goal
is to develop prosthetic hands with a sense of touch. The touch sensor's primary
application is for upper limb amputees. The research team plans both fundamental
research and its application. The types of applications of this kind of sensor
include: humanoid robots for assistive work and elder-care, surgical robotics,
underwater robotic manipulators and spacesuits. Additionally, educational
initiatives including internships, training of under-represented minority, and
research experiences and summer modules for high school students are planned
through the Johns Hopkins Center for Talented Youth. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
technical goal of the project is to build a highly scalable sensor design
mimicking different tactile receptors in human skins and encode information from
the sensors in a manner analogous to the neural activity of the tactile
receptors. The sensor will encode the tactile information at multiple scales,
firstly based on different receptor properties, and secondly based on neuron-
like encoding of the sensor signals. This technique of encoding the neural
activity, known as neuromorphic encoding, converts the sensor activity as an
event stream, and from that data obtains finer features. The receptor based
sensing along with the various neural network algorithms, for the first time,
will provide an approach to texture and shape recognition and, as such, can also
be useful for intelligent palpation and tactile perception by dexterous robotic
hands.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.