* 1849965
* CRII: SHF: Ultra-fast Simulation and Automated Design of Silicon Photonics Devices
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/2019,09/30/2022
* Constantine Sideris, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 09/30/2022
* USD 175,000.00

Integrated circuits are responsible for most of modern technology today. While
electronic circuits have been sufficient for advancing technology until this
point, the challenging computational, energy-efficiency, and communication
demands of the 21st century require a radically new paradigm. This can be found
in silicon photonics, an emerging technology which allows the manipulation of
light by integrating optical devices on the same chips as electrical circuits.
The ability to control light on a chip has already led to important
technological advancements, including ultra-high-speed wired and wireless
communications, lens-free imaging, Light Detection and Ranging (LiDAR),
gyroscopes without moving parts, gas sensors, and label-free biosensors. This
project seeks to solve device simulation and design difficulties which currently
severely limit the potential of silicon photonics, ushering in a new generation
of chips with unprecedented levels of performance and design complexity, and
paving the way for on-chip optical computation and ultra-fast, efficient
communication. Leveraging mathematical and computational modeling, this research
will engage and train graduate and undergraduate students in multi-disciplinary
fields spanning from mathematics to computer engineering and applied physics.
Another objective is to engage high school students from local schools
interested in STEM, with a specific focus on women and underrepresented groups.
This project will spur the growth of powerful new design tools for silicon
photonics which will allow human designers to maximize their efforts designing
at the system level, rather than at the device level, allowing them to develop
highly intricate systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Due to their large size, small
features, and complexity, photonic devices are very challenging to numerically
simulate, and the lack of analytical or even approximate solutions further
complicates the design of new devices. Advanced numerical techniques based on
boundary integral equation methods will be developed in this project and applied
to model photonic devices. Unlike present approaches which necessitate
volumetric meshing of devices to be simulated, the project's approach only
requires meshing the surfaces or boundaries of devices, leading to a significant
reduction of problem size and dramatic increases in speed and CPU and memory
efficiency. High-order polynomial functions will be used to approximate the
electromagnetic unknowns, leading to an almost exponential rate of convergence
to the exact solution with respect to the mesh size, in contrast to present
methods which can only achieve linear or quadratic convergence. An optimization
framework will be designed and implemented which will be capable of
automatically designing new, ready-to-fabricate photonic devices without any
human intervention other than specification of desired functionality and
performance. The efficacy of the new simulation and optimization platform will
then be demonstrated by utilizing the framework to design and evaluate real
silicon photonic devices such as wavelength demultiplexers, power splitters, and
grating couplers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.