* 1849037
* I-Corps: CardioTrak: Using Cardiac Targeting Peptide to Image the Heart
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2018,07/31/2019
* Maliha Zahid, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Pamela McCauley
* 07/31/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this i-Corps project would be the
ability to bring to market a heart-targeted radioisotope for use during stress
testing. This is a field that has not seen any new imaging agents come to market
in ~25 years. Current stress tests rely on a particular formulation of
Technetium, a radioisotope, to image the heart at rest and at peak stress. This
current clinical standard, Technetium Sestamibi, goes to multiple organs other
than the heart leading to poor image quality due to high signal to noise ratio
as well as increasing radiation exposure. By using a Cardiac Targeting Peptide
(CTP) we can target the radiation to only where it is needed for imaging,
thereby improving image quality, reducing false positive results and decreasing
radiation exposure by as much as 80%. We have chosen a radioisotope as our first
cargo due to the widespread use of stress testing contributing to the highest
radiation exposure in medical care, and due to a reasonable length of
time/expense to FDA approval. This is scratching the surface of CTP's potential
and once we can provide proof of concept in the human imaging application, the
path will open for multiple other applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This
I-Corps project is based on a novel, non-naturally occurring, 12-amino acid cell
penetrating peptide that we termed Cardiac Targeting Peptide or CTP due to its
ability to enter heart cells after a peripheral intravenous injection. Both
cardiac diagnostics and therapeutics suffer from a lack of vectors specifically
targeting the heart. Our work utilizing phage display identified CTP which we
believe is a viable solution. In our biodistribution studies, the peak uptake
occurred at 15 mins, illustrating that CTP would be a useful vector in acute
cardiac conditions like myocardial infarction in which the window of opportunity
is limited to ~6 hours. We were able to show this targeting activity in mouse
heart, ex-vivo explanted human heart tissue from patients undergoing heart
transplants and in human induced pluripotent stem cell derived cardiomyocytes,
demonstrating that CTPs ability to enter heart cells is not species limited and
has human applicability. We have labeled CTP with a radioisotope, Technetium
99m, using a chelator Hydrazinonicotinamide and delivered the radiation to the
heart with minimal or no uptake by other organs. We have also demonstrated that
CTP is able to internalize bigger cargo into heart cells like the biotin-
streptavidin complex.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.