* 1849729
* CRII: SaTC: Identifying Fraud in the Cryptocurrency Ecosystem
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2022
* Patrick Bridges, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 05/31/2022
* USD 174,576.00

This project will advance understanding of how cybercrime has been able to
flourish in the emerging cryptocurrency economy. Research has revealed
cybercrime in the cryptocurrency economy, and the rate of fraud has seemed to
increase. By understanding the incentives for crime and by modeling effective
regulation, this research will make progress towards upending cryptocurrency-
based crime. The project will collect data towards understanding how the
underlying incentives work to cause fraudulent behavior and how the ecosystem
perpetuates fraud. This work aims to influence public policy on
cryptocurrencies, making the cryptocurrency ecosystem safer for consumers. The
project will train students in this research area and produce course
materials.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project seeks to correct the information
asymmetry in the current cryptocurrency ecosystem, whereby consumers cannot tell
the difference between a fraud and a legitimate business. There are two parts to
this project. The first part will analyze one particular sector of the ecosystem
that seems to be rife with speculation: alternative currencies and the
corresponding currency exchanges listing the currencies. Each needs the other to
be profitable: currencies need to be listed on an exchange to be worth money,
and exchanges need currencies to be listed on them to extract fees from their
users executing trades and (often) listing fees for each currency. The second
part will collect social network data on cryptocurrency-related services at
large in order to learn which services have a high probability of being scams
and what indicators are correlated with this. The work will compare the
propagation of information about legitimate industries and frauds to work
towards differentiating the two. The project will take a longitudinal approach
towards modeling how the cryptocurrency ecosystem has evolved into its current
state, and it will continue to adapt the models as criminals
adapt.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.