* 1849131
* S&amp;AS: INT: COLLAB: Goal-driven Marine Autonomy with Application to Fisheries Science and Management
* CSE,IIS
* 02/15/2019,01/31/2022
* Michael Cox, Wright State University
* Standard Grant
* James Donlon
* 01/31/2022
* USD 299,997.00

Marine robots can be used to accurately map and track marine life, leading to a
better interpretation of variability and migration patterns that are important
to fisheries managers in marine protected areas (MPAs). Principles of
engineering and oceanography can be used to maximize the impact of a network of
marine robots, but because fisheries managers, oceanographers, and roboticists
have different perspectives and knowledge bases, it can be difficult to take
advantage of cutting-edge research in each field without significant effort to
translate among the groups. Researchers will develop a computational interface
that translates human-specified missions of fisheries managers into multi-level
planning for a fleet of marine robots to monitor fish populations in a dynamic
coastal ocean environment. The system will be designed with input from fisheries
managers through a series of workshops, and will be field-tested at Gray's Reef
National Marine Sanctuary, a federally-managed MPA off the coast of Georgia. The
research will lead to more accurate and effective ways to monitor fish
populations in MPAs, as well as breakthroughs in key areas of artificial
intelligence and autonomous systems. Many of the results will be applicable to
other smart and autonomous systems in challenging environments. In addition, the
project will train graduate students and broaden undergraduate education in
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM), and offer a number of
outreach activities, including working with the University of Georgia Marine
Extension service to develop a summer camp for middle and high school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is focused on developing an
intelligent physical system (IPS) that consists of a heterogeneous fleet of
marine robots, cooperatively tracking fish movement and surveying the habitat
with minimum request for human intervention. The IPS will translate the human-
specified missions of fisheries managers into goal-driven task designs for each
robot, and automatically generate executable plans for the networked mobile
sensing agents. The system will autonomously and persistently collect in-situ
measurements and acoustic detections of fish species while maintaining multi-
scale data streams and constructing multiple spatial-temporal maps reflecting
the conditions of the ecosystem. The research aims to discover the hotspots
(e.g., spatial locations with sustained congregations of fish), as well as
illuminate more information about how and when fish move among these hotspots.
This goal is quite challenging due to a number of gaps between project needs and
the state-of-art autonomy research. Researchers will address the challenges
through new developments that accomplish three main tasks: (1) Developing the
goal-driven marine autonomy for fish habitat survey, (2) realizing the goal-
driven autonomy on physical systems, and (3) evaluating the developed framework
through real-life field work, experiments, and data
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.