* 1849112
* I-Corps:  Real-Time Monitoring with Predictive Intelligence for Efficient Warehouse and Outdoor Inventory Management
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2018,02/28/2022
* David Grau, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 02/28/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project supports
improving the efficiency of inventory and warehouse management operations with a
cost-affordable technology innovation capable of monitoring goods in real-time
without the need for static communications infrastructure. The project promises
to enhance such operations through the extraction of information from the
collected data and the provision of time-critical insights at a fraction of the
costs of current commercial tools. The monitoring innovation will potentially
become the first solution in the market capable of continuously monitoring goods
in outdoor environments. In addition, the monitoring innovation will potentially
become the first cost-affordable monitoring solution for low-value goods. The
innovation promises a primary impact in the sectors of defense and construction.
In reality, though, it offers the potential to positively impact the cost and
efficiency of complex inventory and warehouse management operations across US
industry sectors. This I-Corps team will cross-pollinate discovery and
innovation across the broad spectrum of implementation scenarios by addressing
the existing latent inefficiencies in such operations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
I-Corps project explores the market potential of the real-time monitoring,
predictive, and inexpensive innovation in support of inventory and warehouse
management operations. A realistic real-time monitoring solution without the
need for static communications infrastructure is a technically complex endeavor
beyond the capabilities of commercial tracking and monitoring tools. The
proposed innovation optimizes operations and information flows, and the response
to upstream (push) and downstream (pull) processes and overall system
performance. As large datasets are fused the artificial intelligence aspect of
the innovation automatically identifies inefficiencies and bottlenecks, and
reassesses forecasts and system decisions that account for latest events, data
uncertainties, and multiple local optima. This I-Corps team plans to investigate
the market potential of the innovation, validate customer needs and how the
innovation can alleviate such needs, and discern sustainable business
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.