* 1849067
* The Role of the Motor system in the Perception of Time
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2019,05/31/2022
* Wilsaan Joiner, George Mason University
* Continuing Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 05/31/2022
* USD 264,090.00

This project will investigate the role of the motor system in how people
perceive time. The perception of time is fundamental to our conscious experience
and critical to virtually all of our activities. However, despite being a focus
of research in experimental psychology since the 19th century, time perception
is still incompletely understood. Previous work has suggested that the brain
controls the timing of our actions and the motor system simply produces an
output in response to these timed brain commands. That is, the brain decides
when to move and the motor system produces the movement. However, recent
research has shown that the motor system may have a much more critical role in
timing and may be fundamentally necessary for the perception of time. The
investigators will test this idea by having human participants move a robotic
arm that can be perturbed by the experimenters. The investigators will explore
whether changing the features of the robotic arm movement also alters the
subject's perception of time and whether this paradigm can be used to improve
the perception of time. The research program combines aspects of the decision-
making and motor planning literatures and will provide novel training for
graduate and undergraduate students in the two research areas. Finally,
understanding timing and movements is critical to the development of brain-
machine interfaces and neural prosthetics and may help support interventions in
motor rehabilitation and motor disorders. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In most
psychological research on time perception in humans, subjects must typically
make a choice between two alternatives by pressing a button. This stands in
contrast to most animal research, where animals must move to a response
location. The investigators intend to bridge the gap between these two
literatures with the proposed paradigm. To do this, subjects will be required to
move a robotic arm to different locations, depending on their decision about an
elapsed interval of time. A series of studies will test the effects of 1) adding
resistance to the arm while subjects actively time an interval, 2) actively
moving vs. planning a movement while timing an interval, and 3) the impact of
moving while judging other, time-critical stimuli (e.g., pitch). In all studies,
the investigators will use movement kinematics and dynamics to predict the
choices subjects will make and will apply drift-diffusion modeling simulations
to elucidate where and how movement parameters impact the perception of
time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.