* 1849598
* RAPID: Improving Predictions of Evacuation Decisions
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2019
* Susan Weller, University of Texas Medical Branch at Galveston
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 07/31/2019
* USD 19,695.00

This project will use anthropological approaches to improve measurement and
understanding of hurricane evacuation decisions, and ultimately improve
prediction of evacuations. Population surveys have attempted to understand
evacuation principally in terms of the socio-demographic characteristics of
those who do and do not evacuate. Data collected on evacuation estimates over
the last two decades indicate that about one-third of residents in evacuation
zones fail to evacuate. Despite this, there is no clear or standardized set of
evacuation rationales, making it difficult to generalize across studies and
regions. This project will explore whether a new set of methods for evaluating
evacuation decisions can be replicated across regions and storms, in order to
better predict evacuation decisions. Findings will be disseminated to
organizations that explore and manage the causes, consequences, and complexities
of disaster management and recovery.

This RAPID award supports the collection of time-sensitive data concerning
mandatory evacuation for Hurricane Irma in Florida. In order to get reliable
reports concerning motives and beliefs about evacuation, interviews must be
conducted in a context where respondents can form the appropriate associative
cognitive state related to anthropogenic events necessary for free-listing
exercises. This also needs to be conducted before another storm occurs. The
researchers will use interviewing techniques from anthropology to collect
reasons for evacuation/non-evacuation. Interviews will be conducted with
neighbor-pairs (one who did and one did not evacuate) in both higher and lower
storm risk zones (20 pairs) to elicit reasons for evacuating or not evacuating.
Neighbor-matching is important to control for extraneous factors (such as wealth
or distance from water) that might influence evacuation. Recent research
suggests that free-list interviews are far more productive than standard open-
ended questions. The researchers' previous work, successfully used free-listing
to obtain a comprehensive set of evacuation/non-evacuation rationales on
Hurricane Ike, in Galveston, Texas. The data collected in this project would
improve the robustness, reliability, and replicability of these methodologies
and models across evacuation contexts. If the data is replicable, the project
would constitute a methodological innovation for anthropology specifically, and
for disaster-related science more generally.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.