* 1849089
* Case Adjudication as Local Practice: A Follow-up Study using Multiple Methods
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2021
* Mona Lynch, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 01/31/2021
* USD 153,287.00

Criminal courts that operate under the same formal law and policy often develop
their own norms and practices, resulting in very different kinds of justice
outcomes depending upon where a case is adjudicated. And when formal legal
policies change, the reforms generally get implemented in distinct and divergent
ways by local court actors, sometimes in ways inconsistent with policy goals.
This project capitalizes upon recent major policy changes imposed in the federal
criminal system by the U.S. Department of Justice (DOJ) to examine how different
court "communities" have responded to the changes. Specifically, new policies
have been developed urging prosecutors to focus on certain kinds of federal
crimes, and that require prosecutors across the country to maximize the
potential punishment. While the DOJ policies aim for standardized prosecutorial
practices across the diverse federal district courts, prior research suggests
that local courts will vary in how they translate these directives into action.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The study builds directly upon the PI's previous NSF-
funded research that examined jurisdictional differences in adjudication
strategies in federal court, using both qualitative field methods and
quantitative methods. The project revisits the same research sites (4
geographically and demographically diverse federal districts) to assess whether
and how the current DOJ policy impacts caseload characteristics (including
defendant demography) and adjudication practices and outcomes, with a focus on
how formal top-down policy is translated into localized, on-the-ground legal
action. Using interviews, observations, and administrative data from the federal
courts, the project tests three related hypotheses: 1) Despite the return to
policies that aim to control local practices through top-down mandates,
adaptations will be localized in practice. Between-district variations will
continue to be evident in four distinct sets of practices: case selection;
prosecutorial charging practices; terms and modes of plea agreements; and formal
sentencing practices. 2) Within-district, demographic composition of the
caseload, the application of prosecutorial-controlled sentencing tools, and
sentence lengths will change as a function of temporal period, but local
adjudication norms will temper such change. 3) The degree of change in local
practice norms will be greater in the current policy period (beginning May,
2017) than the previous one (2010-2017) because the current policy authorizes
increased punishment for defendants and includes local compliance
mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.