* 1849816
* CRII: III: Beyond Similarity Learning: Complementarity Learning for Contextual Behavior Modeling
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2021
* Meng Jiang, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 09/30/2021
* USD 174,910.00

Given the complexity of human behaviors, it is difficult to develop a successful
plan and make right decisions. Behavior data in fields such as social media,
education, and academic research have been increasingly available for behavioral
pattern discovery, decision making, and planning. Complementarity has been
revealed of playing a significant role in many fields: partners need
complementary strengths to do successful business; courses need complementary
teaching materials to achieve effective student learning. Therefore, the
representation of human behaviors should preserve the complementarity
information rather than the similarity. The purpose of this project is to
develop complementarity learning models to advance our understanding of human
behaviors in dynamic, social, and spatiotemporal environments, and practically,
to facilitate prediction, recommendation, and decision-making and planning
processes towards the effectiveness of behaviors. This project will also support
educational and outreach programs that will broaden participation in computer
science. Open source software implementations of the new algorithms will be made
available to the public, and will also serve as an educational tool for junior
researchers. Research supervision and career mentoring will be made available to
K-12 students through the development and publication, and a new course in data
science and behavior modeling will be offered to undergraduate and graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop and evaluate novel
behavior modeling methods that learn the representation of human behavior by
preserving the structure of complementarity among the behavior's components. The
idea is that decision makers are looking for not similar but complementary
partners, resources, and conditions that provide extra power to make a behavior
plan more effective. In this project, principled metrics of complementarity that
satisfy intuitive axioms will be proposed; complementarity representation
learning methods will be developed, applied, and evaluated on prediction and
recommendation tasks. In addition, this project will result in an online
recommender system that facilitate young researchers for project teaming and
planning. The results will also be disseminated through tutorial and workshop
organization at international conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.