* 1849821
* CRII: OAC: Real-time Computational Modeling of Crop Phenological Progress towards Scalable Satellite Precision Farming
* CSE,OAC
* 03/15/2019,02/28/2022
* Chunyuan Diao, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Alan Sussman
* 02/28/2022
* USD 174,988.00

Precision agriculture aims to leverage advanced data-intensive technology to
maximize agricultural productivity and to reduce environmental footprints. With
considerable technological advancements, it is a pivotal time to harness the
intensive data collected in space and time to benchmark precision agriculture
systems worldwide. The recent launch of groups of satellites designed to work
together -- known as "satellite constellations" -- opens up unprecedented
opportunities to revolutionize precision agriculture, through monitoring the
crop phenological progress at fine spatial and temporal scales. However, the
gigantic amount of data brings significant challenges to conventional remote
sensing software and tools. The overarching goal of this project is to prototype
advanced remote sensing cyberinfrastructure in support of both data- and
compute-intensive satellite-based precision agriculture systems. This advanced
cyberinfrastructure is applicable to a diverse range of agricultural systems,
especially for resource poor and vulnerable smallholder farming systems. With
its potential to improve global farming practices, the cyberinfrastructure helps
optimize the trajectory of agricultural development to meet future crop demands
as well as lower environmental impacts. The integrated educational and training
activities of the project offer unique learning opportunities to students of
various academic levels and backgrounds, and enhance the broader engagement of
diverse scientific communities, especially minority and underrepresented groups.
Therefore, this research aligns with the NSF mission to promote the progress of
science and to advance the national health, prosperity and
welfare.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The advanced remote sensing cyberinfrastructure
focuses on the development of an innovative real-time phenological computational
(RTPC) model and a high-performance system to harness massive parallelism in
modeling crop phenological progress towards scalable satellite-based precision
farming. The RTPC model integrates dynamic complex networks with time series
remote sensing, and is unique to predict the real-time crop phenological
progress at both fine spatial and temporal scales. The high-performance system
enhances the parallelism of the RTPC using a hybrid computation model, including
a node-level computation model and a system-wide data distribution model. The
node-level computation model takes advantage of multi-core architecture of
computing nodes to parallelize the compute-intensive RTPC in predicting dynamic
network characteristics of crop phenology. The system-wide data distribution
model devises a novel Space-and-Time parallel decomposition strategy in
distributing massive remote sensing time series data to reduce memory
requirements and to achieve high scalability. An open-source toolkit is designed
to facilitate the open development and adoption of the remote sensing
cyberinfrastructure across a broad range of disciplines. Through leveraging the
power of high performance computing and this hybrid computation model, the
cyberinfrastructure can analyze PB-level remotely sensed data in a highly
scalable manner to conduct real-time monitoring of earth system
dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.