* 1849585
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Imagining the Unimaginable: War, Weapons and Procurement Politics
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2019,02/28/2021
* Sanne Verschuren, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Wenda K. Bauchspies
* 02/28/2021
* USD 15,750.00

This project examines how nations make choices about the military weapons that
they design and use. Previous research suggests that decisions about weapons
technologies are driven mainly by security concerns or financial needs, but such
factors cannot explain current patterns of weapons development across nations.
This project will instead test the theory that the ways in which those involved
in war and weapons development in each nation (i.e. military personnel,
scientists, private firms, etc.) conceptualize future warfare shapes the kinds
of weapons that they seek to design and procure. This theory will be tested in
relation to the development and procurement of aircraft carriers, stealth
technology, and autonomous weapons in the United States, United Kingdom, France,
and India. Data for testing the theory will come from analyses of military
documents in national archives, in-depth interviews with key figures in each
nation, and a survey experiment designed to uncover how decisions are made
regarding military budgets and weapons procurement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is
a multi-method investigation of how and why nation states decide to create and
procure different types of weapons technologies. It focuses on interactions
among military personnel, politicians, scientists, private firms, and civil
society organizations. The main contention is that these actors' conceptions of
future warfare shape their choices about weapons procurement. Thus, each set of
actors' identity, belief about the state of future conflict, and receptiveness
to and interpretation of the laws and ethics of warfare shape the technical
solutions that they will propose to different types of security threats. The
extent to which these technological solutions are then transformed into weapons
systems is predicted to be determined by the extent to which each set of actors
has access to the decision-making process and the extent to which their ideas
resonate with those of decision makers. The predicted result of interplay among
these factors is that even when faced with similar threats, states end up making
different choices regarding weapons procurement. This theory of weapons
technology design and procurement will be tested by comparing archival,
interview, and experimental data from the United States, United Kingdom, France,
and India.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.