* 1849899
* CRII: AF: Pseudorandomness: New Frontiers and Techniques
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/2019,02/28/2021
* Eshan Chattopadhyay, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 02/28/2021
* USD 175,000.00

The role of randomness in computation is extremely important with crucial
applications to various branches of computer science including design of fast
algorithms for practical problems, distributed computing, cryptography, and
security. Scientists and economists use randomness extensively in simulations of
physical and biological systems and other complex environments. However, a major
problem in practice is that physical sources of randomness are defective and
only produce correlated bits that contain some entropy. This leads to the
following fundamental question: To what extent is the use of randomness inherent
in applications? Can we reduce the amount or quality of randomness required to
perform these tasks? Most applications of randomness in cryptography are
inherent. Indeed, we require the secret keys for various cryptographic
applications, such as credit card transactions, to be uniformly random. On the
other hand, it is not known if the use of randomness is fundamental in designing
efficient algorithms. This project intends to study these fundamental questions,
and in particular, provide theoretical guarantees on the quality of randomness
used in cryptography and security, and reduce the amount of randomness used in
design of efficient algorithms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The area of
Pseudorandomness provides a unified approach to the above problems and a major
goal in this area is to efficiently construct deterministic objects that are
random-like. The idea is to replace a random object used in an application, with
an explicit construction of a random-like object, thus removing the need for
random bits. Important notions in this area are randomness extractors and
pseudorandom generators. A randomness extractor is an algorithm that produces
purely random bits from defective sources of randomness. Such extractors can be
used in purifying defective sources before carrying out important cryptographic
protocols. A pseudorandom generator is a deterministic algorithm that takes a
short uniformly random string and stretches it into a much longer string that
still "looks random" to the appropriate application (e.g., algorithms that use
limited memory). This project intends to study several concrete directions to
extend the state-of-art on efficient constructions of randomness extractors and
pseudorandom generators that will lead to resolving important open problems in
computational complexity theory and derandomization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.