* 1849002
* Strategies for Engaged-Student Learning Innovation and Curriculum Enhancement in Undergraduate Engineering Education
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Annamaria Konya Tannon, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 09/30/2021
* USD 45,000.00

Social innovation (strategies for meeting societal needs), when combined with
entrepreneurship (launching of new businesses), can potentially energize and
strengthen civil society. The wide-ranging social impacts of engineering
projects on everyday life speak to the altruistic desire of many people to make
a difference in the world. By combining this altruism with economic advancement
opportunities through entrepreneurship, more students are likely to consider
engineering as a career. This project aims to create a comprehensive roadmap for
increased engagement of engineering students through an innovative combination
of social innovation and entrepreneurship. A one-day workshop will use a
discovery process to identify the current and potential practices in this area.
The workshop will include key stakeholders such as professional engineers from
industry, engineering faculty, students, psychologists, cognitive scientists,
curriculum development experts, entrepreneurs, and local government
officials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During the workshop, the project team will
facilitate discussions on approaches to integrating service learning and social
innovation into existing engineering curriculum, as participants share their
experiences in implementing similar engagement-enhancing initiatives. The
workshop will feature brainstorming sessions and presentations centered on four
themes: 1) Rethinking Engineering Education - focuses attention on the
transformations that have taken place in the last decade in engineering
education; 2) Emerging Frontiers and Trends in Student Engagement Strategies -
participants will brainstorm and discuss potential opportunities for social
innovation within the community; 3) Mechanisms for Integrating Service Learning
and Social Innovation - attention will be focused on how to best meet community
needs while serving experiential and entrepreneurship learning goals; and 4)
Towards a Way Forward - participants will synthesize the highlights and lessons
learned from the workshop to develop a roadmap for increased student
engagement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.