* 1849700
* Mantle volatiles and attenuation in the East African Rift
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Heather Ford, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 03/31/2024
* USD 392,618.00

The mantle under the East African Rift features one of the most prominent
geophysical anomalies observed in Earth's upper mantle, defined by a broad
region of very low seismic wave speeds. Though increased mantle temperatures
could slow seismic wave speeds, constraints from erupted lava compositions
indicate that the mantle in this region is warm, but not hot enough to account
for the observed maximum slowness of seismic waves. Elevated concentrations of
volatile elements (e.g., water, carbon) in the mantle can also slow seismic wave
speeds, but these are unconstrained for the mantle along the East African Rift.
Quantifying the abundance of water and carbon in the mantle in this region is
critical to describing the magmatism that has occurred along the length of the
rift, and its relationship to the process of rifting itself. Additionally,
reconciling geophysical and geochemical models for the mantle in this region is
a key test of the current understanding of Earth's mantle more broadly. This
work will inform future field and experimental campaigns by presenting a
synthesis of information that can be gleaned by existing sample sets and
geophysical data sets. In addition to the scientific impacts, this work broadens
the participation of underrepresented groups and supports several undergraduate
and graduate students. This work will also inform an exhibit for the University
of California-Riverside (UCR) Earth Sciences Museum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If the
mantle is significantly water- or carbon-rich, this could lead to mantle melting
at higher pressures and lower temperatures than for a dry and carbon-free
mantle. The presence of melts may also slow seismic wave speeds. This work will
constrain the mantle source volatile composition at individual volcanic edifices
and assess the importance of elevated volatiles, temperatures, and melts on the
extreme nature of the geophysical anomaly under the rift, and to the initiation
and evolution of the rift itself. This work will test existing, quantitative
relationships between petrological descriptions of the mantle and the properties
of seismic waves in this region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.