* 1849227
* RII Track-1: Molecule to Ecosystem: Environmental DNA as a Nexus of Coastal Ecosystem Sustainability for Maine (Maine-eDNA)
* O/D,OIA
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Mary-Kate Beard-Tisdale, University of Maine
* Cooperative Agreement
* Andrea Johnson
* 06/30/2024
* USD 20,000,000.00

This project, known as Maine-eDNA, aims to achieve transformational
understanding of ecosystem dynamics and sustainability in coastal regions
through the application of advanced genomic analysis techniques on environmental
samples. This approach, termed environmental DNA (eDNA) analysis, potentially
allows for all species present in an ecosystem to be detected in parallel.
Coastal ecosystems exhibit complex spatial and temporal variability, and
therefore it has typically been necessary to commit significant time and
resources to characterize even small features of the overall system. The vision
of Maine-eDNA is to show how the eDNA approach can transform how aquatic
ecosystems are studied and managed. The project focuses its efforts across three
watersheds along the Maine coast - Casco Bay, Damariscotta, and Penobscot River
- and across the major habitat types (lake, river, estuary, coastal) within each
watershed. Maine-eDNA's research will explore questions related to sustainable
fisheries and harmful species, along with integrative studies that explore the
transformational potential of big data and team science practices. The project's
research activities will be integrated with an ambitious agenda to engage
teachers, students, and environmental professionals across the state with
targeted activities that will lead to a better-trained, more diverse STEM
workforce.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Maine-eDNA brings together several of the
state's public and private academic institutions and independent research
laboratories to focus on a shared goal of applying eDNA approaches to understand
coastal ecosystem dynamics across spatial and temporal scales. eDNA holds the
promise of overcoming fundamental environmental sampling constraints by
leveraging state-of-the-art molecular next-generation sequencing and
bioinformatics technologies. The project's research will involve a multi-year
sampling campaign across several habitat types in three major Maine watersheds,
augmented by targeted sampling and analyses to support project objectives. eDNA
approaches will be applied to coastal ecological problems of strong economic and
societal relevance for the state, addressing research questions relating to
sustainable fisheries (i.e., ecosystem-based restoration and early-life ecology)
and harmful species (i.e., harmful algal and cyanobacterial blooms and invasive
species). Additional Maine-eDNA research efforts will study how applying big
data and team science approaches can lead to more rapid advances in
understanding complex systems. To broaden the impact of its research agenda,
Maine-eDNA's efforts will also include extensive education and outreach
activities that will emphasize connections with the state's Native American and
rural populations, as well as development opportunities for teachers and
environmental professionals. The project will also build new partnerships and
strengthen existing ties with Maine's resource managers and fishing industries.
Maine-eDNA promises to have a strong beneficial impact on the research capacity
of the participating institutions and on the state
overall.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.