* 1849926
* Collaborative Research: Elucidating algal host-virus dynamics in different nutrient regimes - mechanistic interactions and biogeochemical impact
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2018,09/30/2019
* David Talmy, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Michael Sieracki
* 09/30/2019
* USD 55,642.00

Marine phytoplankton, photosynthetic microscopic organisms that float with the
oceans currents, account for ~50% of the Earth's primary productivity. When
there are sufficient nutrients and light to sustain their growth, phytoplankton
thrive and produce large-scale blooms in the world oceans that can be seen from
Earth-observing satellites. Coccolithophores are arguably one of the most
dominant and globally distributed phytoplankton. Their dual ability to produce
calcium carbonate cell walls and to use carbon dioxide for photosynthesis make
them a key component of the oceanic carbon cycle and marine ecosystems. As such,
water column processes that impact the fate of this cellular carbon are of
critical importance. Emiliania huxleyi is a globally widespread, cosmopolitan
coccolithophore that forms blooms in all but the polar oceans. These blooms are
routinely terminated by virus infection (Coccolithoviruses), which results in
cell death and the release of organic matter into the upper ocean. At the same
time, infection triggers the production and release of a sticky mucus-like gel
which serves to aggregate free floating cells (and even viruses) into larger
particles that have very high sinking rates into the deep ocean. Hence, viruses
play multifaceted roles in determining whether phytoplankton carbon sinks to the
deep ocean and is sequestered away from the atmosphere or is recycled in the
upper ocean free to exchange with the atmosphere. Ultimately, factors that
impact the interactions between phytoplankton cells and viruses are likely to
affect the direction of carbon flow in the oceans. This project uses a well-
characterized, laboratory-based coccolithophore-virus system (E. huxleyi and
Coccolithoviruses) to elucidate the basic mechanisms that underlie host-virus
interactions at the levels of adsorption, replication and production. Proposed
work will manipulate nutrient supply to understand its impact on mechanisms of
infection and to better interpret population changes in different oceanic
regimes. A key tenet is to investigate the role of mucus-like gels and calcium
carbonate cell walls, both of which are produced under nutrient stress, as
important first order drivers in host-virus interactions. Experimental work will
be integrated into mathematical models as a tool to extrapolate our findings and
postulate how, to first order, viruses control the fate of phytoplankton
populations in the ocean. Research concepts and findings will be relayed to
broader audiences by developing an online educational software tool and web app
(via the Rutgers University Mobile App Development group) that focuses on the
use of mathematical modeling in marine science. It will be designed to meet
national requirements for the Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS) for 15-16
year olds. Students will learn about patterns of ocean productivity, articulate
how and why ocean ecosystems are sensitive to environmental change, and
understand the role of viruses in ecosystem structure. To ensure large-scale
distribution of the app, with a particular aim to reach underrepresented
students and to address the NGSS, Rutgers will host workshops to familiarize the
teachers with the science, the scientists, and effective use of the app and
associated lessons. The investigators will work with external evaluators to
assess the effectiveness of these activities and deliverables. Research
activities will also be communicated to the general public by interactions with
the 'Liquid Living' display at the San Francisco Exploratorium and the annual
'Nautical Night' at the MIT museum in Boston, MA.

Phytoplankton are the basis of marine food webs and are responsible for
approximately half of global net primary production. As highly abundant
infectious entities in the oceans, marine viruses can cause the demise of
phytoplankton blooms and drive the release of dissolved and particulate organic
matter (DOM and POM), which stimulates microbial activity, facilitates bacterial
re-mineralization, enhances nutrient recycling and respiration, as well as
short-circuits carbon transport to higher trophic levels. At the same time,
enhanced production and release of "sticky" colloidal cellular components, such
as transparent exopolymer particles (TEP), during viral lysis can cause particle
aggregation and enhance carbon export. As yet, the dynamics of phytoplankton
infection by viruses and the balance between these diametrically opposed
ecosystem pathways has not been fully characterized under different
physicochemical conditions. An enhanced mechanistic and quantitative
understanding of host-virus interactions can critically inform and constrain
ecosystem models and allow researchers to ascertain and quantify its ecological
and biogeochemical impacts on large spatial scales. This collaborative project
aims to bridge existing gaps in our mechanistic and quantitative understanding
of viruses as agents of phytoplankton mortality and their impact on
biogeochemical processes. The ability of ecosystem models to predict carbon flow
in marine systems is limited, in part, by a lack of appropriate information
regarding the nutrient sensitivity of fundamental infection parameters: viral
adsorption rates onto/into hosts, virus replication efficiency and latent
period, and the production of infectious viruses and their excretion into the
surrounding medium. Using lab-based experiments with a coccolithophore host-
virus model system, as well as extensive datasets from virus infected natural
coccolithophore blooms in the North Atlantic, this project aims to elucidate the
impact of nutrient limitation and host cell fitness on virus infection and to
what degree the dependence of viral infection on nutrient supply impacts large
scale biogeochemistry and biogeography of a globally significant phytoplankton
species. Our interdisciplinary approach combines grounded molecular- and flow
cytometry-based diagnostic techniques, with the development of a mathematical
model of infection, to understand the primary mechanisms underlying observed
host-virus dynamics. We will embed the mathematical model of infection dynamics
into a global ecosystem model, so we may understand the ecological impact of
phytoplankton infection by viruses, and its dependence on nutrient supply, on
large spatial scales.