* 1849794
* CDS&amp;E-MSS/Collaborative Research:   Sequential Design for Stochastic Control: Active Learning of Optimal Policies
* MPS,DMS
* 02/01/2018,08/31/2019
* Robert Gramacy, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2019
* USD 19,806.00

This research project aims to build new cross-disciplinary algorithms that blend
concepts from applied probability, control, and statistical modeling to tackle
computational challenges in large-scale optimization. Creation of such new links
is another step in building a next-generation of high-performance algorithms
needed to meet the increasingly complex problems arising in applications as
diverse as finance, energy storage and security, and the management of
epidemics. The project's research agenda is grounded in two concrete application
areas where it is crucial to tackle industrial-grade high-fidelity models. One
is the efficient management of cycled commodity assets, including gas storage,
battery storage, or fleets of power plants as energy infrastructure is
transitioned to the "smart grid." A second is timely and effective response to
unfolding infectious disease outbreaks, notably influenza. Both present major
cross-disciplinary challenges. We see vast potential for algorithms which expand
capabilities for aspects of quantitative control, and thus provide higher
quality information to decision makers. Our goal is to produce a smarter, more
targeted, use of random numbers in a new wave of lean stochastic solvers, and
subsequently an expansion of the size of problems that can be tackled with
existing computing capabilities. The educational core of the project contributes
to inter-disciplinary training in mathematical sciences across undergraduate,
graduate and postdoctoral levels. The collaborative initiatives will also
enhance the research infrastructure through exchange of ideas between the two
campuses (Univesrity of California-Santa Barbara and University of Chicago) and
communities of statisticians, operations researchers and engineers. All
algorithms would be documented and publicly released to the wider scientific
community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Deployment of simulation based schemes remains
key for control of stochastic systems that require realistic high-fidelity
representations. This project will develop new Monte Carlo algorithms for a
class of stochastic control problems by erecting novel bridges between dynamic
control and methods of sequential design and statistical learning. Our research
agenda hinges on sequential, active learning of optimal action sets, so that the
algorithms adaptively allocate computing resources to better enhance fidelity of
the approximated control strategies. Such targeted use of Monte Carlo
simulations links approximate dynamic programming with response surface
modeling, marrying two so-far disparate areas of applied mathematics and
statistics. The resulting adaptive schemes will facilitate orders of magnitude
savings in simulation budgets, expanding the frontier for predictive modeling
and decision making under uncertainty. The proposed research will advance the
theory of algorithms for dynamic control over massive multi-dimensional state
spaces, where curses of dimensionality are unavoidable. Simultaneously,
integration of the statistical and computational theories in this direction will
open new lines of interdisciplinary quantitative research. Through enhancing
knowledge discovery in large-scale control settings, the projects will
facilitate transition to practice in novel contexts. With the aim of reaching
out to diverse users from the mathematical, biological, physical and engineering
sciences, producing general purpose open-source software via R packages is a
primary deliverable of the project, and will be supplemented by a database of
case studies.