* 1849533
* A History of the Definition and Diagnosis of Postpartum Depression as a Disease
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2021
* Rachel Moran, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 05/31/2021
* USD 162,619.00

This award supports a project in the history of science that analyzes the
production and proliferation of the disease concept of postpartum depression in
the United States during the second half of the twentieth century. It traces the
mobilization of medical, popular, and political languages of postpartum
depression (depression with onset in the year following childbirth) as a means
by which different groups defined the normal and abnormal postpartum. The
research will engage in archival research and oral histories; the analysis of
these sources will be guided by the theorization of diseases of risk, somatic
citizenship, and gender, emotion and embodiment. The results of this research
will be published as a book that will interest physicians, psychiatrists, and
others interested in maternal mental health. Transcripts of oral histories with
actors involved in the codification of postpartum depression as a distinct
disease will be made available for future researchers interested in women's
health activism and mental health politics. The researcher will also design a
course for upper-level undergraduates focusing on gender and mental health, and
she will engage in public outreach through op-eds in national newspapers and
women's health publications that will translate this work to a general public.

This research project on the history of postpartum depression will take a
critical perspective in considering how different actors participated in the
politics of diagnosis and the search for causes and solutions within a layered
political context. The primary product of this research, a monograph, will
consider these questions within a broader framework of gendered risk. The
project converses directly with literatures of women's health, mental health,
and 20th century U.S. politics. Contributions include an examination of how
maternal risk and child development literature shaped the construction of
maternal mental health, a nuanced investigation of the gendered national
politics of the late-20th century as they led multiple groups to accept
etiologies of postpartum depression that served their own aims, and an
investigation into disease construction and risk in this specifically gendered
and familial disease.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.