* 1849594
* CAREER: Glass formation in strongly interacting polymers - predictive understanding from high-throughput simulation and theory
* MPS,DMR
* 08/07/2018,06/30/2023
* David Simmons, University of South Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 06/30/2023
* USD 362,269.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports theoretical and
computational research, and education on soft materials. Transformational
technologies ranging from vaccines that remain viable at room temperature to
flexible and stable solar cells and electronics await the development of new
polymeric materials, soft materials made from long molecular chains with
repeating molecular units, that push the limits of material performance. Many of
the most promising materials for these new technologies derive their potential
from two shared features: they solidify without forming a crystal, through a
process known as the glass transition; and their molecules possess strong
interactions. At the same time that these features are key to the potential of
these materials, they also present a challenge to rational materials design. A
fundamental understanding of the physics of the glass transition, the central
determinant of the properties of these materials, is still lacking. This problem
is especially acute in strongly interacting polymers, because strong
interactions are resistant to standard theoretical approaches and are difficult
to efficiently capture in computer simulations. As a result, it has not been
possible to study molecular behavior at sufficiently long time scales and in
sufficiently diverse chemistries to both unravel the fundamental physics of
these materials and guide their design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
aimed to overcome these challenges. The PI will combine new theoretical
approaches and an improved strategy for simulating glass-forming materials to
establish fundamental insights and design guidelines for strongly interacting
glass-forming polymers. This strategy will enable access to very long time
scales and tens of thousands of chemistries to identify common aspects of the
molecular physics of these materials and translate them into predictive theories
for their properties. This theoretical understanding, in turn, will guide
selection of molecular structures yielding unique, targeted material properties.
Success of this project will contribute to accelerating the development of
materials with the potential to improve human health, enable a cleaner domestic
energy economy, enhance the lightness and durability of auto and aircraft
components, and broaden the versatility of electronics and solar
cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will be integrated with educational
outreach activities that will advance a Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics (STEM) pipeline focused on guiding outstanding students - especially
those from socioeconomically underprivileged backgrounds - into STEM careers.
Specific activities will include expanding a PI-initiated effort offering paid
summer-to-fall research internships to high school students, engaging of
undergraduates in laboratory research, and coordinating master's degree programs
to cement the transition of undergraduate students into the STEM community.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports
theoretical and computational research, and education on polymer glasses.
Strongly interacting polymers can exhibit extreme properties with the potential
to enable societally transformational technologies, such as room-temperature
preservation of vaccines in hydrogen-bonding polymer glasses and flexible solar
cells and electronics stabilized by extraordinarily impermeable glassy polymer
films. The dynamic, mechanical, and transport properties that determine the
performance of these materials are largely controlled by the details of their
glass transition, both in the glassy state where the structure frozen in at the
glass transition temperature "controls" these properties and at higher
temperatures where the glass formation process can dominate behavior to hundreds
of Kelvin above the glass transition temperature. Rational design of these
materials therefore demands a predictive understanding of glass formation in
strongly interacting polymers. However, an understanding of the glass transition
sufficient to guide materials design remains a grand challenge of materials
science. While molecular dynamics simulations have provided a valuable tool in
the study of this phenomenon, they have been unable to yield a predictive
understanding of its physics because their insufficient speed prohibits
simulation in the deeply supercooled regime near the glass transition and
prevents simulations from spanning the large sets of systems necessary to
establish comprehensive structure/property relations. This problem is especially
acute in strongly interacting polymers, in which simulations are substantially
slower and standard theoretical approaches based only on van der Waals
interactions break down.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research project is aimed to
overcome these challenges and to accomplish two strategic goals:&lt;br/&gt;1)
Identify universal mechanistic interrelations between static and dynamic
properties associated with glass formation in strongly interacting polymers,
including alpha relaxation time, glass transition temperature, fragility of
glass formation, glassy modulus, configurational entropy, and free volume.
&lt;br/&gt;2) Establish mechanism-based structure-property relations predicting
the dependence of these properties on the molecular structure of strongly
interacting polymers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These goals will be achieved by
employing a novel efficient protocol for molecular dynamics simulation of the
glass transition, developed in the PI's group, to perform simulations that
access the deeply supercooled regime and span large matrices of molecular
properties in strongly interacting polymers. These simulation data will be
employed to establish structure/property relations covering a large range of
molecular properties based on molecular-level insights. Data from these
simulations will also be combined with theoretical models of glass formation to
establish new mechanistic understanding and theoretical descriptions of glass
formation in strongly interacting polymers. Ultimately, by combining theory with
high-throughput simulations, this project will establish structure/property
relations to enable theory-based design of strongly-interacting glass-forming
polymers. &lt;br/&gt;This research will be integrated with educational outreach
activities that will advance a STEM pipeline focused on guiding outstanding
students - especially those from socioeconomically underprivileged backgrounds -
into STEM careers. Specific activities will include expanding a PI-initiated
effort offering paid summer-to-fall research internships to high school
students, engaging of undergraduates in laboratory research, and coordinating
master's degree programs to cement the transition of undergraduate students into
the STEM community.