* 1849427
* Fear and the Safety Net: Evidence from Secure Communities
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2021
* Marcella Alsan, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Reggie Sheehan
* 08/31/2021
* USD 225,000.00

Poorer households in the U.S. are more likely to be eligible for means-tested
federal welfare programming. Prior research has shown that many safety net
programs have important positive effects on the health and well-being of those
who receive them. Yet, take-up of such programs among the eligible population is
incomplete and tends to be dampened by a variety of factors such as stigma,
hassle costs, and lack of information. However, particularly among poor,
program-eligible Hispanic households, the federal government also plays a major
role in their lives through immigration enforcement. Indeed, numerous media
accounts have reported that increased vigilance for non-citizens has led
individuals who are eligible for enrollment in such programs (e.g. U.S.-born and
naturalized citizens) to not sign up or to drop out of government programs. Such
behaviors, purportedly driven by fear of "outing a relative," are highly policy
relevant and could have important effects for Hispanic and non-Hispanic
households alike. Understanding whether the dual role of federal authority as
both enforcer and benefactor influences the take-up of decisions of vulnerable
households is critical to developing policies that fulfill the government's
mandates.

The research will examine the staggered roll-out of a relatively novel and far-
reaching immigration enforcement program, Secure Communities, which led to a
massive increase in detainers and deportations for both violent and non-violent
immigrant offenders. Secure Communities provides ideal quasi-experimental
variation since the Hispanic community was overwhelmingly affected and the
timing of the rollout was based on technical factors, lending itself to a triple
difference-in-differences empirical methodology. This approach allows the
researchers to compare program take-up for Hispanic households within a given
location to take-up for non-Hispanic whites and blacks, net of counties that had
not yet activated, versus after Secure Communities activation. To assess whether
any isolated effects on the take-up of programs by Hispanic Americans are
mediated by fear of revealing non-citizens in their networks, the researchers
have assembled data on the spatial distribution of mixed-status families, survey
data on deportation fear, and Google Trends data on searches for deportation-
related terms. Lastly, the researchers assess whether the effects of enforcement
on take-up are buffeted in areas that have declared sanctuary status.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.