* 1849751
* Disorder and the Emergence of Inhomogeneous Phases in Strongly Correlated Electron Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Peter Hirschfeld, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 07/31/2023
* USD 355,492.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports research and education
designed to advance understanding of materials containing itinerant electrons
that interact strongly with each other, giving rise to new states of electronic
matter with novel properties. The PI will use model calculations for electrons
in materials classes known as cuprates and iron-based superconductors, as well
as others, to study several challenging problems directed towards a broader
understanding of how these materials work. He will also work with a local
science museum to prepare exhibits on superconductivity and magnetism for the
general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Superconductivity is one type of quantum
state of many electrons in a metal that is characterized by the loss of all
electrical resistance and consequently of all dissipation of energy. The PI will
explore the interplay between the fundamental physics of superconductors and
other phases of matter, including magnetic ones, which tend to form when
superconductivity is suppressed. In addition, he will explore the effect of
impurities and other defects that are always present when crystals or films are
grown, on the interplay between these phases. Thus, the PI will explore models
of the effect of impurities and other real-life defects on the properties of
these superconducting materials. The PI will focus especially on the theory of
how to interpret results from an experimental technique called scanning
tunneling spectroscopy. In this method, atomic-resolution images of the quantum
states of a material can be collected by applying a voltage to a tiny sharp
metal tip as it is scanned over the material's surface. Information obtained
from theoretical calculations and the analysis of data from these experiments
may provide key insights into the interplay of superconductivity and other
states including magnetism and a novel state of electrons that is a quantum
mechanical analog of states that occur in liquid crystals and make liquid
crystal displays possible, and their interaction with impurities in the
material.&lt;br/&gt;One consequence of these investigations may be a deeper
insight into the nature of high temperature superconductivity and how it can be
further optimized to have enormous technological implications. Understanding the
properties of these quantum materials and the influence of disorder may also
lead to novel properties that can be utilized in new devices and technologies,
obtaining unusual sensitivity operating near transitions among competing phases
that occur in highly correlated metals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research and education to
address long-standing fundamental problems involving the interplay of quenched
disorder and various types of competing emergent order in correlated electron
systems. The materials to be investigated include cuprate and iron-based
superconductors, as well other quantum materials displaying competing orders.
The PI will investigate properties of electronic systems through a careful
analysis of the behavior of simplified models of interacting electrons on the
lattice, informed in some cases by density functional theory-based electronic
structure calculations with appropriate inclusion of correlations. There are
three main projects:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Interplay of nematicity,
superconductivity, and disorder. The PI and his group will study the influence
of impurities on electronic nematic instabilities in Fe-based superconducting
systems and their interplay with superconductivity. Normally it is expected that
superconductivity and nematicity compete with one another, as seen clearly in
the Barium122 system. This competition may be responsible for the striking
enhancement of the transition temperature with electron irradiation in iron
selenide, but recent experiments on iron materials that include both selenium
and sulfur in proportion have indicated that in some chalcogenide systems
nematicity and superconductivity cooperate with each other, and this unusual
situation may be responsible for the enhancement of the transition temperature
with disorder as observed in iron selenide. A wide range of behavior is
possible, and the PI will investigate the phase diagram of simple models that
allow for both competition and cooperation, as well as how these phases evolve
with disorder. The PI aims to address the basic question: What in a material
system influences whether or not nematicity and superconductivity cooperate or
compete, and how can disorder affect this balance?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2.
Effects of disorder on overdoped cuprates. The PI will perform a series of
investigations on the cuprate materials that can be doped well past optimal
doping, to show the unexpected effects of scattering from out-of-plane dopants,
and test the hypothesis that the overdoped cuprate superconducting state can be
well described by the Landau-BCS paradigm. This notion was challenged by recent
superfluid density and optical conductivity experiments on lanthanum strontium
copper oxide (LSCO) films. The PI and his group will calculate several
measurable quantities in the superconducting state of LSCO and related bismuth,
thallium and other cuprate compounds using the so-called dirty d-wave theory.
One goal will be to examine the effect of disorder as a possible explanation for
the disparate transition temperatures in these systems. The PI's work will be
complemented by studies of the doping dependence of the intrinsic pairing
interaction in Hubbard-type models to see if a consistent picture can be
developed where pseudogap physics is apparently absent. Finally, ab initio
calculations of out-of-plane dopant impurity potentials will be performed to
allow for possible microscopic justification of the established
phenomenology.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;3. STM of charge and pair density waves.
Much of the physical information available on competing order and inhomogeneity
arises from scanning tunneling microscopy and spectroscopy on high quality
surfaces; yet the theory to interpret such data is available only in very
primitive form. The PI will use microscopic Wannier functions from ab initio
calculations to construct local Green's functions in both superconducting and
metallic states to compare with experiments on charge and density waves, above
the sample surface where measurements are actually performed. This technique
will be tested on longstanding problems in cuprate and iron-based
superconductors, and then extended to study modern issues of competing order in
a variety of correlated systems. In particular, the PI and his group will
compare microscopic theories of pair density waves in cuprates with STM
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the properties of correlated electron
systems and the influence of disorder may lead to novel materials properties
that can be utilized in new devices and technologies, obtaining unusual
sensitivity by operating near transitions between competing phases that occur in
highly correlated electron systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award also
supports outreach activities including: designing a new exhibit on electrical
conduction and superconductivity for the recently opened Cade Museum for
Innovation, organizing U. Florida Activities in support of United Nations Women
and Girls in Science Day, and developing and delivering public lectures.
Software developed for the calculation of spin fluctuation pairing, and a
database for Wannier functions in unconventional superconductors, will be made
available through the PI's website and GitHub.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.