* 1849102
* EAGER: Creating a STEM Evaluation Community of Practice to use Culturally Responsive Evaluation (CRE) in Broadening participation (BP) Programs and Projects
* O/D,OIA
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Rodney Hopson, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Bernice Anderson
* 08/31/2021
* USD 299,997.00

Purpose. The purpose of this project is to conduct exploratory research to gauge
the interdisciplinary and transformative potential of using culturally
responsive evaluation (CRE) methods to inform the general development of shared
accountability mechanisms for broadening participation in the STEM workforce. In
addition, the research will add to the evaluation knowledge/practice base,
specifically on the efficacy of internship experiences in the creation of more
effective recruitment strategies, education/training, and career pathways for
evaluation professionals of color. This project builds on a need expressed by
the American Evaluation Association?s national competitive pre-doctoral Graduate
Education Diversity Internship (GEDI) program to introduce and advance the
utilization of CRE in Federal STEM evaluation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Community of
Practice. This project will create a community of practice that places two GEDI
interns annually at the National Science Foundation to engage in both the
application of CRE to ongoing contracted Federal STEM education and research
evaluation projects, but also to contribute to research conducted by the Center
for Culturally Responsive Evaluation and Assessment (CREA) at the University of
Illinois- Champaign-Urbana on the use of CRE in STEM education and research
evaluation based on their experience. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research Activities.
The research will discover the factors that drive the successful development of
sustainable, intergenerational evaluation pathways to promote broadening
participation in STEM evaluation. Data collection methods include literature
review, participant observation, secondary analysis of administrative records
and other data, surveys, and interviews. These data will be used to strengthen
the existing GEDI theory of change framework and curricula by infusing findings
and lessons learned from the internship experience about the use of CRE and
broadening participation in STEM evaluation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dissemination. A symposium held during the second year of
the project will convene experts in CRE, STEM BP, and evaluation to review the
research findings and derive implications for to advancing the science and
practice of evaluating investments in broadening participation across the STEM
research workforce. Dissemination activities and products such as journal
articles, conference presentations, and professional development workshops are
planned for both years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.