* 1849902
* Who Likes Computer Science? How Gender Stereotypes about Interest Shape Children's Motivation
* EDU,DRL
* 12/15/2018,11/30/2021
* Andrew Meltzoff, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Wu He
* 11/30/2021
* USD 399,731.00

This project will advance efforts of the Innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST) program to better understand and promote practices
that increase students' motivation and capacities to pursue careers in the
fields of science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) by preparing
and interesting elementary- and middle-school students for STEM courses/programs
in high school and eventually in STEM careers. This project is significant
because it will deepen the understanding of the importance of interest
stereotypes (stereotypes about who shows interest in STEM) and how they
influence students' motivation to pursue STEM. The project seeks to address the
following objectives: (1) to examine how interest stereotypes affect girls'
motivation; (2) to study whether interest stereotypes have a stronger negative
impact than ability stereotypes on motivation for computer science; and (3)
explore whether it is possible to intervene to reduce the impact of interest
stereotypes. The findings will have implications for many fields conducting
research that aims to reduce educational inequalities linked to stereotypes.
This research has the potential to lead to more powerful interventions to help
children resist such stereotypes and remain open to pursuing interests in STEM.
Another major contribution of this work is to advance social identity theory
beyond stereotype threat research on ability stereotypes. The project impact
broadens the focus in STEM education by designing real-world interventions that
can intervene at the root of the problem to counteract stereotypes and promote
STEM motivation. In addition, the project will promote the use of the Open
Science Framework to allow free sharing of the data and materials. It will help
give students the tools they need to resist interest stereotypes and promote
their interest in STEM, help teachers identify the most powerful messages to
send their students to boost their motivation for STEM, and use an educational
outreach network to connect and share findings broadly, with educators,
policymakers, and the entire community of stakeholders working to promote
students' motivation in STEM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will examine
how interest stereotypes influence 8-12-year-old children's motivation for
computer science. The focus on computer science is due to its low representation
of women and highly stereotyped nature. Several experiments will test (a) how
interest stereotypes about gender groups impact girls' motivation for novel
activities, (b) the impact of interest stereotypes vs. ability stereotypes for
computer science activities with girls and boys, and (c) a novel intervention to
reduce the impact of interest stereotypes and promote girls' computer science
motivation, by linking existing gender differences to environmental structures
rather than inherent group differences. The project provides rigorous,
theoretically-based research, which is evident through the inclusion of power
analysis, reference to previously validated instruments, and reporting of
psychometrics. The results will deepen understanding of the importance of
interest stereotypes and how they influence children's motivation to pursue
STEM, and will lay the groundwork for future interventions that directly target
interest stereotypes to boost girls' motivation in computer
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.