* 1849351
* NSF Student Travel Grant for 2018 ACM Conference on Embedded Networked Sensor Systems (ACM SenSys 2018)
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2019
* Tam Vu, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Sprintson
* 09/30/2019
* USD 24,990.00

The Conference on Embedded Networked Sensor Systems, SenSys, is a highly
selective scientific forum sponsored by the Association for Computing Machinery
(ACM). It has successfully created fundamental knowledge and technologies to
build sensors and smart systems, from wireless sensors in homes and offices to
large-scale sensors, networks, and data analytics in smart infrastructures and
cities. The conference brings together researchers from the fields of wireless
communication and networking, embedded systems and hardware, energy harvesting
and management, distributed systems and algorithms, data management, and
applications, and is an ideal venue for beginning researchers and PhD students
to be introduced to the field from disciplinary and cross-disciplinary
perspectives. The goal of this project is to provide funding for attending
SenSys 2018 by PhD students who are enrolled in US institutions of higher
learning. The project will enable students who are not well-funded or who belong
to underrepresented groups to attend SenSys. The students will not only gain
exposure to the leading researchers in the field but also network with peers and
start research collaborations as they take leadership roles in research.

This project will enable approximately 15 Ph.D. students from a diverse group of
US institution of higher education to attend SenSys 2018. A grant selection
committee will select the participants based on their financial need, research
potential, and their ability to benefit from this attendance while increasing
diversity among SenSys attendees. SenSys and the field of sensing and smart
systems will benefit from this increased diversity and engagement from the US-
based PhD students. The students will benefit from exposure to the leading
researchers in the field and with increased networking and collaboration
opportunities at SenSys.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.