* 1849206
* RII Track-1: Building on The 2020 Vision: Expanding Research, Education and Innovation in South Dakota
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Gilbert Ustad, South Dakota Board of Regents
* Cooperative Agreement
* Andrea Johnson
* 09/30/2024
* USD 20,000,000.00

Bacterial biofilms (layers of bacteria that adhere to surfaces) are becoming
increasingly valued for their potential ability to give advantageous properties
to the surfaces they adhere to. To leverage this, South Dakota EPSCoR proposes
to bring together faculty, staff, and students from eleven South Dakota
institutions to form a new research center called the South Dakota Biofilm
Science and Engineering Center (SDBSEC) under the common goal of becoming
nationally recognized for developing next-generation biofilm technologies. These
technologies will be focused on understanding the interactions between biofilms
and a substrate (metal or plant). The research will eventually develop both
superior corrosion-resistant metals that can be used in the oil and gas industry
and will allow agricultural crops to thrive on less fertilizer by leveraging
nitrogen-fixing bacteria that can supplement nitrogen to crops. The project will
bring together a diverse team of individuals from many different scientific
fields to conduct the research and will create SDBSEC Futures, a program to
focus on the development and engagement of the university educational pipeline,
from K-12 teachers to undergraduate students to faculty in this project. SDBSEC
Futures will focus on researchers and students originating from rural and Native
American communities and will provide unique research experiences in SDBSEC
laboratories to help them advance in STEM fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;South
Dakota EPSCoR's Research Infrastructure Improvement project will create the
South Dakota Biofilm Science and Engineering Center (SDBSEC) that aims to become
nationally recognized for developing next generation, nanoscale, conformational
two-dimensional coatings to control biofilm formation on technologically
relevant materials with agricultural, industrial, and commercial applications.
The SDBSEC intends to develop fundamental knowledge of biofilm phenotypes by
addressing: 1) Corrosion on metal surfaces with a focus on sulfate reducing
bacteria that have direct implications for the energy industry where the
prevention of corrosion of oil pipelines by bacteria could help prevent oil
leaks into the environment and therefore prevent economic and environmental
catastrophes; 2) Biofilm influence on root colonization in agriculturally
relevant crops, focusing on the nitrogen-fixing bacterium Bradyrhizobium
diazoeffeiciens. This research will focus on soybean plant roots to understand
how biofilms could potentially enhance favorable symbiosis between the plant and
the bacteria by reducing the competition of other soil microbes. When the
nitrogen-fixing symbiotic relationship is maximized, efficient nitrogen fixation
will be enabled, thus reducing the need for additional fertilizer application.
Additionally, the project will assemble a comprehensive education and outreach
plan through a program called SDBSEC Futures. SDBSEC Futures will focus on
multiple educational levels from K-12 to faculty, and involve higher educational
institutions, K-12 schools, industry, and tribal colleges to generate
significant, long lasting impacts in the development of a competitive workforce
in the state of South Dakota. SDBSEC Futures has elected to pay particular
attention to providing STEM opportunities to Native American and rural
populations to have a deep and long-lasting impact in South Dakota well beyond
the duration of this award. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.