* 1850914
* Disparate Pathways to Working Longer, Retiring, or Other Exits
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2023
* Phyllis Moen, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Melanie Hughes
* 03/31/2023
* USD 267,641.00

Baby boomers, born 1946-64, are moving to and through the conventional
retirement years in unprecedented numbers, even as conventional retirement
protections and expectations are unraveling. Existing studies of earlier cohorts
of retirees do not fully capture the timing, sequencing, and voluntariness of
short-term work-hour and workforce paths and transitions that Boomer men and
women may experience. This project examines the experiences of women and men in
their 50s, 60s, and 70s as they navigate later adulthood. The project assesses
who is working longer, as well as the timing of exits from and reentries into
employment. The project also examines whether these dynamics vary between
advantaged and disadvantaged workers. The project will assess whether working
longer matters for the financial sustainability of individuals and their
families, or the extent to which age-graded safety nets are effective.
Scientific advances from this work will inform the development of policy
interventions promoting possibilities for working longer as well as for unpaid
community engagement. These insights are key in light of the extraordinary
numbers of Boomer women and men considering or undergoing labor market
transitions moving them from social inclusion to social exclusion from the
mainstream of society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project charts patterned short-
term workforce constellations, capturing similarities and differences in
sequencing and timing, for over 850,000 women and men ages 50 to 75 over eight
time points. The project draws on linked Current Population Survey (CPS) monthly
panel data from 1998 to 2018, with subsequent use of data from 2020. Individuals
are surveyed in the CPS over a period of up to 16 months, which permits study of
labor force entry and exists during that time frame. Using sequence and multi-
level analysis, the project identifies the impacts of inequalities in patterned
workforce constellations by social location, including variations by age,
gender, education, race/ethnicity, and nativity, in combination with geosocial
locations. The project will capture the contemporary complexity, heterogeneity,
and inequities in short-term 16-month work-hour/workforce and family living
arrangement dynamics of Boomer women, men, and couples, examining similarities
and differences in the experiences of Boomers and the cohort preceding them. The
project will assess the predictive effects of resources such as prior health,
income, and job tenure, combined with disadvantaged social statuses and
geographical locations, on the likelihood of following particular workforce
patterns, and whether these predictive effects differ by cohort and time period.
The project will assess the relationship of patterned short-term work
constellations to continuity and change in income levels, civic engagement, and
shifting family living arrangements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.