* 1850398
* Strategies: Catalyzing Inclusive STEM Experiences All Year Round (CISTEME365)
* EDU,DRL
* 03/15/2019,02/29/2024
* Lynford Goddard, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Monya Ruffin
* 02/29/2024
* USD 1,200,000.00

This project will advance efforts of the Innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST) program to better understand and promote practices
that increase students' motivations and capacities to pursue careers in fields
of science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM) by preparing middle
school students for advanced science and math courses, and for engineering
careers. The project seeks to promote inclusion, diversity, equity, and access
for learning experiences and careers in STEM. It provides middle and high school
students opportunities and resources to immerse themselves in STEM activities
throughout the year. The project has identified guidance counselors as an
untapped resource. Counselors play a pivotal role as gatekeepers to informal
learning opportunities and to educational paths into STEM careers. The project
also enables multiple school stakeholders to effectively prepare students for a
STEM major/career. This effort will benefit society by widening the path to
high-demand, high-wage, high-skill STEM jobs and thereby improve the diversity
of our nation's technical workforce. The project is a 3-pillar intervention
strategy with 24 partner schools participating in a comprehensive 10-day (80
hour) summer institute to equip teams (each consisting of a counselor, a
teacher, and a third school stakeholder) with the knowledge, attitudes,
behaviors, and resources to act as effective STEM advocates. The project will
facilitate a school-year networked improvement community (NIC) that connects
teams within and across schools as research is being conducted to better
understand and address underlying inclusion, diversity, equity, and access
issues in STEM. The NIC process will allow the PIs to work with the teams to
implement out-of-school-time STEM clubs to provide unique engineering design,
project-based, and other hands-on experiences to 1,000 students throughout the
school year. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Strategies project will address the
following questions. What learning experiences involving emerging technologies
effectively enable diverse populations of students gain familiarity and relevant
competencies with these technologies, and what factors influence the outcomes of
the learning experiences? What factors and key experiences effectively promote
awareness of STEM careers, motivation to pursue a STEM career, and persistence
in undertaking education pathways to those careers, particularly among students
from underrepresented populations? What strategies to engage principals,
guidance counselors, and other school system administrative leaders effectively
promote student and teacher adoption and effective use of practices and
technologies that support STEM learning and career awareness, and what factors
influence the outcomes of those strategies? The fundamental project goal is to
enable female, underrepresented minority, and/or low-income middle and high
school students to participate in sustained, intensive, hands-on STEM learning
experiences that build technical knowledge and ability and that offer insights
into different STEM careers. The project will enable students access to
participate, make the impact of such experiences endure, integrate them with
other school efforts, and purposely engage underrepresented students. The
project team has significant infrastructure for the summer camps and an
extensive network of partner schools, districts, and career and technical
education consortia to assist in implementing and institutionalizing the
strategies. Using a mixed-methods approach, the project team will examine
program effectiveness on the development of technical skills and self-efficacy
in students and on the practices of counselors and other team members. Each out-
of-school-time STEM club will be outfitted with equipment, software, and using
published curriculum materials to do challenging yet age-appropriate projects
that teach basic concepts in design of experiment, analog and digital circuits,
signals, electromagnetics, communications, controls, power and energy,
microscopy, nanotechnology, photonics, algorithms, and programming. Scholarships
will be provided to 228 students to attend existing STEM summer camps at the
University of Illinois, where the students can explore different STEM majors and
develop technical skills under the guidance of university faculty in high-tech
instructional labs. The project team will investigate the synergistic effects of
school year STEM clubs, university-hosted summer camps, and a NIC that includes
counselors and teachers. The research is potentially transformative because it
creates a new paradigm for advancing students' interest, self-efficacy,
abilities, and pathways in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.