* 1850479
* CRII: SaTC: Improving the Usability and Effectiveness of Security and Privacy Settings in Mobile Apps
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2021
* Yuan Tian, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 05/31/2021
* USD 174,977.00

Mobile users hold people's sensitive information such as passwords, locations,
and health information. Users are permitted to control the use of some of this
information by configuring their privacy settings in the apps they use. These
settings, however, are often difficult to locate and understand, even in popular
apps such as Facebook. Moreover, the settings are often set to share user data
by default, exposing personal data without users' explicit consent. The goal of
the project is to develop an automatic tool to identify the security and privacy
settings embedded in mobile apps, to identify usability and security problems in
using the settings and controlling privacy, and to develop a single, centralized
method of presenting and enforcing user settings such that users do not need to
hunt for settings and controls to protect their privacy. The outcome of the
research will improve the security and privacy of mobile consumers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To accomplish the goal, the project combines techniques
from program analysis, human-computer interaction, and machine learning. The
investigation will include empirical studies to understand users' perspectives
on existing security and privacy settings, and test the specific usability
problems with currently available settings. The research will also develop a
method for identifying and extracting security and privacy settings through
natural language processing and program analysis. Using these insights, the
research will enable a usable centralized interface for people to configure
their security and privacy settings. This work will provide insights for
building usable security and privacy settings for mobile platforms, as well as
for emerging platforms in the Internet of Things. This project will engage a
diverse group of undergraduate and graduate students to develop their interest
and expertise in cybersecurity, privacy, and methods for user
control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.