* 1850227
* CRII: CIF: Secret Sharing Under Communication Constraints in Wireless Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2022
* Remi Chou, Wichita State University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 06/30/2022
* USD 156,344.00

As wireless networks become ubiquitous, the ability to maintain trust and
securely exchange confidential information among interconnected wireless devices
and users is crucial. Secret sharing is a cryptographic primitive that can help
to achieve secure communication with applications that include access control,
key management, digital signatures, and others. Although this primitive is
widely used, it is still not fully understood how wireless communication
constraints such as noise, limited bandwidth, and scalability can be optimally
accounted for in the design of secret sharing schemes. This project aims for new
guidelines for the implementation of secret sharing directly adapted to wireless
communication constraints, to improve security for users, minimize the
communication cost associated with the implementation, and facilitate deployment
in dense wireless networks through improved
scalability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most existing secret sharing schemes hinge on
the assumption that the dealer can securely communicate the shares of the secret
to the participants over noiseless channels with unlimited bandwidth. Under such
an assumption, the implementation of secret sharing schemes in wireless networks
requires additional layers of protocols able to deal with unsecured, noisy, and
bandwidth limited communication channels between the dealer and the
participants. The objective of this project is to understand whether such a
layered approach is optimal and whether a scheme that simultaneously addresses
the constraints of wireless communication and the requirements of secret sharing
could provide gains in terms of communication efficiency and security
guarantees. The project investigates two interdependent research tasks: (i)
understanding the fundamental security limits for secret sharing in wireless
networks under bandwidth constraints and noise, and (ii) the design of explicit
low-complexity coding schemes using tools from cryptography and coding
theory.&lt;br/&gt;This award is jointly funded by the Division of Computing and
Communication Foundations in the Directorate for Computer &amp; Information
Science &amp; Engineering and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research in the Office of Integrative Activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.