* 1850556
* Drone Research and Opportunities for Native Elementary Students (DRONES)
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Dayna DeFeo, University of Alaska Anchorage Campus
* Standard Grant
* Amy Wilson-Lopez
* 09/30/2024
* USD 160,791.00

This project will advance efforts of the Innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST) program to better understand and promote practices
that increase student motivations and capacities to pursue careers in fields of
science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM) by developing and
testing a career exploration experience for upper elementary students. The
project will engage students and their teachers within three rural school
districts of Alaska: a rural coastal hub having a diverse population, a rural
fringe community with an even mix of Native and non-Native residents, and a
remote rural district primarily accessible by air or boat having a predominately
Alaska Native population. The project encourages students and their communities
to envision how unmanned aerial systems (UAS) can be used to address local
priorities, such as wildlife management, search and rescue operations, and
monitoring of hazards. In this context, the project will develop, implement, and
test a place-based education strategy that includes a teacher professional
development course, three culturally inclusive curriculum units focusing on STEM
fields, and UAS-focused career exploration experiences. The project aims to
increase Alaska Native students' enthusiasm, engagement, and success in STEM
education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This mixed-methods comparative case study
responds to three identified problems within the schools and communities
participating in the project. These include: 1) a lack of culturally relevant
curriculum and educational resources, 2)inexperienced educators who are
unprepared for rural Alaska settings; and 3)limited opportunities for local STEM
mentorship and STEM workforce learning opportunities. In this context, the
overarching goal of the project is to increase Alaska Native students'
enthusiasm, engagement, and success in STEM learning. The associated research
goal is to identify key factors and strategies that engender this success in
STEM subjects. To achieve these goals, the project aims to: 1) engage students
and communities in identifying locally relevant UAS applications; 2) develop
science and technology curricula related to place-based UAS applications; 3)
develop a distance-delivered continuing education course for upper-elementary
teachers; 4)train up to 23 elementary school teachers to instruct science and
technology using place-based pedagogies; and 5)deliver the DRONES curricula and
an associated year-end career exploration experience to three school districts
serving a total of 450 4th through 6th grade students in 14 rural Alaska
communities. A backwards design process will be used for curriculum development
to ensure that project deliverables address targeted Alaska cultural standards,
Next Generation Science Standards, Alaska science standards, and 21st Century
Competencies. Alaska Native cultural values will be identified, and key
terminology will be translated into relevant Athabascan dialects to encourage
community support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.