* 1850719
* Collaborative Research: Evolutionary, biochemical and biogeochemical responses of marine cyanobacteria to warming and iron limitation interactions
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Mak Saito, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 09/30/2023
* USD 499,749.00

The oceans absorb much of the heat generated by human activities, and this
warming of the surface ocean has consequences for important groups of marine
organisms. Marine cyanobacteria are one such key group of organisms, since they
supply much of the essential carbon and nitrogen that supports nearly all the
rest of the marine food web. Currently, the growth of cyanobacteria is mostly
constrained by scarce supplies of the micronutrient element iron, but they are
also very sensitive to the ongoing increases in seawater temperature.
Preliminary results suggest that warming could partly mitigate the negative
effects of iron limitation on marine cyanobacteria. This project examines in
depth how these interactions between warming and iron limitation will affect the
future ocean carbon and nitrogen cycles, using laboratory culture experiments
showing how cyanobacteria respond to simultaneously changing temperature and
iron supplies. Both short-term response studies and long-term evolutionary
experiments testing for adaptation use a comprehensive set of molecular biology
tools targeting genes to proteins. The final goal is to apply the results of
these experiments to improve quantitative models predicting how the ocean's
carbon and nitrogen cycles, biological productivity, and living resources will
respond to a warming future climate. Two graduate students, a postdoc and 3-4
underrepresented undergraduate researchers are supported, and the investigators
also mentor summer science interns from largely Hispanic local high schools.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The physiology, biochemistry and biogeography of nitrogen-
fixing cyanobacteria and unicellular picocyanobacteria are strongly influenced
by temperature, subjecting them to intense selective pressure as the modern
ocean steadily warms up. These groups have likewise been rigorously selected
under chronic iron (Fe) scarcity, and the availability of this crucial
micronutrient is also changing with a shifting climate. This project examines
short-term acclimation and long-term evolutionary responses of Fe-stressed
marine cyanobacteria to a warmer environment. Preliminary data show that Iron
Use Efficiencies (IUE, mols N fixed.hr-1 mol cellular Fe-1) of Fe-limited
Trichodesmium increase 4 to 5-fold with a 5oC temperature increase, allowing the
cells to much more efficiently leverage scarce available Fe supplies to grow and
fix nitrogen. This means that warming can to a large degree mitigate the
negative effects of Fe limitation on Trichodesmium, resulting in a modelled 22%
increase in global nitrogen fixation by 2100 in a warmer climate. This project
aims to uncover the cellular biochemical mechanisms involved in this Fe-
limitation/thermal IUE effect in a four-year experimental evolution study of the
diazotrophs Trichodesmium and Crocosphaera and the picocyanobacteria
Synechococcus and Prochlorococcus, under a multi-variate selection matrix of
temperature and Fe availability. The objectives are to 1) Assess the long-term
adaptive responses of fitness, IUE and physiology to Fe limitation and warming
interactions in these four major cyanobacterial groups; 2) Determine the
molecular and biochemical mechanisms behind the surprising Fe/warming
interactive effect on IUE using genomics, transcriptomics and quantitative
proteomics coupled with 'metalloproteomics' determinations of Fe content in
critical proteins; 3) Compare and contrast acclimation and adaptation responses
to Fe limitation and warming in key cyanobacteria taxa, and 4) Integrate results
using a published biogeochemical modeling approach to assess global consequences
for marine productivity and nitrogen fixation. This project offers a mechanistic
and predictive understanding of adaptation to Fe and warming co-stressors in a
rapidly changing future ocean environment for some of the most important
photoautotrophic functional groups in the ocean.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.