* 1850367
* Maker Challenges to Promote Math Learning among English Language Learners
* EDU,DRL
* 05/15/2019,04/30/2024
* Rena Dorph, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steele
* 04/30/2024
* USD 613,445.00

This project will advance efforts of the Innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST) program to better understand and promote practices
that increase student motivations and capacities to pursue careers in fields of
science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM) by developing and
testing four Maker Learning Cycle (MLC) curriculum units for English language
learners (ELLs) in each of grades 4 and 5. Each Maker challenge engages students
in hands-on creation of solutions to authentic problems in a social context, and
each challenge is followed by one to three mathematics lessons related to the
challenge. Explicit connections to STEM career possibilities are also featured,
linking mathematics concept development to potential career interests. Published
collections of mathematics MLCs, together with research on their effective use,
will enable teachers and schools to incorporate Maker education in targeted ways
to promote both learning in mathematics and broader interest among students in
STEM related activities and careers. The project will also develop video
resources and examples of student work that can be incorporated into teacher
professional learning modules for schools and districts implementing MLCs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This design and development project is guided by the
hypothesis that authentic Maker experiences promote deeper engagement with
mathematics concepts among ELLs; promote STEM activation in the dimensions of
fascination, competency beliefs, and innovation solutions enhance; and enhance
teacher perceptions of ELL capacities. Each MLC includes three components: (1) A
maker challenge for teams of students to complete in a regular classroom during
a single lesson; (2) Two to three follow-up mathematics lessons focusing on
conceptual understanding of the mathematics embedded in or exposed by the
challenge and students' language, culture, and prior experiences; and (3)
Revisiting the Maker challenge to foster connections among Maker mathematics
concepts, and language development. Each MLC includes three components: (1) A
maker challenge for teams of students to complete in a regular classroom during
a single lesson; (2) Two to three follow-up mathematics lessons focusing on
conceptual understanding of the mathematics embedded in or exposed by the
challenge and students' language, culture, and prior experiences; and (3)
Revisiting the Maker challenge to foster connections among Maker mathematics
concepts, and language development. The research plan for this project includes
two studies that each explore two research questions. Study 1 examines the
impact of MLCs on opportunities to learn, and the research is guided by two
questions: (1) What aspects of mathematics MLCs provide opportunities for
English learners to equitably access mathematics learning? And (2) How do MLCs
enable participating teachers to recognize capacities in English learners that
support engagement in mathematics learning? Study 2 examines the impact of MLCs
on STEM learning activation and mathematics learning. The research is guided by
two questions: (1) Do features of MLCs impact English learners' growth in the
dimensions of STEM learning activation, and their deeper mathematics learning?
And (2) Do features of MLCs impact all students' growth in the dimensions of
STEM learning activation, and their deeper mathematics learning? An array of
standard measures will be used to collect data for these studies, and a
background survey will be used to gauge resources and supports for learning
available to students in their homes. For data analysis, three analytical models
will be used to explore outcomes: (1) How well the MLC experiences influence the
dimensions of STEM learning activation, (2) How well MLCs position all students,
especially English learners, for future mathematics learning, and (3)
Mathematics learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.