* 1850739
* RAPID:  CSBR:  Emergency Rescue of the Saint Louis University's Genetic Resources &amp; Collection to The University of Alabama Ichthyological Collection
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2021
* Phillip Harris, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 08/31/2021
* USD 33,525.00

Saint Louis University Museum's Genetic Resources &amp; Collections (GRC)
amassed a collection of approximately 63,000 catalogued and vouched specimens or
tissues from over 6,600 species of freshwater and marine fishes since its
beginning in 1983. The GRC contains important temporal samples, extensive
within-species geographic sampling for North American taxa, a broad taxonomic
sampling of freshwater fishes from Asia, with an emphasis on SE Asia, and many
globally distributed marine species. Many of these specimens were collected with
funding from NSF during Tree of Life and Planetary Biotic Inventory projects. On
May 25, 2017, Macelwane Hall, home to the Museum and GRC, experienced a fire
that caused extensive structural, water, and soot damage throughout the
building. Following this incident, Saint Louis University determined that it
would no longer support or maintain either the museum or the GRC. Thus, without
rescue this extremely valuable collection would otherwise be lost to the global
scientific community. The goal of this project is to transfer the GRC to The
University of Alabama Ichthyological Collection (UAIC). Transferring this
collection into UAIC will ensure long-term curation of this collection, as well
as providing access to the specimens through our web portal
(specifyweb.as.ua.edu) or from our four distributed information project partners
(GBIF, FishNet2, VertNet, and iDigBio Hub). Student research opportunities in
molecular systematics, population and conservation genetics, genomics, and
transcriptomics will be enhanced due to the taxonomic diversity and global
distribution of specimens and tissues contained in this invaluable collection.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project transfers ownership of Saint Louis University
Museum's Genetic Resources &amp; Collection (GRC) to The University of Alabama
Ichthyological Collection (UAIC), providing immediate rescue and curatorial
intervention to a very large and valuable collection of frozen and 95% ethanol-
preserved specimens and tissue samples from freshwater and marine fishes
collected from around the world. Addition of the GRC specimens into UAIC?s
Tissues and DNA Collection greatly enriches and supplements materials currently
in UAIC in both number of species and specimens. Many specimens in the GRC
collected from Southeast Asia are irreplaceable and represent time-intensive
research documentation. In addition, genomic, transcriptomic, and proteomic
studies are possible with these samples because many of the tissues or whole-
body specimens were placed directly into liquid nitrogen upon collection and
have been maintained continuously at -80 degrees C. By uniting these collections
and providing access to these specimens or tissues through multiple biodiversity
information distribution partners, the scientific community will continue to
have access to an invaluable genetic resource that documents aquatic
biodiversity from around the world. In addition, digital data for these
specimens will become available through a portal (specifyweb.as.ua.edu) or from
four distributed information resources (GBIF, FishNet2, VertNet, and
iDigBio).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.