* 1850400
* CRII:SCH:Human-in-the-loop Design and Control of Handheld Robotic Instruments for Laparoscopic Surgery
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2022
* Tania Morimoto, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 05/31/2022
* USD 175,000.00

High-quality, affordable surgical care should be widely available, yet
availability often depends largely on environmental factors. For example, the
infrastructure for expensive equipment and expert surgeons may not exist in
remote environments, including rural hospitals, battlefronts and space flights.
While there has been significant research into the development of large-scale
robot- assisted minimally invasive surgical systems, commercial systems and
trained surgeons are both expensive as well as limited resources. This project
focuses on developing lower-cost, handheld robotic devices that combine the
strengths of direct human-operators with the precision and dexterity of robots.
These handheld robots will have broad impact in the medical field, by improving
the health, well-being, and standard of care for underserved patients. In
addition, the fundamental principles of human-in-the-loop design and control
discovered through this research will help guide the creation of new devices in
other areas of healthcare, manufacturing, and defense. This project aims to
broaden participation in engineering through outreach programs, public lab
tours, the development of a new hands-on course, and the mentoring of
underrepresented students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to create handheld
robotic devices, this project will take a human-focused approach to design and
control through three main technical components. First, a model of the handheld
device that incorporates the dynamics of the human hand, along with fatigue
models for various muscle groups in the hands and arms will be developed. These
models will help inform the device design. Second, the efficiency and accuracy
of different strategies for both steering the instrument, as well as for mapping
hand movement to instrument movement, will be evaluated. Third, flexible strain
sensors will be incorporated for measuring task-critical force information that
will then be displayed to the operator using haptic feedback in the form of
directional cues. The optimal feedback parameters, along with the effectiveness
of haptic feedback in improving task performance, will be measured. By
developing a human-focused design approach, this work will expand our
understanding of human-robot interactions for classes of robots beyond
telerobots and can provide guiding principles for creating new robots with
applications beyond surgery and healthcare.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.