* 1850774
* EAGER: Novel Approach to Acceleration and Escape of Charged Particles at Interplanetary and Astrophysical Shock Waves
* GEO,AGS
* 11/01/2018,10/31/2022
* Federico Fraschetti, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 10/31/2022
* USD 99,411.00

The modelling of particle acceleration at shocks is expected to pave the path to
improved understanding of the origin of cosmic-rays, which were discovered more
than 100 years ago. The current standard model of Diffusive Shock Acceleration
(DSA) applies to the case of ideal, infinitely planar shock front; the process
of acceleration is self-sustained if particles can contrast the flow advection
and return to the shock to undergo further acceleration. If particles cannot be
confined in proximity of the shocks, then the DSA approach is not feasible. The
main focus of this one-year EAGER project is to explore a novel approach to
explain the observations of energetic particles that do not fit in the DSA
paradigm. This approach will comprise both analytic and numerical analyses,
which support the interpretation of spacecraft data. The research project will
produce an advanced theoretical model that may explain the measurements of
shocks near the Earth, as well as observations of a variety of astrophysical
sources, including pulsar wind nebulae, blazars, supernova remnants,
etc.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This one-year EAGER project is aimed at transforming
our present understanding of the acceleration of charged particles at
interplanetary and astrophysical shock waves. Several interplanetary shock
events exhibit broken power-law spectra of the energetic particles. Such spectra
fall outside the regime of validity of the standard Diffusive Shock Acceleration
(DSA) model and, despite observed in several cases, have been poorly studied to
date. This project builds upon a previous effort to interpret the observed
electromagnetic radiation from astrophysical sources -- a log-parabola spectrum
of energetic electrons, instead of empirical, multiple power-laws -- that
explains surprisingly well the observations of the Crab Nebula over an
unprecedentedly broad energy range. The project team, which based at the
University of Arizona, aims to determine the physical conditions that give rise
to a log-parabola spectrum, which would yield a paradigm shift in the field. The
team will use the new knowledge gathered during the project to educate the
general public about the physical drivers of space weather and their impacts.
The research and EPO agenda of this EAGER project supports the Strategic Goals
of the AGS Division in discovery, learning, diversity, and interdisciplinary
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.