* 1850483
* CRII: CSR: Mitigating Tail Latency in Prediction-serving Systems using Coding-theoretic Tools
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2019,08/31/2020
* Rashmi Vinayak, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Matt Mutka
* 08/31/2020
* USD 175,000.00

Prediction-serving systems take in queries and return predictions from a machine
learning model. For example, an image classification service would take an image
as a query and respond with a prediction of whether there is a car in the image.
Prediction-serving systems are increasingly important for a wide variety of
applications today. These systems are typically run in large-scale computing
infrastructures, where failures and slowdowns are common. Such unavailability
results in significant increase in the query-response latency, thereby degrading
the quality-of-service. The research project designs and implements a resource-
efficient solution for robustness in prediction-serving systems using a tool
from the domain of coding theory called "erasure-coded
computation".&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of the project is to
design and implement a solution for reducing the potential long latency in
prediction-serving systems using erasure-coded computations. The project
overcomes critical limitations in existing coded-computation solutions by
employing machine learning in a novel way. Specifically, the project involves
the following key tasks: (1) Designing a low-overhead coded-computation solution
that efficiently supports complex non-linear functions by employing a learning-
based approach; (2) Designing an efficient training methodology conforming to
the constraints of real-world prediction-serving systems; and (3) System design
and implementation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The software resulting from the project
will be integrated into open-source prediction-serving systems for use in both
research and education. Active engagement in promoting diversity in science,
technology, engineering and mathematics disciplines and undergraduate mentorship
will be continued. The findings from the project will be integrated into
graduate and undergraduate courses in computer science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
results from the research project, including software, will be made available at
http://www.cs.cmu.edu/~rvinayak/crii .&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.