* 1850055
* CRII: CHS: Do virtual behaviors represent reality: Examining human behavioral validity in virtual reality interactions
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2022
* Karen Chen, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 03/31/2022
* USD 174,943.00

Virtual reality is becoming commonplace to study human behavior because it
affords simulations of various situations, thus is advantageous for standardized
training, education, and experimental research. However, virtual reality may not
contain all sensory cues (e.g., smell, scent) and non-perceptual factors (e.g.,
consequence, time pressure) that would evoke behaviors normally exhibited in the
real world. There is limited research on behavioral validity of participants in
virtual reality experiments. Thus, the principal goal of this research is to
study the validity of human behavior in virtual reality, and thereby strengthen
the transferability and generalizability of findings. Researchers will benefit
from this work, as they will be able to apply the postulated perceptual-
behavioral framework. Society in general will benefit, as private industry will
be able to leverage the outcomes and guidelines to yield enhanced virtual
reality technologies and other consumer products. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There
are two primary research objectives. (1) Understand effects of immersion on
perceptual-behavioral relationship in an immersive virtual environment.
Immersion is a quantifiable measure of virtual reality. A more immersive virtual
environment will offer, for example, more extensive cues than a less immersive
virtual environment. (2) Study and characterize non-perceptual factors that
influence behavioral validity in an immersive virtual environment. Non-
perceptual factors include time pressure and consequences (but not life or death
because it is virtual). Behaviors (performance and actions) exhibited by
participants will be examined in both research objectives. Empirical experiments
will be conducted to collect quantitative and qualitative data to support the
investigation driven by these two research objectives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.