* 1850975
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: An Ethnographic Study of the Making of Mental Health Care Artificial Intelligence
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2019,12/31/2020
* Karen Nakamura, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 12/31/2020
* USD 11,378.00

This multi-sited ethnographic investigation will examine how technology
companies design artificial intelligence (AI) to provide mental health
diagnostic and therapeutic care. What factors guide the many decisions that
translate mental health care into algorithms, a set of instructions carried out
by AI? There is tremendous variation in how these companies make mental health
into an object that is measurable and/or treatable via algorithm. Facial
expressions, vocal tone, word choice, or smartphone usage patterns become
potential sources of data that communicate mental health states. In other words,
companies do not simply collect data; they determine what counts as data sources
and establish the correlation of this data to mental health states, and they are
doing so in very different ways. In addition to providing funding for the
training of a graduate student in anthropology in scientific methods of rigorous
data collection and analysis, the project would broadly disseminate its findings
to organizations invested in discovering more effective means of improving
mental health diagnosis and treatment.

Valerie Black, under the supervision of Dr. Karen Nakamura at the University of
California at Berkeley, will explore how technology companies design AI for
mental health diagnosis and treatment. The algorithms developed by companies
that gather and analyze mental health data are typically proprietary. Since
these algorithms are being developed at a time when AI can determine matters
ranging from bank loan eligibility to criminal sentencing, there is a growing
call for AI decision-making transparency. This project asks how mental health
technology companies in the US and Japan (two major, interconnected centers of
AI development) are addressing this concern, and how that impacts the ways in
which they use AI to provide care. Research will take place at three AI
companies (two in the U.S. and one in Japan) in the understudied startup
technology sector. Data collection includes interviews and participant
observation with innovators and investors, psychological service leads, and
engineers and developers. Data will be analyzed to ascertain what objectives,
ethical and practical considerations, and relationships inform the mental health
care algorithms. This ethnographic investigation aims to further scientific
understanding of how different configurations of and approaches to AI make
possible an array of different (and sometimes clashing) objectives, strategies,
and core beliefs about what constitutes optimal ways of caring for mental
health. The project will advance theoretical understanding at the intersections
of anthropology, psychology, and STS around datafication in health care and how
mental care, as experienced across different cultural terrains, is translated
into algorithms.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.