* 1850496
* CRII: CSR: Systems and Tooling Enabling Adaptive Intermittent Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 02/15/2019,07/31/2022
* Josiah Hester, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Jones
* 07/31/2022
* USD 199,000.00

Tiny energy harvesting computers tap into the sun, radio waves, vibration, and
other sources to power all their sensing, computing, and communication tasks. By
leaving batteries behind, these devices can function maintenance-free,
potentially for decades, enabling numerous applications in the Internet-of-
Things. These battery-free devices can lose power at any point because of
fluctuations in energy availability, which makes programming, debugging, and
deployment challenging. The goal of this project is to develop the systems and
tools that make these devices resilient to power failures, dependable, easier to
program, and able to function in unpredictable environmental and energy
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merits of this project are
focused on improving adaptivity, programmability, reliability, and applicability
of intermittent computing devices. Three complementary research thrusts are
pursued: 1) development of a rigorous classification of energy harvesting
environments built on identifying unique energy modes, aiding in application
design; 2) prototyping a novel recognition circuit for anticipating changes in
the energy harvesting environment or energy mode based on remanence decay; 3)
development of a task-based programming language with built-in adaptation
semantics leveraging energy modes and the recognition circuitry with
accompanying low overhead runtime system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work in this
project develops adaptive systems and tooling for intermittent computers that
will enable even novices to build reliable and long-lived sensor devices. By
making application development easier, and improving availability (and
reliability), these systems will positively impact applications in healthcare
(wearable and body sensor networks), defense, ecology, horticulture,
infrastructure, wildlife tracking, space exploration, and many other areas where
long-term, low cost, massive scale sensing is essential.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All hardware, software, and collected environmental
profiles and energy traces will be made freely available, along with
documentation and tutorials. These project artifacts will be stored in a
dedicated repository for scientists, educators, hobbyists, and industry to
access and use. This repository will be maintained for at least three years
after the duration of the project. &lt;br/&gt;(https://gitlab.com/ka-
moamoa/battery-free-sensing)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.