* 1850663
* REU Site: UCSB Mathematics Summer Research Program for Undergraduates
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2019,12/31/2022
* Maria Isabel Bueno Cachadina, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Tiziana Giorgi
* 12/31/2022
* USD 347,711.00

The UCSB Mathematics Summer Research Program for Undergraduates aims to provide
a full research experience to undergraduate students in mathematics from
different backgrounds. Over the course of the eight-week program, the students
will learn to investigate and solve open problems in diverse areas of
mathematics, to work in a collaborative environment, to communicate their
mathematical results through talks and written reports, and to publish their
findings in appropriate journals with the goal of disseminating their research.
The program will expose the participants to daily life in graduate school,
through interactions with graduate students, graduate advisors, faculty and
postdocs in the UCSB math department. In addition, through professional
development workshops, the participants will learn about different areas in
industry that demand professionals with good research skills.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Historically, the UCSB REU has not focused on a specific
area of mathematics. However, the program intends to be accessible to students
with a variety of backgrounds in mathematics. Thus, the research projects are
likely to be in linear algebra, matrix analysis, numerical linear algebra,
combinatorics and graph theory; that is, in areas that do not require extensive
mathematical background from students. Examples of topics that have been studied
in this program before include 1) primitive circulant matrices; 2) matrix
polynomials and linearizations; 3) matrix equations; 4) parking functions; 5)
Alexander and Jones polynomials; 6) sequential dynamical systems. The topics
will change every year depending on the active research areas of the mentors
involved in the program. The final goal is to expose the students to the
techniques and methods used to tackle problems in these areas, to publish papers
in refereed professional journals, and to participate and give talks in
conferences for undergraduates. The REU concludes with a poster conference in
which undergraduates doing summer research in all the UCSB departments present
their results and make it accessible to non-experts in the area. Previous
projects and publications as well as more information about the program can be
found on the website http://math.ucsb.edu/REU.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This site is
supported by the Department of Defense in partnership with the NSF REU
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.