* 1850116
* Strategies: Engineering Academy: Educating Engineers of the Future
* EDU,DRL
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2024
* David Ferguson, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Wu He
* 04/30/2024
* USD 1,193,776.00

This project will advance efforts of the Innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST) program to better understand and promote practices
that increase students' motivations and capacities to pursue careers in fields
of science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM) by preparing middle
school students for advanced science and math courses, and for engineering
careers. There is a general lack of engineering knowledge, limited awareness by
K-12 teachers about engineering careers, and absence of appropriate role models.
Research has shown that early exposure to engineering can significantly increase
students' awareness of this discipline as a rewarding career path. The
Engineering Academy (EA) at Stony Brook University addresses factors that
inhibit involvement in engineering, by engaging students and teachers from low
achieving middle schools in the passion, challenges and opportunities of
engineering. The project will impact a broad spectrum of participants, with
focus on low income students. Students will be exposed to cross-cutting
engineering knowledge and skills. Teachers will learn innovative engineering
instructional practices that will impact students for many years in the future.
Professional engineers will inspire participants by sharing their career
experiences; faculty will integrate their expertise in science education and
engineering; and Stony Brook University will broaden its vision, mission and
role in 6th-8th grade education. The results will be a model for a sustainable
and scalable partnership that demonstrates meaningful implementation of the Next
Generation Science Standards, addressing student education and teacher
professional learning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This unique program addresses
several documented weaknesses in engineering education. It is inspired by
successful activities already in place and will provide a model for middle
school engineering instruction. The EA will offer activities in several
engineering disciplines and computer sciences to students and their teachers in
grades 6th-8th. The Student Engineering Academy (SEA) will run after-school
sessions during the academic year and a one-week summer camp for a total of
about 40 hours of engineering exposure. In addition, 10 in-service teachers per
year will chaperone students to the SEA and attend a Teacher Engineering Academy
(TEA) that will engage them for a total of forty hours to integrate engineering
into mathematics and science instruction. The research component of this project
will investigate the underlying psychosocial mechanisms that promote or
undermine academic and career engagement, especially, as these mechanisms relate
to a diversity of middle school students. Utilizing repeated measures,
longitudinal quantitative and qualitative survey methods, the research project
will address some of the guiding questions aligned to the NSF ITEST program,
including: (a) How does exposure to SEA impact the development and change of
academic and career engagement outcomes (e.g., efficacy, identity and
investment) among student participants over time; (b) Does exposure to SEA
impact the development of academic, social and career engagement outcomes among
students over time; and (c) Does exposure to TEA impact teachers' knowledge of
students' STEM career options, efficacy in implementing engineering content
aimed at their students, and beliefs about student
engagement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.