* 1850089
* Collaborative Research: Design of a Nanosat Constellation for Measuring Internal Gravity Wave Fluxes in the Earth's Stratosphere
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2022
* Kerri Cahoy, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 05/31/2022
* USD 343,174.00

Gravity waves, meaning waves for which buoyancy provides the restoring force,
are commonly seen propagating across the surfaces of ponds and lakes, in the
wakes of ships, and breaking in the surf zone at the beach. Similar waves occur
in the atmosphere, but atmospheric gravity waves can propagate vertically as
well as horizontally. Vertical propagation means that activity near the surface,
such as winds blowing over mountains or updrafts in convective clouds, can
influence the circulation at stratospheric levels. Stratospheric circulation can
in turn affect surface weather over much of the globe, and is a potential source
of long-range forecast skill. Thus the driving of the stratosphere by gravity
waves is a topic of both practical and scientific
interest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to design a satellite
constellation for observing atmospheric gravity waves. The constellation
consists of nine low-cost cubesats using radio occultation (RO) to detect
gravity waves in temperature profiles extending through the upper troposphere
and lower stratosphere. RO is a technique which measures the refraction of
signals from satellites of the Global Navigation Satellite System (GNSS, which
includes the GPS satellites) as they pass through the atmosphere. At the levels
of interest refraction can be used to deduce atmospheric temperature, thus the
constellation would produce nine simultaneous temperature profiles, each
containing wiggles indicating the presence of gravity waves. These could be
combined to determine the three-dimensional structure of a wave packet, from
which its propagation and likely influence on stratospheric circulation could be
inferred. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is a feasibility study in which the
PIs use a high-resolution atmospheric model, the Model for Prediction Across
Scales (MPAS, in a global nonhydrostatic configuration), to generate realistic
vertically propagating gravity waves. A virtual constellation "orbits" over the
model simulation to determine what observations would be produced by the
satellites for a given wave field and a given set of satellite, orbit, and
instrument characteristics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work has societal relevance
due to the desirability of better gravity wave representations in models used
for weather prediction and to provide guidance to decision makers. In addition,
the work contributes to the development of cubesat technology, which has a
variety of commercial and scientific applications. Cubesats also provide
valuable educational experiences, as they can be built and operated by
university students. The project provides support and training to a graduate
student, thereby promoting workforce development in this research
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.