* 1850443
* CRII: AF: Markov Chain Monte Carlo Algorithms for Spin Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2021
* Antonio Blanca Pimentel, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 06/30/2021
* USD 175,000.00

Generating samples from probability distributions is a fundamental computational
task in science, engineering, and technology. Efficient and unbiased sampling
algorithms have a significant impact in a variety of fields, notably including
statistics, biology, physics, and computer science. The Markov chain Monte Carlo
(MCMC) method provides a powerful class of sampling algorithms used by an active
community of researchers in diverse applications, typically relying on
heuristics for their design and analysis. This project focuses on the
theoretical study of MCMC algorithms, aiming to increase their reliability and
to reduce computational costs in practice. Two application areas will be most
relevant: statistical physics and machine learning. Most of the work will be
carried out in close collaboration with graduate students; the training provided
will be conducive to their development as researchers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
PI will consider the problem of sampling from Gibbs (or Boltzmann) distributions
in the context of spin systems, a general framework for modeling interacting
systems of simple elements. In this context, the PI intends to rigorously
analyze the efficiency of popular MCMC algorithms. Two specific foci will be the
Alternating Scan dynamics for bipartite systems and the Swendsen-Wang algorithm
for the classical Ising/Potts model from statistical physics. The former is
actively used to train Restricted Boltzmann Machines and build sophisticated
deep learning architectures, while the latter is a standard method for sampling
from the Ising/Potts distribution. The PI will also study the interplay between
the efficiency of MCMC algorithms and the phase transitions of the underlying
probabilistic model. Additional computational implications of these phase
transitions will be explored in the context of structure learning, a closely
related supervised learning problem. As such, the connections between
theoretical computer science, statistical physics, and machine learning will
play a central role in this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.