* 1850666
* Law Enforcement and the Educational Performance of Youth
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Joscha Legewie, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 06/30/2023
* USD 343,995.00

This project examines the consequences of neighborhood and school-level exposure
to aggressive law enforcement strategies and tactics for the educational
outcomes of youth. Over the last three decades, cities across the United States
have adopted strategies involving strict enforcement against low-level crimes
and extensive use of pedestrian stops. As a consequence of these changes in
strategies and tactics, an increasing number of youth have involuntary contact
with the criminal justice system. The primary objective of this project is to
examine the consequences of neighborhood and school-level exposure to these
strategies and tactics for the educational outcomes of youth as a function of a
number of factors, such as neighborhood and individual characteristics. Findings
will contribute to our understanding of the link between the criminal justice
system and social opportunity. They will benefit society by helping policymakers
and other stakeholders make more informed decisions about
enforcement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will build a large-scale data
infrastructure by combining administrative school district records from New York
City and New York Police Department (NYPD) data over the years 2004 to 2017.
This data infrastructure is the foundation for a series of statistical analyses
that estimate effects on educational outcomes by various demographic categories
and explore the underlying mechanisms. Goals of the project include determining
short-term and long-term consequences of law enforcement strategies. The project
also examines how the consequences differ by demographic characteristic, as well
as showing effects of school-level exposure, determining effects of high-profile
cases, and uncovering the mechanisms that explain the
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.