* 1850283
* Exploratory: Life STEM: Promoting STEM Career Awareness, Engagement, and Identity, via a Culturally Relevant and Technology-Infused STEM-Based Curriculum
* EHR,DRL
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2022
* Kenneth Brown, Winston-Salem State University
* Standard Grant
* Alicia Santiago Gonzalez
* 03/31/2022
* USD 400,000.00

This project will advance efforts of the Innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST) program to better understand and promote practices
that increase students' motivations and capacities to pursue careers in fields
of science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM) by engaging in hands-
on field experience, laboratory/project-based entrepreneurship tasks and
mentorship experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF ITEST program supports
research on the design, development, implementation, and selective spread of
innovative strategies for engaging students in technology-rich
experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Innovative Technology Experience for
Students and Teachers project will expose underrepresented minority (URM)
3rd-5th grade students to a range of Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics (STEM) careers, and promote positive STEM identities by piloting a
novel STEM Academy infused with technology and culturally relevant STEM career-
based modules. This 2-year exploratory project will develop a sustainable
program to engage URM students, make them aware of STEM careers, and motivate
them to consider educational pathways to STEM careers. This project will create
training and mentoring opportunities for students, teachers, and families
through a partnership between a minority-serving institution and elementary
schools that are federally designated as low-performing focus or priority
schools. The project will also advance knowledge related to educational,
psychosocial, and family factors that may determine whether URM students persist
in the STEM education-to-career pipeline. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will enhance 3rd-5th grade STEM curricula by developing and implementing
culturally relevant and responsive modules. The project will explore factors
influencing URM students' learning and efficacy in STEM, while developing a
platform for teachers to better understand socio-cultural and environmental
impacts on URM students' engagement in STEM and interest in STEM careers. The
four major goals are as follows: 1) develop an effective partnership that
promotes a collaborative and synergistic STEM Learning Ecosystem between
teachers, students, parents/families and STEM career partners; 2) utilize best
practices to create an intentional, stakeholder-vetted, culturally relevant, and
technology-rich STEM Academy geared toward promoting STEM occupational
awareness; 3) develop a reflective capstone project that encourages application
of ideas, skills, and knowledge gained during the Academy, and 4) develop
purposeful mechanisms and utilize innovative technologies to bridge the gap
between at-school and at-home learning. The project goals will be evaluated
utilizing a mixed methods design including surveys, the Draw-a-Scientist Test
(DAST), the capstone project, and feedback from focus groups. These data sources
will elucidate the impact of the technology-infused culturally relevant
pedagogical interventions on STEM career knowledge, science/scientist identity,
and STEM self-efficacy. Hence, the project will engage both students and
stakeholders while focusing specifically on building students' STEM identities
via a STEM Academy&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.