* 1850012
* CRII: Algorithms and Methodologies for Real-Time Decision-Making of Mission-Critical Structures Experiencing High-Rate Dynamics
* CSE,OAC
* 03/15/2019,02/28/2023
* Austin Downey, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Juan Li
* 02/28/2023
* USD 191,000.00

This project focuses on investigations into methodologies to enable real-time
decision-making for mission-critical structural systems experiencing high-rate
dynamics. Examples of mission-critical structures that experience high-rate
dynamics include hypersonic vehicles, space crafts, ballistics packages, and
active blast mitigation. Enabling real-time decision-making for these structures
increases mission success rates by enhancing the structure's survivability,
providing on-time guidance corrections, and adopting the mission goals/outcome
to changing conditions. Additionally, the methodologies developed by this
project increase the robustness, safety, and commercial viability of structures
operating in extreme dynamic environments. The development of algorithms and
methodologies for structures experiencing high-rate dynamics serves the national
interest and fulfills the NSF's mission: to promote the progress of science; to
advance the national health, prosperity and welfare; or to secure the national
defense. This project provides research experience and mentors a diverse and
inclusive group of students, and introduces a graduate level class on surrogate
modeling of complex systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A structural system operating
in a high-rate dynamic environment can experience sudden and unmodeled plastic
deformation of the structure that may further lead to damaged electronics,
sensors, and/or delicate payloads. This research focuses on enabling a real-time
decision-making module to take corrective actions. To achieve this goal, a
parallelization framework is developed that enables a structural system to be
decomposed into its constituent components where each component can be
monitored, modeled, and extrapolated into the future. Once the degradation
trajectories for each component have been estimated, they are recombined into a
single system-level model to be used for real-time decision making. The project
is organized into two research thrusts and one experimental design challenge.
Thrust 1 investigates surrogate modeling techniques with the goal of developing
component-level models that can converge within the required time constraints.
These surrogate models use data obtained from dense sensor networks to generate
data-driven damage-sensitive features that can be used as the degradation
parameters for component-level prognostics. Thrust 2 explores and formulates
methodologies for real-time component-level prognostics. These component-level
predictions are then recombined into a single structural model that is used to
develop potential corrective actions. Lastly, the experimental design challenge
validates the developed algorithms and methodologies using a high-rate dynamic
test bench.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by Office of
Advanced Cyberinfrastructure (OAC) and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.