* 1850384
* CRII: NeTS: The Battle for Bandwidth: Heterogeneous Congestion Control on Today's Internet
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2019,11/30/2021
* Justine Sherry, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 11/30/2021
* USD 175,000.00

Internet congestion is more and more frequently a challenge in home networks,
Internet service providers, enterprises, and cloud datacenters. Where congestion
occurs, it introduces packet loss, increases network latency, and slows down
throughput for individual connections - all of which contribute to poor
performance for applications running over the Internet. A close look at
congestion can reveal that there are winners and losers on the Internet: when
bandwidth becomes a scarce resource, some senders crowd others out, dominating
link capacity and harming the performance of other connections. Analyzing these
winners and losers becomes challenging because every Internet service is free to
independently determine its sending rate, speeding up to consume more bandwidth
or slowing down to share the link, according to the parameters of its congestion
control algorithm. Examples of common congestion control (CC) algorithms include
NewReno, Cubic, Akamai's FastTCP, and Google's BBR.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal aims to understand the state of fair bandwidth allocation given the
heterogenous congestion control algorithms in use today. Our project goal is
twofold: (1) to measure what CC algorithms are in use 'in the wild' today; and
(2) to evaluate each algorithm in controlled experiments in contention with
other algorithms. To achieve (1), we will design and implement new techniques to
identify and characterize the CC in use for arbitrary Internet services (even
when we cannot control the service ourselves). To achieve (2), we propose new
frameworks to conduct scientific evaluation of fairness and, where possible,
combine our fairness measurements with mathematical models describing our
results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.