* 1850706
* Imaging Tools for the Early Detection of Burli Ulcer
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2018,02/29/2020
* Courtney Queen, Texas Tech University Health Science Center
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 02/29/2020
* USD 50,000.00

This innovation demonstrates how advanced algorithm information technologies can
transform the medical care delivery system by shifting the focus to early
diagnosis. This technology identifies suspicious skin lesions as positive or
negative for the structural properties of Buruli ulcers. Furthermore, this
technique validates the classification system for other skin lesions which can
be improved and expanded to include other types of skin diseases for humans,
animals, and also plants. Point-of-care diagnostics for skin diseases have the
potential to not only identify diseases in the early stages, but also create
opportunities to initiate medical interventions in earlier stages of a disease,
thereby reducing medical costs by treating diseases with antibiotic therapy
instead of surgical interventions and eliminating any unnecessary pain and
suffering resulting from complications of late-stage disease diagnosis. This
innovation is critical for differential diagnosis, disease surveillance,
collecting environmental contextual data, medication adherence, and advancing
health literacy. This work is important because it contributes to a wider body
of knowledge that seeks to validate algorithm development for point-of-care
diagnostics, and ultimately improves access to healthcare for rural and hard-to-
reach populations, also reducing barriers to care for otherwise stigmatizing and
debilitating diseases.

Advancements in point-of-care diagnostics for neglected tropical diseases, and
neglected infections of poverty represents an opportunity to decrease both the
incidence and prevalence of debilitating and disfiguring diseases. These
otherwise preventable diseases represent the most disability-adjusted life years
lost. Representative of an interdisciplinary intervention, image diagnostics for
skin diseases require the development of effective means for intervention
design, management, and evaluation while enhancing the relationships and
collaborations working internationally, across cultures, with community-based
primary care, and to also include opportunities for incorporating telehealth to
address access to care in resource-limited and hard-to-reach communities.
Opportunities to more widely disseminate this research, and to include
commercial potential expands the scope of this innovation and provides
additional education and training opportunities for students of engineering and
public health, but also for clinicians, and community-based healthcare
providers. Successful implementation of point-of-care diagnostics for early
stage disease detection advances the disciplines and allows for the translation
of the innovation, analysis, synthesis, and interpretation of research for
future education and training. Lastly, the advancement of this type of
innovation has the ability to shift the medical system to early diagnosis
reducing the overall disease burden of ill-health and disability due to late
stage diagnosis of disease.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.