* 1850356
* CRII: CIF: Practical and Timely Coded Caching for Dynamic and Volatile Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2021
* Shirin Saeedi Bidokhti, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 05/31/2021
* USD 175,000.00

Caching is a promising technology that is revolutionizing traditional data
communication networks from host-based to information-centric architectures. In
information centric networks, the focal point is content rather than where it
can be retrieved; hence, one can replicate and store (or cache) content at
various nodes or storage units throughout the network so that it can be accessed
faster locally without burdening the server and the global network. This is
desirable in Internet of Things (IoT) applications where content is distributed,
and delay is of crucial importance. However, there are stringent constraints on
device storage capabilities and computational power. As such, the existing
caching mechanisms do not suit IoT domains very well. This project combines two
main aspects of caching, namely, information theory and networking, to develop
practical and timely coded caching schemes for dynamic and volatile networks
such as the IoT. This will allow information-centric networks to achieve their
full potential as a replacement to conventional host-based data communication
networks of today.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop practical and
efficient caching and coding schemes for dynamic and volatile networks such as
the IoT. It develops a new framework to model capabilities of users in caching
content on the fly. This framework allows one to address practical constraints
(such as storage capacities and freshness of information) by bringing concepts
such as Age of Information (AoI) and cache replacement techniques from network
theory and queuing theory into picture while preserving coding opportunities and
optimality of the schemes (in an information theoretic
sense).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.