* 1850937
* I-Corps: A Social Platform that Models User Identity Via Interactive Stories
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2018,11/30/2019
* D. Fox Harrell, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Pamela McCauley
* 11/30/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project results from its
utility for customizing interactive media experiences for diverse users in
systems including workplace learning software, streaming media, educational
games, and recommendation applications. This is enabled by the project's novel
approach to implementing more nuanced user representations in software (online
accounts, user profiles, avatars, etc.). Currently, customized systems'
responses for specific user representations are expensive to produce and not
expressive enough: they often are hardcoded, labor intensive to implement, and
fail to support the particular needs of diverse users. In most such systems
users' membership in categories (e.g., demographic groups or experts vs.
novices) is determined in a top-down fashion, with no possibility for systems to
respond to user representations that only partially fit in categories, inhabit
multiple categories, or change over time. These deficiencies prevent systems
from achieving the nuance of social category membership in everyday life.
Finally, a key potential application is building interactive media supporting
prosocial skill and knowledge development.

This I-Corps project will advance knowledge related to modeling user identities
in commercial and socially impactful digital media systems. Key to the
intellectual merit of the project, the core technology is a computational engine
that models identities (using data from profiles, avatars, characters, and
accounts) by mathematically computing users' degrees of membership across
multiple categories over time. To computationally model category degrees of
category membership, the engine computes a closeness value corresponding to the
degree to which an actor deviates from a prototypical member of a category, who
is defined via a set of features. The degree of membership fluctuates throughout
an interactive narrative based on user behaviors. Modeling these scenarios draws
upon specific concepts from sociolinguistics, cognitive science, and sociology
of classification. They include: category gradience, category dynamics, multiple
memberships, inter-category relationships, and prototypes. Along with numerous
publications, relevant prior work has been conveyed through invited keynotes and
talks at major universities, foundations, and academic venues internationally.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.