* 1850685
* GeoPRISMS Postdoctoral Scholar: Refining GPS-Acoustic Processing to Measure Cascadia Subduction
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2022
* David Schmidt, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 04/30/2022
* USD 260,341.00

There is geologic and historical evidence that a magnitude 9.0 earthquake,
comparable in size to the earthquake off Japan in 2011, could strike the
Cascadia subduction zone, the region immediately offshore Oregon and Washington
State where the ocean floor is slowly crashing into and sinking below the North
American continent. Normally when assessing seismic hazards on land, the
movement of the ground is measured using the Global Positioning System (GPS),
which informs where an earthquake may happen in the future and how large it may
be. However, GPS can not be used in offshore regions like the Cascadia
subduction zone because a seafloor instrument cannot directly communicate with
an orbiting satellite through the water column. Instead, an analogous technique
called GPS-Acoustic is used. GPS-Acoustic couples the satellite signals from GPS
with sound waves from instruments deployed on the seabed to measure the movement
of the seafloor. However, GPS-Acoustic instruments are not as accurate as
onshore GPS stations because of difficulties in predicting how fast sound will
travel through the ocean at any specific time and place. This project seeks to
use improved oceanographic models of sound speed to improve measurements of
seafloor movement along the Cascadia subduction zone. This will in turn allow a
more accurate assessment of the seismic hazard in the region. Broader impacts of
the work include the support of a postdoctoral scholar, potential improvements
in subduction-zone seismic hazard assessments and potential cross-disciplinary
impact for both geodesy and physical oceanography.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal
of the project is to test the assumptions of a stationary and horizontally
layered sound velocity structure for GPS-Acoustic positioning. Oceanographic
hindcast models will be used to inform a strategy to filter out the variations
in sound velocity from the GPS-Acoustic residuals. This will allow
implementation of methods to more accurately and efficiently isolate the
geologic and oceanographic signal in the travel time residuals collected during
GPS-Acoustic deployment. This approach will be evaluated using GPS and acoustic
ranging data previously collected by a Wave Glider for sites above the Cascadia
subduction zone. If successful, the accuracy of GPS-Acoustic displacement
measurements will be improved from the cm-scale to the mm-scale, as well as the
efficiency of GPS-Acoustic by shortening the required data collection window.
With improved GPS-Acoustic measurements, refined boundary conditions will be
generated for fault locking models along the Cascadia margin and aid in the
monitoring of the seismic cycle, in line with the goals of the GeoPRISMS
initiative to improve understanding of subduction cycles and
deformation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.