* 1850765
* Collaborative Research: How and Why eNd Tracks Ocean Circulation
* GEO,OCE
* 05/15/2019,04/30/2024
* Brian Haley, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 04/30/2024
* USD 437,171.00

Circulation of water is a fundamental trait of the oceans that impacts its
physics, chemistry and biology; however, understanding modern and past patterns
of circulation - especially in the vast bodies of deep water - is challenging
because global circulation defies direct measurement. The problems with direct
measurement largely stem from the vast scales of space and time that are of
interest in understanding global circulation. One tool for estimating global
circulation patterns that holds promise is seen in neodymium isotopes which
appear to be powerful tracers of deep ocean circulation, over a variety of
timescales. Unfortunately, the elemental behavior of neodymium contrasts the
isotopic behavior of neodymium in the oceans, a puzzle branded the "neodymium
paradox." This inconsistency of geochemical behavior opens to question the
application of neodymium isotopes as a tracer of circulation. Therefore,
scientists from Oregon State University, Tulane University, and Bigelow
Laboratory of Ocean Sciences propose to test the hypothesis that there is a yet
unconstrained (even poorly identified) source of neodymium to the oceans that
can explain the discrepancies seen between the elemental and isotopic neodymium
marine budgets. The scientists further seek to understand the mechanistic cause
of this source and thus be able to start making global constraints on its
influence. Understanding these processes will fundamentally change our
interpretations of neodymium data and allow us to more accurately quantify ocean
circulation with a greater degree of confidence. For outreach activities, the
scientists plan to participate in open house days held at Oregon State
University, da Vinci days, National Ocean Science Bowls, Salmon Bowl and Bigelow
Laboratory for Ocean Sciences' Cafe Scientifique. Undergraduate students and one
graduate student from Tulane University would be supported and trained as part
of this project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scientists from Oregon State University,
Tulane University, and Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences propose to test the
hypothesis that there is a benthic source of neodymium (Nd) to the oceans that
exerts a primary control over the distribution of this element and its isotopes
(eNd) in the ocean. This benthic flux results from early diagenetic reactions
that release rare earth elements (REEs) from the solid phase to pore fluid. The
scientists contend this flux will explain eNd distributions throughout the
modern and past global oceans. The planned research will be guided by three
questions:&lt;br/&gt;(1) What are the mechanisms that control the magnitude and
isotope composition of the benthic flux?&lt;br/&gt;(2) What are the
relationships among bottom water, pore fluid, and the terminal solid phase
compositions? Particularly, how and under what chemical conditions does an eNd
signature become part of a preserved archival record of [Nd] and
eNd?&lt;br/&gt;(3) Can our understanding of the deep water benthic fluxes
account for the integrated bottom water eNd as a function of apparent water mass
age and circulation path (e.g., how do the pore fluid and solid phase values
reconcile with the existing water column signature and water mass age
data)?&lt;br/&gt;To test these ideas, sediments and their pore fluids will be
collected from a diverse set of deep sea sites in the Pacific Ocean that reflect
slow-to-fast sedimentation rates, carbonate-, terrigenous-, volcaniclastic- and
siliceous-sediment, and low-to-high organic carbon. The sediments and porewater
samples, as well as samples from the overlying water column will be
characterized for the following parameters: major, minor, and trace metals, Nd
isotopes, carbonate chemistry, oxygen, nutrients, particulate organic carbon,
particulate organic nitrogen, radiocarbon, porosity, and grain size. With these
observations we will build a quantitative numeric geochemical model (e.g.,
PHREEQC, Geochemist's Workbench, Humic Ion Binding Model) that can capture the
cardinal controls over the benthic source. Our goal is to provide a new
interpretive framework for Nd and eNd, such that we can offer quantitative
estimates of benthic fluxes for use in models of global circulation. This work
has potentially transformative implications on our understanding and application
of REEs and Nd isotope data in both the modern and ancient
oceans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.