* 1850809
* Hotplate Precipitation and Wind Measurement Improvement
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/2019,01/31/2024
* Jefferson Snider, University of Wyoming
* Continuing Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 01/31/2024
* USD 306,227.00

Precipitation is a vital element of the Earth system. Where and when it occurs,
and in what amount, affects the planning of individuals, communities, regions,
and nations. For these reasons, there is clear justification for measuring
precipitation. From a scientific perspective, the measurement of precipitation
is important for understanding Earth's atmospheric, hydrological, and energy
cycles. Improved weather forecasts and improved weather notification are two
societal benefits that stem from making, analyzing, and improving precipitation
measurements. In this project, multiple versions of a relatively new
precipitation measurement system, the hotplate gauge, are investigated.
Collocated deployment of multiple hotplates during precipitation events and
analysis of data from these systems and events, is the basis of the research.
The goal is to enhance scientific confidence in hotplate measurements of
precipitation and wind speed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A significant problem in
hydrometeorology is quantitative precipitation estimation (QPE). The foundation
of QPE is measurements of precipitation made with precipitation gauges. In the
case of snowfall, measurements obtained from weighing gauges can be compromised
by gauge capping, delay in registration of snowfall, and by wind-induced snow
particle undercatch. For each of these, bias on the order of a factor of two is
consistent with present understanding. This project extends a new paradigm in
ground-based measurement of snowfall. The basis is the hotplate technology
developed by the National Center for Atmospheric Research and the Desert
Research Institute. Because a hotplate's upward- and downward-facing surfaces
are maintained at 70 degrees Celsius, this type of precipitation system is
immune to capping and delay errors and its measurement of wind speed is not
compromised by icing. Since 2005, a private company has been licensed to market
the hotplate. Approximately 70 have been sold. Testing of a subset of these has
revealed substantial error in the determination of wind speed, and thus, in
determination of both snow particle catch efficiency and precipitation amount.
In this project, a solution to the speed bias problem is investigated. This
project aims to establish the applicability of a new speed bias correction for
four collocated hotplate systems, the applicability of a new snow particle catch
efficiency function based on the corrected wind speed, and that these
modifications lead to consistency among the wind and precipitation measurements
obtained from the four collocated systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.