* 1850024
* Enhancing STEM Identity through E-Mentoring Experiences
* EDU,DRL
* 12/15/2018,11/30/2023
* Deniz Eseryel, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Toya frank
* 11/30/2023
* USD 1,199,814.00

This project will advance efforts of the Innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST) program to better understand and promote practices
that increase students' motivations and capacities to pursue careers in fields
of science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM) by preparing and
interesting high achieving middle school students for advanced math courses in
high school and eventually in engineering careers. This project is a partnership
between the College of Education, the Math, Science and Education Network Pre-
College Program, the Minority Engineering Program, and Technology and
Engineering Education, all at NC State University, as well as four school
districts in high poverty rural areas of North Carolina. This project addresses
an important national concern of strengthening and diversifying the scientific
workforce. This project could have significance by providing a transformative
model that can potentially enhance STEM learning and engagement for
underrepresented students living in rural areas of the U.S., thus greatly
improving their chances for upward mobility. The project studies the effects of
e-mentoring (online mentoring) on underrepresented student mentors and
underrepresented high school students living in rural areas. The mentoring model
and tools developed have the potential to impact all students, further
contributing to the capability and diversity of future STEM professionals.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is to develop and iteratively test
an e-mentoring program for underrepresented high school students living in rural
North Carolina that will engage them in engineering-related experiences
supported by near-peer relationships with mentors of similar background, race,
gender, and experiences, to improve students' attitudes about and participation
in STEM. This project will employ a research-based mentoring model facilitated
using mobile and web-based software technology. This three-year project will
iteratively design, implement, and study the e-mentoring program by matching 100
underrepresented rural students with college engineering majors from the
Minority Engineering Program and Technology and Engineering Education at NC
State. Both high school students and student mentors participating in the
program will benefit from a connection to the broader STEM community that will
allow them to envision pathways to STEM careers. This project will report on
factors that facilitate successful implementation of the e-mentoring experience,
examine the potential promise of the e-mentoring experience for participating
students, and determine factors that may moderate the potential of the
e-mentoring program. By matching underrepresented students with near-peer
mentors of similar background, experience, and interests, it is expected that
mentees will improve in their self-efficacy and value for STEM, and their STEM
intentions, enrollment, and persistence. The methods and approaches used for
applying strategies of successful mentorship programs will leverage digital
tools and an inverted classroom to enhance STEM learning and the mentoring
experience. The project has the potential to expand upon the capacity of
traditional mentoring and develop new avenues through which to enhance STEM
identity, education, and the workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.