* 1850365
* CRII: SaTC: Secure Branch Predictors for High Performance Processors
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2022
* Dmitry Evtyushkin, College of William and Mary
* Standard Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 06/30/2022
* USD 175,000.00

Branch predictor (BP) is one of the key performance improvement mechanisms in
today's processors. Recent studies demonstrate that it can be used to initiate
powerful attacks such as side-channel and speculative execution-based attacks.
These attacks allow adversaries to steal sensitive data and compromise computer
systems. This project investigates security threats introduced by existing BP
designs and develops new safe designs to stop BP-related attacks without
significantly degrading the performance.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;First, the
project addresses the problem of sensitive data leakage through shared BP data
structures. It develops a safe sharing mechanism which permits BP structure
sharing while simultaneously preventing dangerous collisions. Second, the
project addresses the speculative execution threats caused by incorrectly
predicted branch instructions. This is achieved by redesigning speculative
execution components of the processor by adding restrictions on speculative
instruction execution and caching critical data to prevent drastic performance
losses. Third, the project develops a novel evaluation framework that is used to
evaluate and compare security and performance properties of new and existing
branch predictor designs.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Hardware security
vulnerabilities affect billions of computers worldwide. This project intends to
improve the security of computer hardware and disallow both known and future
attacks by designing safe branch predictors. As a result, security of future
computers will be improved, making a positive impact on society. Discoveries
from this project are used in curriculum development. The project actively
involves graduate students into research.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Data, code and
other research artifacts generated by this project will be stored locally at
William and Mary machines and backed up to an in-house network storage system.
Tools and data samples will be available at the project website:
http://www.cs.wm.edu/~dmitry/safebp/. All data generated during this project
will be kept for the duration of the project and at least two additional
years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.