* 1850943
* Belmont Forum Collaborative Research: Scenarios for providing multiple ecosystem services and biodiversity in viticultural landscapes
* GEO,RISE
* 03/01/2019,02/28/2023
* Daniel Karp, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 02/28/2023
* USD 179,542.00

Innovative research on the complex interaction of socio-economic and global
environmental trends of biodiversity and ecosystem services is needed to help
develop more informative scenarios for addressing environmental and human
development challenges. To overcome these challenges coupled natural-human
systems approaches and analyses are needed. These provide improved scenarios of
biodiversity and ecosystem services that couple the outputs of direct and
indirect drivers, such as land use, invasive species, overexploitation,
biodiversity, environmental change, and pollution. The resulting models provide
a methodological state-of-the art that results in more accurate quantitative
assessments, better land use, and more effective ecosystem services. This
research project involves a coalition of investigators dedicated to advancing
sustainable ecosystem services and maintaining essential biodiversity in
agricultural landscapes with a focus on issues in vinicultural systems. Drivers
such as soil fertility, pest regulation, biodiversity conservation, and crop
production as a function of climate change that influence land use, economics,
and policy decisions at the local, landscape, and regional level will be
examined. The interdisciplinary research team, which includes members from the
US academic sector, will develop and test predictive models that examine and
integrate different land use and biodiversity scenarios across spatial scales
for future farm management in viticultural regions across Europe. Members of the
team have extensive and well-documented collaborations with key stakeholders in
the targeted regions including wine growers, non-governmental organizations,
regional and national authorities, and extension service personnel. This
research involves the iterative collection of input from stakeholders to help
develop and test predictive models and to translate their results into a user-
driven, decision-support tool that will provide wine-region vineyard farmers and
regional authorities with better information and approaches on how to manage
vinyards more sustainably and economically. Broader impacts of the work include
international collaboration between the US, Austria, Germany, France, Spain,
Romania, and The Netherlands. This large international collaboration will help
build bridges collaboration and cooperation between countries and communities;
engage stakeholders, ranging from local communities to national environmental
protection agencies, in the process; and develop a far-reaching and rich,
publicly accessible data resource that will be available to natural and social
scientists across countries and disciplines. In addition to its scientific
impact, this project has societal impacts in terms of the economies of an
important cash crop which will likely also impacts on US winegrowing regions.
Additional impacts include the integration of research and education and the
training of a postdoctoral scholar.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports
U.S. researchers participating in a project competitively selected by a
coalition of 26 funding agencies from 23 countries through the Belmont Forum
call for proposals on "Scenarios of Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services". The
call was a multilateral initiative designed to support research projects that
contribute to the development of scenarios, models, and decision-support tools
for understanding and solving critical issues facing our planet. The goal of the
competition was to improve and apply participatory scenario methods to enhance
research relevance and its acceptance and to address gaps in methods for
modelling impact drivers and policy interventions. It was also to develop and
communicate levels of uncertainty associated with the models, to improve data
accessibility and fill gaps in knowledge. Funds support U.S. participants in the
larger international consortium are dedicated to synthesizing pest-control data
using government-sponsored databases from Spain, France, Germany, Austria, The
Netherlands, and Romania. The data will be used to develop statistical models
that predict variation in pest and predator abundances across European
vineyards. These models will be validated against independent field
measurements, collected by European colleagues, of arthropod biodiversity, pest
control, and economic performance along gradients of landscape complexity and
management options across five case-study regions. Results of the study will
advance understanding of the consequences of various ecosystem services that try
to address pressing challenges such as climate change, decline in worldwide
biodiversity, invasive species, and unsustainable land use. Essential
information from those intimately involved in vinicultural processes and land
management will be collected via local focus groups which will generate
stakeholder-driven scenarios. These case studies will be used to drive models
that will be created and used to examine the most effective way of providing
sustainable use. The validated models will be used to explore the biodiversity,
ecosystem service, and crop production consequences of alternative land-use
decisions under a range of social, economic and ecological restrictions.
Collaborators from other countries are funded through their associated national
funding organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.