* 1850297
* CRII: NeTS: Denoising Internet Delay Measurements using Weak Supervision
* CSE,CNS
* 06/15/2019,05/31/2022
* Ramakrishnan Durairajan, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Ann Von Lehmen
* 05/31/2022
* USD 190,999.00

Understanding the characteristics of the Internet is one of the key goals of
Internet measurement researchers, and the service providers and content delivery
networks that serve billions of users worldwide. To this end, a myriad of
measurement tools and techniques have been developed. Despite these efforts,
what is critically lacking is a systematic framework to interpret the results
due to the presence of measurement noise. This research proposes to develop a
new framework to solve this problem. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main goal of this
project is to design, develop and rigorously evaluate a framework for denoising
latency measurements. The objectives are to make the denoising process easy,
automatic, and rapid via two key research thrusts. In the first thrust, the goal
is to design and develop the framework to generate measurement noise labels
(i.e., ground truth data) automatically leveraging recent advancements in
machine learning. The second thrust will expand the capabilities of the
framework to remove and repair the noisy measurements in an automated and rapid
fashion. The efficacy of the framework will be evaluated in lab-based settings
and in a real-world setting by applying it on community
datasets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.