* 1850406
* CRII: SaTC: Creating and Managing Structurally-Morphing IT Systems - Moving Targets
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2023
* Alexandru Bardas, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 05/31/2023
* USD 174,898.00

Current information technology (IT) systems are relatively static from a
configuration perspective and give adversaries the valuable advantage of time
for breaching them. A new concept, called Moving Target Defense or MTD,
dynamically reconfigures systems to increase uncertainty and complexity for
attackers, reduce their window of opportunity, and raise the costs of their
reconnaissance and attack endeavors. All of these contribute towards increased
security. Unfortunately, current moving target defense approaches tend to
address only individual aspects or components of an IT system and not
holistically the entire system. While such efforts are important building-
blocks, how a large complex system can be dynamically reconfigured and adapted
remains an open research problem. This project investigates the feasibility and
challenges related to adopting moving target defense for creating and managing
structurally morphing IT systems in order to better protect them. It also
provides opportunities for curriculum enhancement via integrating research
results in cyber defense courses, training students at different levels and from
under-represented groups and informing the security research community about
opportunities and impediments to enterprise system defenses via moving target
defense.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project develops a comprehensive
framework/platform for creating and managing structurally changing IT systems.
The framework consists of several components: a methodology to abstract the
functionality and structure of enterprise systems into a high-level multi-
layered model, a compiler that converts the abstract requirements into an actual
system, and a moving target defense strategy generator to assist and proactively
evaluate the cost of various combinations of system changes against the security
benefits achieved and performance overheads incurred. The framework is
prototyped leveraging readily available virtualized environments,
containerization techniques and configuration management tools. Vital component
operations belonging to the moving target defense infrastructure are protected
using the notion of hardware supported security enclaves to further enhance the
security of the framework.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.