* 1850742
* PREEVENTS Track 1: Coupling Uncertain Geophysical Hazards: Bringing together Geoscientists, Computational Mathematicians, and Statisticians to Advance Hazard Forecasting
* GEO,ICER
* 03/01/2019,08/31/2020
* Elaine Spiller, Marquette University
* Standard Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 08/31/2020
* USD 39,490.00

Better prediction of natural hazards could save lives and mitigate destruction
of property. This conference will address the question of uncertainty in coupled
mathematical models of physical systems and the impact of this uncertainty on
hazard prediction. It will provide a venue to introduce young geoscientists,
computational mathematicians, and statisticians to each other and to senior
researchers. It will identify specific problems of interest and new
collaborations focused around the challenges of coupled hazard models.

Uncertainty analysis in mathematical models of physical systems is still in
development. Only recently has the effect of uncertainty been incorporated into
hazard predictions. However, most hazards are the consequences of a cascade of
effects. For example, rain weakens soil on a fire-scorched hillside, which
causes a landslide that can harm people and damage property. The goal of this
conference is to better understand i) the physical processes causing the hazard,
ii) the mathematical models of these processes and the range of uncertainty in
the model equations, and iii) the coupling of events leading to hazards and the
associated propagation of uncertainties from one model to the next.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.