* 1850355
* CRII: III: Novel Computational Social Choice Extensions for Highly Distributed Decision-Making Contexts
* CSE,IIS
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2023
* Adolfo Escobedo, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 06/30/2023
* USD 222,329.00

Over the last two decades, there has been a growing interest in the aggregation
of individual preferences into socially desirable collective choices (e.g.,
crowdsourced recommendations, online voting), helping to propel the new
interdisciplinary field of computational social choice. In many ways, the
emphasis on examining whether and how preference aggregation algorithms can be
designed to ensure fairness, avoid strategic manipulation, and achieve other
socially desirable properties is driven by the largely unchecked prevalence of
automated "black-box" decision-making technologies within everyday life. While
the rising interest in this new field has resulted in various landmark results,
implementation of the more socially beneficial methodologies within modern
contexts remains severely limited due to a combination of incompatible
assumptions and computational difficulties. This research project will seek to
extend the real-world applicability of these robust methodologies by melding
socio-theoretical insights, efficient algorithms, and advanced operations
research techniques. Accordingly, this novel approach will build
interdisciplinary bridges with computer science and expose computational social
choice to new audiences. Moreover, through an overarching emphasis on rigorous
theoretical underpinnings, the envisioned contributions will address the
pressing need to develop and implement interpretable decision-making algorithms.
Hence, the outcomes of this project will prospectively have widespread impacts
on society. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The advances envisioned through the
completion of this project will expand the traditional scope of computational
social choice, particularly of Kemeny aggregation, which is widely regarded as
one of the most robust preference-ranking aggregation frameworks in the
literature. The focus of this research project will be on highly distributed
decision-making contexts, which are often characterized by large numbers of
alternatives, tied (i.e., partial) preferences, errors, and/or incompleteness.
This will be accomplished by exploring symbiotic relationships between social
choice theory, efficient algorithms, and operations research techniques. Planned
research tasks will include: (i) Establishing social choice axioms and
properties that different distance measures should satisfy when dealing with
partial and incomplete preference rankings; (ii) Constructing mathematical
models and decomposition algorithms that take advantage of these insights; and
(iii) Exploring the validity and pragmatic implications of these measures via
formal statistical methods and benchmark instances of preference
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.