* 1850195
* CRII: CHS: Improving Data Exploration by Mining Analyst Behavior
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2023
* Jeffrey Rzeszotarski, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Todd Leen
* 03/31/2023
* USD 175,000.00

Data analysts must explore increasingly large amounts of information. A variety
of tools to visualize, filter, and model data help make it more manageable. Yet
they bring with them a chance of errors of interpretation, omission, or
cognitive bias. This project develops techniques for making data analysis tools
more resistant to such errors. The team will record and store logs of the
processes many different analysts use to explore a variety of datasets. From
these logs of analyst behavior, the team will create models that identify both
potentially advantageous and risky working strategies. They will use this model,
along with tools designed to detect biases, to build new data analysis tools.
The new tools will shape the presentation of data to users and suggest
exploration choices to help counter errors and biases. For example, if past
successful analysts, when faced with a similar set of data, performed a
particular sequence of operations, the tool might suggest that the current user
pursue similar procedures. The tools and work will be deployed publicly,
benefiting individuals who may be less familiar with data
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ultimate goal of this research program is to
construct data analytics technology that learns from experts' work in order to
improve the experience of novice data scientists. In this project, the team will
build a dataset of analyst behavior using crowdsourcing platforms. To identify
commonalities among many different analysts and datasets, they will develop a
vocabulary (or set of abstractions) of analysis actions grounded in existing
literature on analytics tool design. These actions will be encapsulated as
states in a probabilistic graphical model of the sequence of actions taken
during analysis. The team will explore how different behavior abstractions
influence the fitting of the probabilistic model. The team will create
algorithms to match new analyst sessions to the existing models and identify
potential targets for intervention (or coaching) points during the data
exploration. The project will incorporate these interventions into existing data
analysis tools as a proof of concept, exploring in laboratory studies how
individuals respond to different strategies of intervention. In addition to
developing specific models and tools around data analytics workflow, this
project sets up a broader research agenda of mining interaction logs for deeper
insights into analyst cognition and working
strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.