* 1850566
* CRII: CSR: Programmable Heterogeneous Memory Systems via Multiple Address Spaces and RAM Lake
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2022
* Jason Lowe-Power, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 06/30/2022
* USD 477,817.00

Computer systems store an increasingly vast amount of data. The major limiting
factor for computer performance is data retrieval from memory, not data
processing. At the same time, these systems integrate various physical storage
technologies adding complexity to data retrieval. The project will develop new
improvements to computing system hardware to increase data retrieval performance
in systems with many memory technologies by addressing two initial questions:
how to move data between memory technologies efficiently and how to represent
different types of data flexibly for both the programmer and the hardware
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will produce new hardware mechanisms
and software interfaces that will increase the performance and simplify the
programming of heterogeneous memory systems. Additionally, the work will expand
the understanding of how software will use these nascent heterogeneous memory
systems by deeply studying current and emerging systems and applications. This
work will be broken into two main thrusts. First, designing novel hardware
support for fine-grained user-directed and system-directed data movement, and
second, designing hardware support for multiple address spaces to improve the
interfaces to heterogeneous memory for programmers and system
software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computing systems ranging from datacenters and
supercomputers to mobile devices and Internet-of-Things systems are processing
an increasing amount of data, which is driving the trend toward heterogeneous
memory systems. The proposed research will increase the performance and
usability of these computing systems. This research will be presented to the
scientific community and the public through conference publications, software
repositories, and blog posts on a public website. Additionally, this project
will develop an upper-divisional undergraduate/introductory graduate class on
programming heterogeneous systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All data, software, and
other artifacts generated through this research will be carefully managed and
archived through third party repositories such as GitHub and cloud service
providers. The software artifacts will be maintained indefinitely using publicly
accessible history tracking version control systems. Data that can be
regenerated by re-running simulation software will be kept for at least five
years, as well as the foreseeable future. Links to repositories containing the
simulators used, code produced, and data used in the published results can be
found at https://arch.cs.ucdavis.edu/projects/heterogeneous-
memory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.