* 1850436
* CRII: SaTC: Mitigating Software-Based Microarchitectural Attacks via Secure Microcode Customization
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2019,02/28/2022
* Ashish Venkat, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 02/28/2022
* USD 174,996.00

Modern high-performance processors implement complex microarchitectural
optimizations involving speculative execution which has recently been shown to
be vulnerable to a type of malicious attack called Spectre. This project will
investigate a microarchitectural solution framework to secure against such
attacks. This framework, called context-sensitive fencing, will seek to
automatically track and detect malicious execution patterns dynamically to
trigger defense code without programmer intervention and with minimal impact on
processor performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will investigate a
high performance defense strategy with three novel components: (a) secure
microcode customization which leverages the processor's microcode engine to
enable the surgical injection of Spectre defense code (e.g., speculation fences)
into the dynamic instruction stream without the need for software patching, (b)
a decoder-level information flow tracking framework which detects spurious
execution patterns that result in the mis-training of core microprocessor
structures such as the branch predictor, and (c) microarchitecture hardening
mechanisms that shield sensitive microarchitectural structures against the
malicious side effects of speculative execution, to further enable a security-
aware processor architecture design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The reconfigurable
microcode-level defense proposed by this research may address the Spectre attack
which affects millions of users. This project will train and mentor graduate and
undergraduate students and is expected to facilitate development of a hardware
security course to be delivered in-class and online.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
results from this research will be disseminated in the form of publications,
presentations, design reports, course materials, and source code, and will be
hosted publicly for the length of this project and beyond, on the investigator's
website at http://www.cs.virginia.edu/venkat.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.