* 1850204
* CRII: III: A Spatio-Temporal Data Mining Framework For Functional Neuroimaging Data
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Gowtham Atluri, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 05/31/2024
* USD 191,000.00

The human brain is an interconnected web of billions of neurons that enables
humans to memorize, reason, perceive, imagine, and act. Understanding the
relation between neuronal activity in the brain and the functionality it enables
is crucial to the characterization, early diagnosis, and effective treatment of
mental illness. Advances in brain imaging technologies allow researchers to
collect large volumes of brain activity data while subjects are resting or while
working on a task. Multiple such brain imaging datasets that are publicly
available present a tremendous opportunity to study the relationship between
brain activity and brain functionality. However, a major factor limiting
progress is the lack of suitable computational data mining tools that can sift
through large volumes of data with challenging properties to discover insights
about brain functionality. One major challenge in developing the necessary tools
is due to the properties of the brain activity data that are different from
traditionally studied data for which majority of the computational tools are
originally developed. Another challenge is due to the manner in which desired
insights are represented in the brain activity data. This project will result in
novel computational tools and techniques that will address these two general
challenges. This work is expected to accelerate progress towards effective
treatment procedures for mental illness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goals
of this project will be accomplished by defining original neuroimaging data
analytic problems without shoe-horning them into existing frameworks, tackling
the unique spatio-temporal characteristics of neuroimaging data, and leveraging
domain knowledge in neuroscience. The driving neuroscience questions include: 1)
What are the representations of the functional activity that adheres to the
underlying structure of the brain connections? 2) What are the brain activation
maps that can be used to represent a variety of brain functions and to study
relationships among them? 3) What is the utility of transient brain states in
uniquely identifying subjects, in comparison to a static representation? The
corresponding computational research involves developing techniques for: 1)
Determining the brain parcellation such that the resultant parcels reflect the
underlying topographic connectivity; 2) Simultaneously learning the dictionary
as well as classification models for multiple task-fMRI datasets; 3) Discovering
and using transient brain states and their transitions to uniquely identify
subjects based on their fMRI data. The resultant tools and techniques will
enable the investigation of hypotheses relevant to personalized neuroscience --
understanding the neurological processes that are shared and unique to
individual subjects. This will help achieve the clinically relevant goals of
personalized neuroscience and eventually alleviate the huge societal burden of
mental illness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.