* 1850750
* REU Site: Solar Physics at the Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2023
* Edward DeLuca, Smithsonian Institution Astrophysical Observatory
* Continuing Grant
* Manda S. Adams
* 04/30/2023
* USD 601,042.00

This project will support the continuation of a Research Experience for
Undergraduates (REU) Program at the Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics
(CfA), in which students will carry out individual research projects in solar
physics under the supervision of CfA senior staff scientists and engineers for
ten weeks during the summer. The student projects involve numerical modeling,
data analysis from space missions currently being supported at the CfA, such as
Hinode, SDO, IRIS, Wind, DISCOVR, and Parker Solar Probe or engineering projects
related to solar instrumentation being built at the CfA, depending on the
students' interests and abilities. With its strong Space Weather component this
program has the benefit to society of adding to our understanding of potential
space hazards. Moreover, this program will provide exposure to professional
research in a university environment with a goal of helping students to decide
whether to continue their education in graduate school, and whether or not to
pursue research as a profession. A student outreach component of the program
will bring educational activities to the local community. The target group of
students consists of undergraduates in Science, Technology, Engineering and Math
(STEM) disciplines, with a preference for underrepresented groups in STEM fields
and students from small colleges where there are few research opportunities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goals of this program are to 1) develop
students with demonstrated talent and potential by stimulating independence,
creativity and cultivating an interest in physics, astronomy and engineering
graduate school, 2) demonstrate to participants how academic knowledge acquired
in classes applies to real-word research problems, 3) foster participation in
scientific research by women and traditionally underrepresented groups in
scientific research, 4) increase awareness of solar physics as a field of study,
5) develop student competence and confidence in presenting scientific research
in a public forum, 6) provide a high-quality research experience, and 7)
accomplish state-of-the-art solar research. Since the projects are designed to
be part of cutting-edge solar physics research, student projects will frequently
result in joint professional publications or presentations with their CfA
mentors, providing undergraduates with valuable motivation and career
development experiences. Since Solar Physics is taught at relatively few
colleges and universities, this program provides an important service to the
discipline. The proposal will encourage minority student applications through
contacts with other minority-serving internship programs on campus,
recommendations from professional contacts at minority serving institutions,
advertising the program at conferences such as the National Society for Black
Physicists, and a broad advertising campaign targeted at minority colleges and
universities. This site is supported by the Department of Defense in partnership
with the NSF REU program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.