* 1850630
* Seminar on Stochastic Processes 2019
* MPS,DMS
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2020
* Davar Khoshnevisan, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Pawel Hitczenko
* 01/31/2020
* USD 49,000.00

The 2019 Seminar on Stochastic Processes (SSP) will be held at the University of
Utah in Salt Lake City, UT from March 13-16, 2019. This conference has been held
annually since 1981 and is devoted to probability theory and stochastic
processes. Past conferences have had major impact on the field in several
distinct ways. They consistently feature broad participation of graduate
students and early-career researchers, including future Fields medalists and
other world-leading experts in the early stages of their research careers. The
primary goal is to provide a platform for the dissemination of the most
significant recent research progress in the theory of stochastic processes, and
to enable participants to discuss ideas in an informal
atmosphere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Stochastic processes are basic building blocks
of the way that randomness exhibits itself in the real world, and are used to
model a wide range of physical, biological, ecological, and financial phenomena.
The format of this meeting is based on the success of recent Seminars on
Stochastic Processes. There will be five one hour talks and a tutorial session
consisting of two 90 minute lectures, all delivered by distinguished speakers on
key recent themes and developments in stochastic processes research. Talks also
emphasize the important connections of stochastic processes to other parts of
mathematics and the sciences. There will also be a poster session and
opportunities for early career researchers to present their own research, and
time set aside for the discussion of open problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More
details are available at the conference website&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;http://www.
math.utah.edu/SSP-2019/&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.