* 1850343
* A Youth-Led Citizen Science Network for Community Environmental Assessment
* EDU,DRL
* 05/15/2019,04/30/2024
* Sharon Locke, Southern Illinois University at Edwardsville
* Standard Grant
* Asli Sezen-Barrie
* 04/30/2024
* USD 1,033,648.00

This project will advance efforts of the Innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST) program to better understand and promote practices
that increase student motivations and capacities to pursue careers in fields of
science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM) by developing a
technology-rich, out-of-school time STEM program for underserved middle and high
school youth. The new program features citizen science activities involving
mobile sensors, drones, mapping software, and other technologies associated with
environmental science data collection and careers. Four learning modules will be
developed that focus on air, noise, and soil pollution, and how factors
associated with land use contribute to different types of pollution. Field data
will be compared to land cover classifications to examine how pollutants are
related to and influenced by natural and built environments. Participants will
also use their developing technology skills to communicate their findings to
larger audiences using a website, digital stories, videos, and citizen science
cafes. In the science cafes, youth will gain leadership skills by guiding their
parents or caregivers, siblings, and the community at large in citizen science
activities. This project extends the typical pattern of citizen science projects
by having participants go beyond joining established citizen science projects to
initiating their own projects grounded in issues and affordances of their local
communities. If successful, the model from this project has the potential to be
broadly adapted to other communities and linked to research of local or regional
interest or importance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This design and development project
will directly engage 45 students in grades 8 and 9, with potential for reaching
over 300 individuals as participants' families and community members become
involved in citizen science cafes. Most project activities will take place at
government subsidized housing sites. The program progresses through five
elements: curriculum development, instructor preparation, immersive summer
sessions, school-year sessions for participating youth, and citizen science
cafes. The project will develop four teaching modules: Air Pollution, Noise
Pollution, Soil Pollution, and Natural and Built Environments. Students will
gain experience with field research methods while learning to collect high-
quality data using various sensors and related technologies. They will use the
data to answer scientific questions. A mixed methods approach will be employed
to examine outcomes related to the research questions: (1) How does
participation in community-focuses environmental citizen science impact the
development of three aspects of science: performance, competence, and
recognition as a scientist?(2) To what extent and how does participation in
community-focused environmental citizen science activities move youth towards
full participation in the science community? and (3) How do levels of
performance, competence, and recognition influence progress towards full
participation in the science community? Data sources will include a student
science identity survey, a test of relevant knowledge, a student interview
protocol, a student observation protocol, student artifact rubrics, and a
parent/caregiver interview protocol. Interviews will be conducted with student
participants at regular intervals, and with parents/caregivers at the end of
program sessions. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will expand the existing
ITEST portfolio by addressing important questions relating to community-relevant
curricula, linkages of formal and informal education, and examining potential
new elements of STEM learning ecosystems, including the use of student-initiated
citizen science endeavors and youth-led citizen science cafes. Through the
embedded research, this project will also advance understanding of science
identity development and its relationship to STEM occupational
choices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.