* 1850578
* Emergence of beavers as ecosystem engineers in the New Arctic
* GEO,OPP
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Christopher Arp, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Kelly Brunt
* 09/30/2023
* USD 800,000.00

In recent decades, beavers have reportedly extended their range from the boreal
forest into the arctic tundra, altering tundra streams and surrounding
permafrost at local to regional scales. In lower latitudes, beaver damming can
convert streams, backwaters, and lake outlets into connected ponds, which in
turn can change the course of channels, temperature of streams, sediment loads,
energy exchange, aquatic habitat diversity and nutrient cycling, and riparian
vegetation. In the Arctic, effects of beavers may include enhanced thawing of
permafrost, increased stream temperatures, and changes in seasonal ice in
streams, as well as complex ecosystem responses. This study will 1) document
movement of beavers from the forest into tundra regions, 2) understand how
stream engineering wrought by beavers will change the arctic tundra landscape
and streams, and 3) predict how beavers will expand into tundra regions and
alter stream and adjacent ecosystems. Results will be of interest to local
communities and resource managers, and the team of investigators will convene a
scientist and stakeholder workshop in Fairbanks, Alaska to synthesize
observations, compare results from studies in temperate ecosystems, and clarify
impacts of beaver expansion unique to the tundra biome. The project also
includes support for a postdoctoral scientist.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this
project, the investigators will combine a novel remote sensing technique that
detects beavers in satellite imagery, a field campaign that includes drone
imaging, and beaver habitat modeling to understand how beaver expansion in
Alaska is altering arctic stream and riparian ecosystems. They will use a semi-
automated workflow to analyze Landsat imagery, high resolution satellite
imagery, and historic aerial photography to identify the formation and
disappearance of beaver ponds and map beaver dispersal into and impacts on
arctic tundra regions of Alaska since 1950. To document the short- and long-term
effects of beavers on the physical environment, the team will focus on field
sites with chronosequences of beaver establishment, as well as those where
beavers are absent. Landscape models will use attributes of current beaver
habitat to identify other suitable habitat across the Alaskan arctic tundra and
compare it to beaver habitat in temperate ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.