* 1850693
* Incredible India: High Resolution Proterozoic Paleogeography through integrated studies of mafic dykes
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2019,02/28/2023
* Joseph Meert, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 02/28/2023
* USD 287,227.00

The motion of continental crust over long periods of Earth history results in
the periodic assembly of larger landmasses referred to as supercontinents. The
most recent supercontinent, Pangea, coalesced about 300 million years ago,
whereas older supercontinents are hypothesized to have formed around 600 million
years ago (Pannotia), 1000 million years ago (Rodinia), and 1800 million years
ago (Columbia/Nuna). Supercontinents have a coincident relationship to some
important developments in Earth history including the formation of economic
mineral deposits (Columbia), severe climatic fluctuations (Rodinia) and the
evolution of modern animal phyla (Pannotia). Because modern continents hold the
dispersed remnants of ancient crust, determining the timing of supercontinent
assembly requires paleomagnetic and geochronologic knowledge of the entire
globe. Peninsular India is a fusion of five ancient pieces of continental crust
known as the Aravalli, Bundelkhand, Singhbhum, Dharwar, and Bastar cratons. The
research in this proposal is focused on determining the paleogeographic assembly
of the five cratonic pieces by an investigation into the magnetic directions in
igneous rocks. The diverse research team, including undergraduate students,
graduate students and foreign collaborators, targets three key regions in the
Dharwar, Bundelkhand and Singhbhum cratons. The paleomagnetic data being
gathered in this investigation is incorporated into global paleogeographic
models that are key to understanding larger scale questions such as: When were
all continents assembled into larger supercontinents?, How has the Earth's
magnetic field changed through time?, and What were ancient climatic conditions
and how might they help us understand future climates?. Important societal
impacts from this study include the training of graduate and undergraduate
students in an important STEM discipline, educational outreach activities and
collaboration with a 2-year community college, K-12 classroom outreach including
predominantly African-American and Hispanic middle schools, and efforts that
involve mentorship of university STEM students from underrepresented groups. The
project also involves international scientific collaboration with scientists
from India.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators outline a series of goals
aimed to clarify the geological history of Peninsular India and interpret global
tectonic implications. The work conducted in this proposal is generating that 1)
refine the sequence of events that led to India's assembly, and 2) also
elucidate India's place in the proposed supercontinents of Columbia/Nuna and
Rodinia. In a review of global tectonic models, it is noted that Peninsular
India is treated as a unified block during the entire Proterozoic, but available
paleomagnetic and geochronologic data do not support such a conclusion.
Additionally, structural and geochronological data from the Central Indian
Tectonic Zone suggest that unity was not achieved until ~1100-900 Ma. Comparing
a robust paleomagnetic record from India with results from around the globe will
establish the tempo and mode of plate tectonics in the Proterozoic, helping
answer the question of when modern style tectonics began. In reviewing
"traditional" models of Rodinia and Columbia, it is apparent that the central
structure of the supercontinents appears to show little change. If the Rodinia
configuration represents only a slight variation on Columbia/Nuna, this might
reflect some underlying difference from modern-style (Phanerozoic) plate
tectonics, or perhaps fundamental mode of plate organization regularity
throughout geologic time. These data allow the researchers to evaluate potential
"nearest neighbors" to the Indian cratons such as North China, East Antarctica,
Australia, Baltica, and parts of Africa and Madagascar. The contributions add an
important component to studies of ancient climatic gradients across the Earth,
behavior and strength of the magnetic field, the record of true polar wander,
and the identification of large igneous provinces in formerly adjacent cratons
that may host important metallogenic ore deposits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.