* 1850900
* The role of oceans in climate asymmetries
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2019,02/28/2023
* Kyle Armour, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 02/28/2023
* USD 358,924.00

The oceans are responsible for a range of scientifically interesting and
societally relevant asymmetries in Earth's climate. Moreover, the ocean's long
timescales and diverse regional circulations impose strong constraints on the
patterns of surface and subsurface warming under greenhouse-gas forcing. In
turn, oceans mediate the rate and magnitude of global warming through (i)
storage of anomalous heat at depth and (ii) the coupling between surface warming
patterns and atmospheric radiative feedbacks, which governs the evolution of
global climate sensitivity. Insights into the role of oceans in climate have
come from idealized coupled global climate model (GCM) experiments wherein
different ocean circulations and climates are induced by prescribing distinct
continental geometries. This project is to examine the role of large scale
oceanic circulation in the earth's climate system in simplified geometries and
with cloud feedbacks. Different idealized continental configurations will be
considered. This work improves upon previous efforts that have used ocean-only
models or coupled models that did not include cloud-feedbacks. This work would
support a female graduate student, an assistant professor to advise the
research, and a part-time software engineer to assist in technical aspects of
computing and modeling. The graduate student would gain valuable experience in
teaching and communicating climate science. The idealized nature of results from
this project would make them valuable additions to undergraduate and graduate
courses. Tools developed for the purposes of designing idealized continental (or
bathymetric) geometries in the coupled model will be made widely available to
the community through both GitHub and, eventually, within NCAR's Community Earth
System Model (CESM) idealized ocean model hierarchy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project improves on previously idealized, coupled modeling framework in three
key ways: (i) By employing state-of-the-art model components that, importantly,
represent realistic cloud feedbacks which were previously neglected; (ii) By
performing simulations with novel continental geometries and with varying
planetary rotation rates; and (iii) By performing carbon dioxide forcing
simulations with a range of background ocean circulation regimes induced by
those distinct continental geometries. These model experiments are designed to
answer key outstanding questions about the role of oceans in climate and climate
change. The work will lead to improved understanding of the conditions by which
large-scale ocean circulations arise and in turn govern: (i) large-scale
asymmetries in climate; (ii) geographic patterns of climate change; and (iii)
the rate and magnitude of global warming. In particular, it will provide deeper
knowledge of the specific dynamics by which the oceans and atmosphere affect
pole-to-equator temperature gradients; meridional heat transport and its
partitioning between oceans and atmosphere; freshwater transport; tropical
rainfall patterns; and localization of deep-water formation and meridional
overturning. The work could also provide a physical theory for why GCMs predict
increasing climate sensitivity under greenhouse-gas forcing, thus improving our
understanding of one of the major uncertainties in climate projection.
Evaluating the key role of clouds and cloud feedbacks in contributing to these
features will be a focus throughout.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.