* 1850296
* Digital technology integration and engineering contexts to support elementary students' systems thinking
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Jennifer Maeng, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Leilah Lyons
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,198,260.00

This project will advance efforts of the Innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST) program to better understand and promote practices
that increase students' motivations and capacities to pursue careers in fields
of science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM). Research has
indicated limited digital technology use and engineering instruction among
elementary teachers. This project addresses two of the seven ITEST guiding
questions: student experiences with emerging technologies and instructional and
curricular innovations. The Making Engineering Real (ME-REAL) project will
develop and implement professional development (PD) to support teachers who work
with high populations of underrepresented students in STEM to develop richer,
more authentic STEM education through: (a) technology-rich instruction, (b)
authentic engineering opportunities, and (c) the development of systems thinking
skills. The project will provide guidelines for technology integration within
elementary engineering contexts that can inform expectations beyond Virginia.
These guidelines will also inform interventions involving secondary teachers to
support the development and integration of more comprehensive and increasingly
complex technology use within STEM instruction. The project impacts the
competencies essential for students to be successful in STEM-related degree
programs and careers and is focused on better preparing elementary and secondary
science teachers, providing them with valuable instructional tools. Because of
this project, students will have more opportunities to engineer within authentic
contexts, use relevant technologies in ways that reflect the work of scientists,
and think about systems critically. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prior research
indicates teacher beliefs must be elicited and addressed to support changes in
instructional practices. However, the question remains as to the extent
interventions that incorporate attention to beliefs leads to instructional
change. Comparison of ME-REAL teachers' innovation adoption rates to adoption
rates cited in other studies in which the intervention included modeling,
practice, planning, and coaching, but not attention to beliefs will allow the
determination of the extent attending to beliefs promotes instructional change
and innovation adoption, especially in the domain of computer simulations. The
goal of ME-REAL is to increase and improve 1) elementary teachers' instruction
and students' engagement and understanding in the STEM domains of engineering,
digital technology, and systems thinking and 2) elementary student science
learning among traditionally underrepresented groups in STEM (e.g. rural, Black,
Hispanic, low socioeconomic status). Through a delayed-treatment quasi-
experimental design, the ME-REAL project will advance the understanding of (1)
pedagogies (e.g. digital technology integration) and engineering contexts that
effectively support elementary students' systems thinking, (2) PD that
facilitates teachers' systems thinking, engineering understandings, and digital
technology use, and (3) the extent to which attending to teachers' beliefs
during PD promotes instructional change and innovation adoption. Results from
this ME-REAL project have implications for designing curricular tools and
scaffolds to develop students' critical thinking about systems in all STEM
domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.