* 1850025
* CRII: SHF: Pointer-aware Memory: Boosting Cybersecurity by Making Strong Memory Protection Affordable for Irregular Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 02/15/2019,01/31/2022
* Xun Jian, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 01/31/2022
* USD 183,000.00

Computer security weaknesses are threatening public safety and economies at
global scale. Due to the need for stronger computer security, current processors
implement many new types of strong memory protections, such as memory encryption
and out-of-bound memory access detection. The research community is also
actively investigating many other types of strong memory protections, such as
memory address randomization, memory traffic shaping, etc. Unfortunately, strong
memory protection significantly slows down memory accesses and, therefore,
application performance. Through real-system measurements using latest
processors, adding a single type of strong memory protection can more than
double a program's total execution time. Such a high performance penalty can
curtail the adoption of strong memory protections, thereby degrading
cybersecurity and jeopardizing public safety. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
this project is to reduce the high performance cost that strong memory
protection currently imposes on pointer-heavy applications; this performance
cost is especially problematic for such applications, which are very sensitive
to memory-access latency. This project will explore CPU hardware innovations to
reduce the performance overheads of pointer de-referencing for different types
of strong memory protection transparently and without programmer assistance.
Reducing this performance cost will broaden the adoption of strong memory
protection and thus help boost the cybersecurity of
software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.