* 1850722
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Economy, Culture, and Community Food Aid
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2019,11/30/2022
* Sarah Renkert, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 11/30/2022
* USD 14,915.00

The research supported by this award investigates the causes and consequences of
interruptions in food assistance programs. Globally, multilateral organizations,
nation states, non-governmental organizations, and local-level kitchens support
a variety of food assistance programs. The goals of these programs vary widely.
Some provide livelihood opportunities, including direct cash or voucher
transfers; others focus on emergency food aid or even enhancing the nutritional
value of crops and processed foods. But whatever their goals, the foundations of
such program are often shaky. Dependent on mixed-source funding and volunteer
labor, they frequently taper off or close completely, leaving behind questions
about why they arose in the first place, why they are unstable, and what the
consequences of their demise might be for households and communities. The
research supported by this award addresses these questions through the lens of
intensive study of a network of volunteer meal provisioning establishments in a
context of economic shift.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will be carried out
by University of Arizona anthropology doctoral student Sarah Renkert, with
supervision from sociocultural anthropologist, Dr. Maribel Alvarez. The
researcher has located a site in a neighborhood of Lima, Peru, appropriate for
the project because it has experienced exactly the sort of change that needs
investigation: the unwinding of a formerly robust volunteer system of local-
level food provisioning. This particular food system was based on communal
kitchens, staffed by female volunteers who provided a government-subsidized hot
meal to food insecure residents. These kitchens have been closing in recent
years so the researcher has the opportunity to study the entire cycle: the
system's rise; the kitchens that remain; and the effects, if any, of the changes
on household wellbeing. The researcher will collect data with a combination of
social science methods including participant observation; semi-structured
interviews with current and former volunteers, clients, and supporting
institutions; archival research on the system's history in relation to shifts in
the local economy; and a household food security survey. These data will
document the system's rise and development, the shift from community-level food
aid programs to individual household self-provisioning, and the effects of these
changes. Findings from this research will contribute to social theories of
volunteerism and welfare in market-based economies, and be critical for policy
makers attempting to develop effective programs for food provisioning, including
in the United States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.