* 1850076
* CRII: RI: Fair, Efficient, and Truthful Resource Allocation in Dynamic Environments
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2019,10/31/2020
* Hadi Hosseini, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Roger Mailler
* 10/31/2020
* USD 189,656.00

Through the integration of artificial intelligence (AI), economics, and
computation this project investigates novel solutions for resource allocation in
dynamic environments and situations that lack transferable currency. With the
advent of online platforms, economic theory emerges as a fundamental approach to
promote desirable social properties of efficiency, fairness, and truthfulness in
a variety of domains such as shift scheduling, course registration, cloud
computing, and crowdsourcing. These new applications are beyond the scope of
classical economic theory and market design. Complex scenarios involving
changing preferences, dynamic populations, and online items require novel,
practical, and scalable solutions. This project tackles a variety of fundamental
problems at the intersection AI and economics while enriching the algorithmic
and societal understanding of resource allocation in dynamic settings. This
contrasts with classical mechanisms that either focus solely on economic aspects
of resource allocation in static and offline settings or disregarded social
aspects such as fairness. New techniques investigated in this project seek to
expand the algorithmic aspects of resource allocation and explore the limits of
feasibility for dynamic fair allocation. Advances here can have profound impact
in designing efficient mechanisms to allocate resources fairly while
incentivizing truthful behavior among the participants.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the project studies two interconnected components: (1)
sequential allocation under uncertainty, by synthesizing models studied in AI
with economic theory to investigate, analyze, and create new mechanisms that are
fair and discourage strategic manipulation in environments where agents'
preferences are evolving (e.g. nurse scheduling and course allocation); and (2)
online mechanisms, by employing insights from algorithm design and AI to study
fairness and efficiency of allocation mechanisms when agents arrive and depart
over time or the availability of items is uncertain (e.g. food bank
organizations and crowdsourcing platforms). The new techniques aim to exploit
the mathematical framework of decision making under uncertainty as well as
axiomatic approaches of algorithmic economic and mechanism design to develop
theoretical models for dynamic resource allocation, and employ the multiagent
design paradigm to investigate the relation between the well-established
mechanisms in fair allocation problems. Ultimately, the findings of this
research will lead to the development of robust systems for practical
applications in dynamic settings that demand efficient and socially desirable
decisions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.