* 1850097
* CRII: III: Adding Exploratory Statistical Analysis and Prediction Support to SPARQL
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2023
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 05/31/2023
* USD 174,596.00

Search engines use semantic annotations to provide search results, which remain
well hidden behind the familiar search box interface. Beyond web search and
recent technologies such as virtual assistants, semantically enriched data
appear in a wide spectrum of application domains, including but not limited to,
bioinformatics, neuroscience, health care, and social and psychological
sciences. Access to semantic data, however, has been restricted to those
intimately familiar with Semantic Web Technologies, standards, and protocols,
data formats, and query languages. This project aims to substantially reduce the
effort and expertise required to access and analyze semantically enriched data,
and therefore increase the range of applications that can benefit from such
data. Furthermore, this award will support the development of PhD and
undergraduate students, and a graduate-level course on the statistical analysis
of semantically enriched data at the State University of New York at
Albany.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical aims of the project are divided into
two thrusts. The first thrust will develop a general approach to support simple
and intuitive, yet functional, visual semantic querying. In particular,
algorithms will be devised to automatically construct semantic queries from
keywords provided through a search-like interface. The second thrust will open
up the statistical exploration, analysis, and predictive modeling of semantic
data. Specifically, new primitives based on ideas from statistics and
information theory will be incorporated directly into SPARQL, the query language
for retrieving, and discovering relationships from semantic data. An ontology
will be designed to support alternative statistical operations. Computational
methods and algorithms for query answering in this setting will be developed.
These research aims will be complemented by a comprehensive evaluation
plan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.