* 1850278
* CRII: SaTC: A Malware-Inspired Approach to Mobile Application Repackaging and Tampering Detection
* CSE,CNS
* 06/15/2019,05/31/2022
* Lannan Luo, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 05/31/2022
* USD 174,879.00

Mobile application ("app") repackaging is a severe threat to the flourishing
mobile market and numerous users. 97% of the top paid Android apps and 87% of
the iOS ones have been repackaged. Besides, it is one of the most common ways of
propagating mobile malware. Existing countermeasures mostly detect repackaging
based on app similarity measurement, which tends to be imprecise when
obfuscations are applied to repackaged apps. Moreover, they rely on a
centralized party, typically the hosting app store, to perform the detection,
but many alternative app stores fail to commit proper effort to piracy
detection. This research aims at an effective defense against app repackaging,
and will result in substantial progress in tackling malware propagated via
repackaged apps. It will help mitigate attacks such as ransomware or DDoS
launched from repackaged apps. It will also help reduce the massive monetary
loss of legitimate app developers. Industrial collaborations ensure rapidly
translate scientific discovery and technical knowledge into beneficial
commercial products. Educational resources from this project, including course
modules on mobile security and malware detection, will be disseminated through a
dedicated web site. This research will foster new research and education
opportunities at University of South Carolina. Students from underrepresented
groups will participate in the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is to
explore a decentralized scheme that adds repackaging detection capability into
the app to be protected, such that the host devices are made use of to conduct
detection when the app is running. The main challenge is how to protect the
repackaging detection code from attacks. The team of research proposes a novel
malware-inspired approach to handling the important mobile app repackaging
problem. The team will explore a creative use of logic bombs, which are
regularly used in malware: the trigger conditions are constructed to exploit the
differences between the attacker and users (in terms of hardware, sensor values,
and inputs), such that a bomb that lies dormant on the attacker side will be
activated on the user side. The repackaging detection code, which is packed as
the bomb payload, is executed only if the bomb is activated. (2) Unlike many
conventional software tampering detection techniques that try to conceal the
detection code, by leveraging various methods used in malware this design is
non-stealthy, which means that the detection code is not hidden, yet still
resilient to attacks. (3) The proposed system also aims to detect code
tampering, which occurs when malicious code is inserted and hence implies
extraordinary dangers. (4) The decentralized repackaging/tampering detection is
proposed to be used for crowdsourced malware information collection to fight
against malware propagation. (5) Finally, the team is to address how to prevent
the proposed techniques from being abused by malware
authors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.