* 1850269
* CRII: CHS, SCH: Monitoring Heat Stress Through Environmental Sensing
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Dana Habeeb, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 07/31/2024
* USD 190,936.00

Heat waves are responsible for more deaths each year than all other natural
disasters &lt;br/&gt;combined. In urban areas, extreme heat events are
intensified by the Urban Heat Island effect, &lt;br/&gt;which results in even
more extreme microclimates due to the physical layouts of cities, the use
&lt;br/&gt;of certain building materials, and a reduction in natural landscapes.
In this project, the &lt;br/&gt;investigator will identify landscape design
recommendations to mitigate extreme heat hazards &lt;br/&gt;in urban
microclimates. Body-worn and ambient sensors will be used to understand urban
heat &lt;br/&gt;wave patterns and the influences that heat and humidity have on
physiological functions such &lt;br/&gt;as the core body temperature of
individuals utilizing outdoor urban areas. A wearable and &lt;br/&gt;ambient
sensor network will be extended and field-tested in Bloomington, Indiana.
Geographic &lt;br/&gt;information systems will be used to classify urban areas
within Bloomington &lt;br/&gt;into microclimates in order to ascertain exposure
levels of heat and humidity hazards to &lt;br/&gt;residents. A real-time
monitoring system for microclimates during heat extremes will be
&lt;br/&gt;developed using participatory design with stakeholders such as city
planners, public health &lt;br/&gt;officials, green infrastructure experts, and
citizens. Results will include a new understanding of &lt;br/&gt;the effects of
extreme heat events on human health and wellbeing and will provide methods to
&lt;br/&gt;mitigate heat hazards through more effective use of information
technology and urban green &lt;br/&gt;infrastructure.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Urban heat extremes result in the highest number of
fatalities across all types of natural &lt;br/&gt;disasters each year. The
design of cities and urban areas contributes to the intensity of heat
&lt;br/&gt;events through the Urban Heat Island effect. The investigator aims to
use wearable sensors and &lt;br/&gt;embedded environmental sensors to better
understand effects of extreme heat microclimates &lt;br/&gt;on human health. The
method includes an extension of an existing person-environment sensor
&lt;br/&gt;network to collect human physiological data and ambient temperature
variances in &lt;br/&gt;microclimates. Current data and software tools will be
used to explore, classify and integrate data to determine
&lt;br/&gt;relationships between microclimate heat events throughout the city,
interactions with humidity &lt;br/&gt;and wind speed variations, and human
physiological responses, such as core body temperature. &lt;br/&gt;Through
participatory design, prototype visualizations of real-time climactic changes in
&lt;br/&gt;microclimates will be developed. This research will contribute to
collaborative efforts among &lt;br/&gt;stakeholders to minimize risks to human
health and design green infrastructure to mitigate the &lt;br/&gt;harmful
effects of extreme heat events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.