* 1850674
* Context resolution and variability: Identifying learning strategies to optimize hippocampal representations
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Rachel Diana, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 03/31/2024
* USD 564,874.00

A student in a Cognitive Psychology seminar asked, at the end of a unit on long-
term memory: "What do experts know about memory that students can apply to
learning?" This question identifies a key challenge in the field of memory
research: translating cognitive neuroscience findings from the laboratory into
strategies that are useful in the real-world. Although memory researchers have
identified a set of well-accepted findings and strategies for memory success
(for example: elaboration, pattern separation, and transfer-appropriate
processing), these strategies have rarely been integrated or even contrasted
with one another. By doing so in the current project, we may be able to identify
common principles of memory function that translate to real-world learning and
memory. We expect that these common principles will increase our understanding
of how the brain codes memories and will reveal additional strategies that can
be used to improve learning. The ideas from this project will be translated into
strategies that will be taught to students entering college. This outreach
program will increase student confidence and success and is intended to improve
educational outcomes relative to higher education
costs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Well-established principles, including transfer-
appropriate processing, encoding specificity, and elaboration, are known to
produce benefits to long-term memory in the laboratory. However, we do not yet
know: 1) how these principles relate to one another or to hippocampal memory
representations and 2) how these principles can be translated into real-world
implications. The first question is of great theoretical and scientific
significance and must be answered for our understanding of long-term episodic
memory to advance, whereas the second is of great educational and societal
significance and must be answered to improve our educational systems. The
current project develops a unified account of the role of context in episodic
memory, addressing both questions. This account proposes that elaboration,
transfer-appropriate processing, and pattern separation (via hippocampal coding)
have cognitive and neural mechanisms in common whose identification will both
transform our understanding of long-term memory and lead to new strategies for
learning. The objectives of the proposed project are to: 1) investigate the
cognitive and neural mechanisms of transfer-appropriate processing from a new
perspective: as it relates to context and hippocampal activation patterns, 2)
test the prediction, derived from cognitive studies of elaborative rehearsal,
that variability in context and hippocampal activation patterns improves
retrieval, and 3) test the prediction, derived from animal studies of the
hippocampus, that pattern separation of similar events increases context
resolution and cue specificity. The ideas in this project, along with existing
findings, will be taught to incoming university students who are the first in
their family to attend college or who are from underserved populations and may
not previously have been taught effective strategies for independent learning.
The goal of this outreach is to increase confidence and success in college for
these students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.