* 1850606
* Assessing the relationship between strain localization and magmatism during rift evolution
* GEO,OCE
* 05/15/2019,04/30/2024
* Tyrone Rooney, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 04/30/2024
* USD 350,474.00

The majority of Earth's surface is covered in oceans, below which lie rocks that
constitute the oceanic crust. Unlike Earth's continents, which may persist for
billions of years, the oceanic crust is continually destroyed and created. These
dynamic processes lead to the opening and closure of ocean basins, and even the
breaking apart of continents. Continental rifts, which manifest as a series of
interconnected linear to arcuate valleys on continents, are the manifestation of
the process by which continents may split and new oceans form. Insights into the
creation of new oceans thus depends on the processes active within continental
rifts. This project focuses on the generation of large volumes of lavas within
continental rifts. These lavas form the basis of later oceanic crust, but the
mechanism of magma generation is currently unclear. The project focuses on the
East African rift - the premier example of a modern continental rift, and
examines how magmas are generated in the mantle, evolve in the crust, and
eventually erupt in this rift. One of the eventual aims of this project is to
develop an understanding as to why large-volumes of lavas flood onto the surface
of the rift during certain periods, while during other periods the lavas are
restricted to linear belts. This work can feed into evolving models that seek to
constrain the architecture of the crust within rifts and nascent ocean basins.
Insights gained from East Africa have broad implications in understanding rifted
margins globally, and how the crust and offshore basins along these margins
develop. By examining rocks that are exposed in East Africa, we may generate
better conceptual models of regions where these rocks may be buried by
kilometers of sediments (e.g., Eastern U.S. seaboard). Broader Impacts include
undergraduate research experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this proposal new
geochemical and petrographic constraints on lavas from the East African rift
will be obtained. The focus will be on lava fields that represent end members in
eruption style - large lava flows, isolated shields, and smaller lava cones. The
proposed study regions in East Africa are the following: (i) Afar, a region
where researchers vigorously debate if ocean crust is already being formed, and
(ii) Turkana, a region where an earlier rifting event has made the crust thinner
than would be anticipated. The work being undertaken in this proposal will be
arranged around four interlinked questions: (A) What is the mechanism of magma
generation for the different lavas fields? (B) What mantle sources contribute to
magma creation within these lavas fields? (C) How does magma generation/ source
contribution change over time? (D) Is there a difference in the conditions of
magma evolution within the crust between the different lava fields? The region
this project focuses on spans two of the targets elucidated by the GeoPRISMS
Implementation Plan. Turkana lies within the "Primary area for focused
investigations", while Afar lies within the "collaborative target" region. Thus,
the results of this study can be collated with other NSF-sponsored science being
undertaken in the same region to address GeoPRISMS science goals. When combined,
these data will be used to address the science question: "How is strain
accommodated and partitioned throughout the lithosphere, and what are the
controls on strain localization and migration?" The results of this work will
have further impact upon other science questions related to the distribution of
deep mantle material in the East African upper mantle. These questions are
currently being addressed through other interdisciplinary studies and the
proposed work would add a critical component to the the constraints on the
rifting process that is recorded in the recent lavas. When considered in
aggregate, these studies aim to push the boundaries of current knowledge as to
how rifting initiates, evolves, and transitions to oceanic
spreading.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.