* 1850273
* CRII:SCH: Parent-2-Parent: Supporting Dyadic Caregiving Coordination in the Hospital
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2022
* Andrew Miller, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 05/31/2022
* USD 174,791.00

When a child is hospitalized, existing support networks spring into action. In
this unanticipated, stressful situation, parents must quickly absorb complicated
clinical information and take on new caregiving tasks, without abandoning other
responsibilities. Furthermore, within-family communication and coping strategies
of the parents, or dyad, are significant predictors of post-hospitalization
health outcomes. Human-Computer Interaction and Computer-Supported Cooperative
Work researchers are actively studying how technology can support coordination
between children and their care team, and between parents and children. However,
little research has focused on how technology can support and augment the
parenting dyad during hospitalization. Current technologies are not optimized
for these contexts, and may even compound family stress if not carefully
designed and implemented.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-term goal of this
project is to establish fundamental design strategies for social computing that
enable effective dyadic caregiving coordination in unanticipated, stressful
situations, such as the hospitalization of one's child, and show how those
technologies could support decision-making and information sharing amid high
degrees of uncertainty. The specific objective of this proposal is to identify
and demonstrate how social technologies can support and augment the ability of
parenting dyads to effectively communicate and coordinate during
hospitalization. Through a combination of rigorous qualitative investigations,
parent-driven design sessions, and hospital-based pilot technology deployments,
the investigator will address two specific aims: 1) Characterize current
communication and coordination practices within parenting dyads, and 2)
Envision, demonstrate, and verify dyadic caregiving support technologies. This
work will be grounded in the case of pediatric cancer, the leading cause of
disease-related deaths in youth. However, the proposed work has implications for
dyadic caregiving in diverse healthcare contexts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.