* 1850557
* CRII: III: RUI: Effective Protein Characterization via Fast Exact Open Modification Searching
* CSE,IIS
* 02/15/2019,01/31/2020
* David Anastasiu, San Jose State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 01/31/2020
* USD 85,843.00

Proteins form the major building blocks of cells, and protein-protein
interactions provide information about cell functions. Characterizing these
interactions is made possible through mass spectrometry (MS), a technique that
breaks down complex biological samples into much simpler ions and measures their
individual masses. Computer algorithms can then be used to interpret the output
of MS experiments. The advent of tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS), also known as
shotgun proteomics, led to a huge increase in the speed with which researchers
can execute proteomics experiments, which in turn has enabled the creation of
massive databases containing millions of known spectra. This research will
create novel algorithms that will be able to quickly identify which proteins
exist in a biological sample by comparing unknown spectra from the sample
against entire libraries of known spectra. Ultimately, this project will make it
easier for humans to understand the molecular basis of disease and will enable
personalized medicine and identifying new drugs to tackle currently incurable
diseases. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to develop novel
methods for protein characterization in MS/MS experiment results that will
provide increased spectral match effectiveness while scaling to search the
largest existing protein databases and beyond. The key computational component
in shotgun proteomics is matching MS/MS spectra against theoretical spectra or
actual spectra in spectral databases to identify possible peptides (protein
sections). In essence, given a translation of the spectra to points in the
Euclidean space and a chosen proximity function, the algorithmic component in
the search is a nearest neighbor search algorithm. Due to the large size of
spectral databases, the problem has been traditionally solved through a variety
of approximate nearest neighbor search methods and a combination of vector space
and probabilistic proximity measures which are often not scalable and lead to
missed spectral matches. This project aims to address these limitations in two
ways. First, it will develop novel filtering-based exact nearest neighbor search
methods for the shifted dot-product proximity measure, which has been recently
shown to outperform alternatives by accounting for spectral post translational
modifications while searching for matches. The proposed filtering-based methods
prune much of the search space by eliminating potential candidates without
computing their proximity to the query, based on their composition and on
theoretic properties of the proximity measure. Second, the project will develop
effective decomposition techniques for the inherently irregular computation
requirements of the proposed pruning-based search that will enable distributed
methods to search the largest proteomics databases of today, and beyond. The
project will result in the dissemination of the developed methods to the large
computational genomics community and will involve research education of
underrepresented undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.