* 1850608
* RAPID: Observing Heat and Carbon Fluxes with an Autonomous Wind-powered Surface Vehicle in the Gulf Stream
* GEO,OCE
* 11/01/2018,10/31/2019
* Jaime Palter, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 10/31/2019
* USD 40,014.00

Western Boundary Currents (WBCs) such as the Gulf Stream are regions of intense
air-sea exchange and some of the strongest CO2 uptake in the world ocean. Yet
basic questions persist about the mechanisms governing this uptake, partly
because of the difficulty of making sustained measurement in these dynamic
regions. This project will demonstrate that Saildrone, a fast-moving (3-5
knots), high-endurance (over 3 months) autonomous surface platform that measures
lower atmosphere and surface ocean properties, can provide a much-needed, novel
WBC observing strategy. With the integration of a state-of-the-art CO2 sensor
designed for autonomous use by NOAA's Pacific Marine Environment Lab (PMEL),
Saildrone could provide as a potentially transformative solution to observing
air-sea fluxes across the remote and chronically-undersampled WBCs of the
Southern Hemisphere. Thus, the proposed work is an important step toward closing
the global ocean carbon budget. The project will also include some outreach to
the general public. The principal investigator is working with the University of
Rhode Island Office of Marine Programs to coordinate a public event to coincide
with the recovery of the Saildrone in Newport. She also plans to visit a local
elementary school to do a map-reading exercise with a bilingual second grade, in
which they pick a Saildrone waypoint and track its progress toward
it.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main goal of this study is to use
Saildrone to measure wintertime surface heat and CO2 fluxes across the Gulf
Stream. Because of the short space and time scales characterizing their
variability, WBCs present tremendous observing challenges that are not addressed
with Argo float measurements. A state-of-the-art, self-calibrating CO2 sensor
developed by PMEL has collected climate-quality data for hundreds of days on
moored buoys, was recently adapted for use on the Saildrone, and preliminary
missions show that it is capable of collecting climate quality pCO2 data
(accurate to &lt; 2 micro atm) aboard the platform. The principal investigator
of this project recently won the Saildrone award to sail a 30-day mission across
the Gulf Stream in winter 2019. This RAPID project funds the urgent task of
preparing and integrating the Autonomous Surface Vehicle CO2 sensor system
(ASVCO2) in time for the deployment. The Saildrone mission can reveal, for the
first time, the importance of CO2 uptake along the Lagrangian pathway of the
Gulf Stream relative to uptake during mode water formation. The Gulf Stream is
also an ideal region to test the capability of the Saildrone platform as a WBC
air-sea flux observing strategy, as there are nearby observing assets that will
provide independent data for calibration and validation and a recent wintertime
ship-based flux survey to provide valuable data for
comparison.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.