* 1850182
* CRII: AF: Faster Iterative Decisions within First-order Optimization Methods
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2022
* Swati Gupta, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 05/31/2022
* USD 175,000.00

At the heart of most user-centric algorithms today is an optimization engine
trying to provide the best decision with the information observed so far in
time. Examples include recommending preferred items to new consumers, computing
least congested routes in a road network with changing traffic, distributing
power radially over electricity grids with changing demand, and so on. All these
problems have an inherent "combinatorial" structure that constrains the possible
decisions one can take. This combinatorial structure becomes even more complex
when these decisions are required to incorporate fairness and reduce disparate
impact, such as a balanced representation of female/male scientists when a
search query for "scientists" is made. These combinatorial problems are
computationally challenging, necessitating rigorous yet fast algorithms to run
these efficiently in real-world scenarios where decisions must be made in real-
time. A large class of optimization methods prevalent in learning applications,
the so-called first-order optimization methods, work by repeatedly solving
perturbations of similar combinatorial subproblems. This research project will
explore whether the knowledge of "how" the solution was computed to previous
subproblems within first-order optimization methods can be used to speed up
computations in subsequent iterations. This project has the potential of
speeding up a wide range of applications whenever a constrained decision with
combinatorial structure must be made in real-time as mentioned above. The
interdisciplinary nature of this work, spanning first-order optimization methods
and combinatorial algorithms, will benefit students helping prepare a stronger
and a holistic STEM workforce with impact in a large number of applications - at
both undergraduate and graduate levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project serves
as a cornerstone for proper integration of first-order optimization methods
(like Frank-Wolfe (FW), mirror descent (MD) and their variants) and the theory
of combinatorial optimization with wide-ranging applications. It brings together
the theory of data structures, approximation algorithms, parametric analysis in
combinatorial optimization and the computational requirements of iterative
first-order optimization methods to achieve amortized speeds ups in overall
runtime. MD and FW variants rely only on the function value and gradient
information at a single data point in each iteration and this property has
rendered these methods to be used in numerous real-time machine learning
applications. When making constrained combinatorial decisions as described
above, these methods repeatedly compute two main subproblems: (i) linear
optimization in each iteration of the FW variants, and (ii) projections or
convex minimization in each iteration of the MD variants. With this award, the
investigator will explore (a) identification of combinatorial primitives
suitable for amortized analysis within first-order methods, (b) use of
previously discovered tight cuts for iterative projections within mirror descent
variants, (c) decomposition of convex problems, (d) construction of smarter warm
start solutions for first-order optimization, (e) weaker but relevant
approximate models and algorithms for repeated perturbed subproblems. With
recent results closing the gap of possible convergence rates for first-order
optimization in various settings, these questions have become of paramount
importance to enable the next scale up in runtime of constrained decision-making
to real-time user-centric applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.