* 1850379
* CRII: SaTC: Explorng the Real World Applicability of Denial of Service Mitigation via Routing
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2021
* Max Schuchard, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 05/31/2021
* USD 174,860.00

Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS) attacks disrupt the ability of computers to
communicate over the Internet by flooding victims with large volumes of unwanted
network traffic. Due to their high economic impact and low technical complexity,
such attacks remain one of the most problematic and common attacks experienced
by companies, organizations, and high-profile individuals. This research project
explores the viability of mitigating the effects of a distributed denial of
service attack by dynamically adjusting the path traffic takes through the
Internet, causing it avoid links congested with attack traffic. This technique
has a number of advantages over currently deployed techniques which are both
costly and, in many instances, ineffective. The research in this project
additionally helps scientists more broadly understand how the Internet responds
to on-demand re-routing of traffic. The final product of this research is
functional prototype systems that are capable of ensuring that victims of a
distributed denial of service attack can still communicate over the Internet,
while at the same time being inexpensive and deployable on the existing Internet
infrastructure. The project will train students in research as well as
distribute software prototypes for the network operator community to use. It
will also spend efforts to transition research to practice. The adoption of such
systems would help companies avoid the financial harm that comes from
distributed denial of service attacks and secure critical infrastructures, for
example Smart Grids and national defense communications, from such
attacks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project expands our knowledge of how
re-routing based DDoS attack mitigation systems would function in practice. The
experiments being conducted explore three key areas necessary for viable
deployment of such systems. First, the research would validate the feasibility
of re-routing as a security primitive on the live Internet. To explore this,
researchers are attempting to execute re-routing policy on the Internet for
their own network, observing from diverse vantage points the impact on path
selection. These experiments quantify the prevalence of policies that inhibit
the ability to migrate traffic, the number of alternative paths available in
practice, and the independence of those paths. Second, researchers are exploring
the viability of multiple actors successfully utilizing re-routing
simultaneously. Researchers are developing algorithms that both compute the
maximal amount of re-routing the Internet infrastructure can support and
allocate those resources to make the most efficient use of this capacity.
Lastly, researchers are enhancing re-routing based mitigation to function
against dynamic adversaries. By considering the capacity of adversaries to also
re-route their malicious traffic, researchers are building alternative path
selection strategies that minimize the ability of the adversary to violate
traffic isolation, and at the same time are exploring the viability of using a
moving target defensive strategy through continuously re-routing critical
traffic. This project results in functional software prototypes of a re-routing
based distributed denial of service mitigation system that are freely supplied
to the networking operator community for their use. Researchers are facilitating
the system's transition to practice (TTP) by reaching out to the network
operator community, both educating them on the possibilities of such solutions
and as well as receiving feedback and suggestions for future
enhancement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.