* 1850988
* NSFGEO-NERC: Mechanisms of Adaptation to Terrestrial Antarctica through Comparative Physiology and Genomics of Antarctic and sub-Antarctic Insects
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Andrew Michel, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Gast
* 07/31/2024
* USD 780,033.00

The cold, dry terrestrial environments of Antarctica are inhospitable for
insects, and only three midge species make Antarctica home. Of these, Belgica
antarctica is the only species found exclusively in Antarctica, and it has been
a resident of Antarctica since the continent split from South America ~30
million years ago. Thus, this species is an excellent system to model the
biological history of Antarctica throughout its repeated glaciation events and
shifts in climate. This insect is also a classic example of extreme adaptation,
and much previous work has focused on identifying the genetic and physiological
mechanisms that allow this species to survive where no other insect is capable.
However, it has been difficult to pinpoint the unique evolutionary adaptations
that are required to survive in Antarctica due to a lack of information from
closely related Antarctic and sub-Antarctic species. This project will compare
adaptations, genome sequences, and population characteristics of four midge
species that span an environmental gradient from sub-Antarctic to Antarctic
habitats. In addition to B. antarctica, these species include two species that
are strictly sub-Antarctic and a third that is native to the sub-Antarctic but
has invaded parts of Antarctica. The researchers, comprised of scientists from
the US, UK, Chile, and France, will sample insects from across their geographic
range and measure their ability to tolerate environmental stressors (i.e., cold
and desiccation), quantify molecular responses to stress, and compare the makeup
of the genome and patterns of genetic diversity. This research will contribute
to a greater understanding of adaptation to extremes, to an understanding of
biodiversity on the planet and to understanding and predicting changes
accompanying environmental change. The project will train two graduate students
and two postdoctoral researchers, and a K-12 educator will be a member of the
field team and will assist with fieldwork and facilitate outreach with schools
in the US. The project includes partnership activities with several STEM
education organizations to deliver educational content to K-12 and secondary
students. This is a project that is jointly funded by the National Science
Foundation's Directorate of Geosciences (NSF/GEO) and the National Environment
Research Council (NERC) of the United Kingdom (UK) via the NSF/GEO-NERC Lead
Agency Agreement. This Agreement allows a single joint US/UK proposal to be
submitted and peer-reviewed by the Agency whose investigator has the largest
proportion of the budget. Each Agency funds the proportion of the budget and the
investigators associated with its own country. UK participation in this project
includes deploying scientists as part of the field team, supporting field and
sampling logistics at remote Antarctic sites, and genome sequencing, annotation,
and analyses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on the key
physiological adaptations and molecular processes that allow a select few insect
species to survive in Antarctica. The focal species are all wingless with
limited dispersal capacity, suggesting there is also significant potential to
locally adapt to variable environmental conditions across the range of these
species. The central hypothesis is that similar molecular mechanisms drive both
population-level adaptation to local environmental conditions and
macroevolutionary changes across species living in different environments. The
specific aims of the project are to 1) Characterize conserved and species-
specific adaptations to extreme environments through comparative physiology and
transcriptomics, 2) Compare the genome sequences of these species to identify
genetic signatures of extreme adaption, and 3) Investigate patterns of
diversification and local adaptation across each species? range using population
genomics. The project establishes an international collaboration of researchers
from the US, UK, Chile, and France with shared interests and complementary
expertise in the biology, genomics, and conservation of Antarctic arthropods.
The Broader Impacts of the project include training students and partnering with
the Living Arts and Science Center to design and implement educational content
for K-12 students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.