* 1850672
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Understanding the Brain-Machine Interface in the Engineering of Prosthetic Technologies
* SBE,BCS
* 01/15/2019,12/31/2019
* Joao Biehl, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 12/31/2019
* USD 25,200.00

People suffering from traumatic limb loss often experience both withdrawal and
heightening of sensation. Deprived of the limb's sensory feedback, roughly 80%
of amputees experience intense, mysterious phantom limb pain. Scientists are
developing brain-controlled prosthetics that enable patients to move their
prosthetic limbs through thought, while also receiving sensory feedback (touch)
from the environment back into the body. Yet touch, pain, and sensation are
difficult to quantify, deeply subjective experiences, requiring a delicate
process of communication, collaboration, and translation among patients,
scientists, and engineers. How do patients' sensory experience, their sense of
being in a body in space, and their awareness of their phantom limb, influence
the development of such biotechnologies? How do patients actively participate,
and even intervene, in the design of human-machine interfaces? These are the
questions addressed in this project, to inform the development of
biotechnologies. In addition to providing funding for the training of a graduate
student in anthropology, the project will broadly disseminate its data and
findings to aid organizations in developing more effective biotechnology design
and clinical practice to improve the lives of disabled
individuals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Graduate student, Alexandra Middleton, under
the supervision of Dr. Joao Biehl of Princeton University, will investigate the
role of patients as simultaneously experimental subjects and active co-
innovators in human-machine interface design. To understand how the brain-
machine interface is engineered, the project examines the role of patient
experience and feedback in the development of biotechnology. This ethnographic
research will be conducted in Gothenburg, Sweden, a global epicenter of
engineering brain-machine interface prosthetic technologies. The researcher will
follow two clinical trials, accompanying patients as they engage with
experimental neuroprosthetics in the laboratory, clinic, and their homes. These
devices are the first in the world of their kind to travel outside the
laboratory for home use in everyday life. Ethnographic focus will be placed on
the home as a key site of science-in-the-making. Through participant observation
in patients' homes and interviews with both patients and family members, the
researcher will investigate how everyday experiences constitute a particular
type of expertise about the use and possibilities of these devices. Circling
back to the clinic and laboratory, the researcher will trace how these forms of
expertise inform decisions in design as well as therapeutic communication.
Archival research will examine the particular economic and social contexts that
make such experimentation and development possible. Findings from this research
will offer insight into the ways that human perspective and technology use can
inform laboratory development and clinical communication, as well as
highlighting the importance of involving disabled individuals in the design of
technologies aimed at enhancing their lives. These insights will inform clinical
trial design and practice among scientists, clinicians, and patients, as well as
human-machine relations generally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.