* 1850360
* CRII: III: Computational framework for disparate data integration  to study cancer drug resistance
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2019,12/31/2022
* Sha Cao, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 12/31/2022
* USD 174,747.00

With the advent of high-throughput biotechnology, people can now investigate a
biological system with multiple bioassays using diverse types of study objects.
The convolution of multiple bioassays, study objects and exposure conditions
produces a wealth of rich information about the biological system, and at the
same time, poses great challenge on how to integrate heterogeneous data sources
and extract sufficient knowledge that cannot be gained from any single dataset
alone. Depending on the complexity level of the convolution, direct data
integration is often used when combing information from multiple bioassays on a
cohort of similar study objects, and indirect integration via knowledge transfer
is generally attractive when it comes to the power of incorporating relatively
more diverse data types. Direct information integration relies on concordant and
well annotated data structures, and the connections between datasets are usually
easily understood. These methodologies have to meet many computational
challenges owing to different sizes, formats and dimensionalities of the data
being integrated. In biological studies, researchers tend to study their system
using models varying in terms of species (human vs. mouse), compositions (tissue
vs. cell lines, single cells) and/or exposures conditions. Thus, the datasets
generated are drawn from different feature space and/or different sample
distributions, where direct integration becomes infeasible. These highly
disparate datasets may each have the potential to provide complimentary
information key to the research question being carried out, and thus it is also
urgent to construct a transfer learning method tailored for high-throughput
bioassay data so that existing heterogeneous datasets could be re-purposed in a
future study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address these challenges, this project
will develop new classes of computational methods for direct information
integration and indirect knowledge transfer, and ultimately leverage structures
and relations among various bioassay datasets for better understanding of a
biological system, for example, cancer drug resistance mechanism. The research
team will achieve their goals through exerting the following two objectives.
First, they will develop a novel formulation for information distillation on
multiple -omics data so that knowledge could be easily transplantable to future
studies, which would otherwise be prevented due to technical and platform bias.
The framework consists of a supervised sparse clustering method for qualitative
representation of coherent signatures, together with a co-clustering approach to
detect local low rank structures. Second, they will develop a novel transfer
learning method by imposing the structural regularities learnt from the source
domains to any target domain. The key assumption is that the structural
regularities are invariant to technical and platform bias, so they are ideal
vehicle for knowledge transfer. The project is expected to develop novel
computational tools that can effectively explore a wide range of heterogeneous
datasets, and it has great potential to minimize the cost on recollecting new
training data, by maximizing utilization of existing information and fully using
the knowledge derived therefrom to substantiate our understanding of a
biological/biomedical system. Hence the project will have far-reaching economic
and societal impacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.