* 1850849
* Critical tests of neurocognitive relationships
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Ramesh Srinivasan, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 08/31/2023
* USD 674,807.00

The link between patterns of activity in the brain and human actions has been
studied for a long time. Careful study of these patterns has led to great
scientific and technological progress. Brain-computer interfaces and brain-
controlled prosthetic limbs are two examples. These technologies depend strongly
on the power to tie brain signals to (intended) actions. In this project, we use
state-of-the-art methods in cognitive science to develop a precise mathematical
model of the link between brain activity and human behavior. Our theory now
needs to be tested with new experimental data in adverse conditions. The
challenges that will test whether this model can predict the brain-behavior link
in new experiments, new behaviors, and new measures of brain activity. A strong
model of brain and behavior will improve our knowledge of the brain and help
future research and technological development. It can also improve the accuracy
of science or technology that uses brain signals, including brain-computer
interfaces. The project will benefit researchers outside our lab in other ways.
We will document analyses and experiments as part of a series of video lectures.
We will also freely share our data, code, and methods online. This will help
other researchers to verify our findings and to educate members of the general
public who have an interest in cognitive neuroscience. Finally, the project will
involve junior scientists who will receive training and start a career in
neuroscience or cognitive science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary advantage of
joint modeling is that it improves researchers' ability to estimate parameters
of neural, cognitive, or behavioral models by using constraints imposed by one
or more additional data modes. This has already allowed us to construct genuine
neurocognitive models that are jointly informed by behavioral and neural data.
We have developed a multimodal sequential accumulation model that makes
predictions about the combination of reaction time, accuracy, and neuroelectric
data, and that allows for conclusions not possible from either type of data
individually. We will now test the generalizability of this model to other
contexts. After first training a model on a relatively small data set, we will
extrapolate its predictions to (a) new tasks by the same participants; (b) new
participants in the same task; (c) new paradigms (i.e., tasks with new response
modalities) by the same participants; and (d) new tasks by new participants. For
a rigorous test of the linkage between the neural and behavioral data, the
experiments will involve manipulations that selectively affect the cognitive
components (visual preprocessing, motor preparation time, evidence accumulation)
as well as corresponding human behavior (reaction times, accuracies, and choice
behavior) and electrophysiological signals (ERP latencies and magnitudes and EMG
muscle preparation signatures).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.