* 1850802
* Individual Differences in Habitual Sleep Quality and Episodic Memory Network Activity Across the Adult Lifespan
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2019,02/28/2022
* Mark Wheeler, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 02/28/2022
* USD 449,958.00

One of the most common and distressing cognitive declines in normal aging is in
episodic memory. In everyday life this might manifest as forgetting a person's
name but not the person. Substantial inter-individual variability exists, with
some older individuals showing episodic memory performance and neural
recruitment equivalent to some young. Existing theories suggest that malleable
lifestyle factors, like sleep, contribute to this variability but are not yet
well-informed by such evidence. Established age-related declines in habitual
sleep quality, the relationship between sleep and neural functioning in memory-
supporting brain regions, and the role of sleep in episodic memory consolidation
make sleep an essential lifestyle factor to examine. The primary goal of the
proposed research is to elucidate the extent to which individual differences in
sleep quality contribute to those in neural activity that, in turn, contribute
to episodic memory success across the normal adult lifespan. Students from high
school through graduate level receive hands on training in all aspects of
conducting cognitive neuroscience research pertinent to human memory functioning
and the health and lifestyle factors that influence it in diverse, adult
lifespan samples. The potential impact of this research for understanding how
malleable, individual difference factors affect cognitive decline in aging is
high. These results from a large, racially diverse sample will inform existing
theories of cognitive changes across the lifespan and future interventions by
providing knowledge of the approximate age, specific brain systems, and aspects
of memory for which sleep quality is most important and for which sleep
interventions may be most effective in the general
population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Difficulty utilizing cognitive control and the
patterns of prefrontal cortical (PFC) activity underlying it is a major
contributor to episodic memory decline in normal aging. Sleep quality is related
to PFC integrity and its associated network connectivity. Normal aging has been
shown to negatively affect this activity, sleep quality, and episodic memory
performance but the relationship between these variables is unclear. The
overarching goal of this project is to determine the extent to which age-related
sleep disruptions contribute to those in PFC network activity during learning
that, in turn, affect episodic memory performance. A mediation model is proposed
in which poor sleep quality partially mediates the negative impact of healthy
aging on episodic memory via reduced resolution of interference during learning,
a major age-related cognitive control deficit. A diverse sample of 90 young,
middle-aged, and older adult participants without sleep disorders, perform
multiple episodic memory tasks that tax different interference resolution
functions is measured to assess the generalizability of the negative impact of
poor sleep. Episodic memory is assessed behaviorally and supporting brain
activity measured with fMRI. In order to evaluate the specificity of the model
to episodic memory, both episodic and item memory are tested. Memory is tested
immediately following learning and after a 24-hour delay in order to separately
assess the impact of sleep on new learning from consolidation. The influence of
multiple confounds, including medication, naps, depression, and exercise is
controlled through screening and statistical analyses. Objective measures of
sleep are obtained using actigraphy, the best method for assessing habitual
sleep patterns over multiple days for a large number of individuals naturally,
in their homes, with minimal intrusion. Mediation results from average sleep
estimates, the night immediately prior to memory testing, and night-to-night
variability are compared in order to separate the impact of habitually poor
sleep from variable or a poor night's sleep. Univariate analyses are used to
identify PFC regions that support resolution of interference defined by activity
that is correlated on a trial-by-trial basis with multivariate pattern analysis
(MVPA)-derived interference signals. Functional connectivity analyses are
additionally applied to identify the networks affected by sleep
quality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.