* 1850319
* CRII:IIS:Topology Aware Configuration Spaces
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2022
* Chinwe Ekenna, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Juan Wachs
* 05/31/2022
* USD 174,146.00

Motion planning is an important concept in robotics with a simple definition -
find a path for a robot from its start to a goal position, where the start and
goal is determined by the task the robot is expected to perform e.g., navigate a
factory floor, manipulate an arm to pick up an object etc. This however is
difficult to model and compute. To efficiently plan motions neccessitates having
complete information about the robot's environment beforehand, then building
efficient algorithms that produces a trajectory the robot can utilize;
unfortunately, this has proven difficult to achieve. To mitigate this
shortcoming, sampling-based algorithms were developed that approximate the
information given about the environment. Analysis of these algorithms shows that
if a trajectory exists, these sampling algorithms will find such trajectory. The
question that arises, though, is how well was the environment information
approximated to ensure a high success rate. This project will develop algorithms
that better approximate the environment information planning space by producing
a measure for this approximation using topology and geometric based
formulations. This project will give more control to sampling algorithms to help
determine what areas in the environment needs more attention and representation,
which will in turn improve on the time needed to perform motion
planning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Motivated by the increasing need for motion
planning algorithms that are fast and accurate even when they approximate the
planning space, and a need to also measure such approximations so as to better
manipulate and control the planning process, this project aims to devise a set
of formal representations and algorithms to a) better characterize the topology
of the planning space, b) combine formal methods to plan and approximate the
planning space, c) provide a measure of such approximations and utilize this
information to better guide planning in difficult regions, and d) subsequently
reduce planning time and memory use which will potentially lead to more real
time planning algorithms. In addition, the algorithms and theorems developed in
this project will be adaptable to any planning method in any type of environment
(dynamic, complex or heterogeneous). This research thus removes a major barrier
in the current practice of motion planning where approximate techniques are the
state of the art. This project will greatly increase the scalability of motion
planning algorithms because it will be topologically rich with information,
measure the sampling approximations made in the planning space, and subsequently
give a more informed description of these planning spaces. This project will
capture in a unique and novel way the topology of the planning space using
mathematical formulations such as the Vietoris Rips complex, graph "gluing", and
an innovative use of simplicial collapses in planning
algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.