* 1850243
* CRII: RI: Stochastic Optimization via Embedding Counting as Optimization with Randomized Constraints
* CSE,IIS
* 03/15/2019,02/28/2022
* Yexiang Xue, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Roger Mailler
* 02/28/2022
* USD 174,941.00

Stochastic optimization is a problem-solving method that makes use of randomness
in the world. Randomness arises naturally in many applications ranging from
economics, operational research, and artificial intelligence. Take the network
design problem for wild-life animal protection as an example. The movements of
wild-life animals can be described using a stochastic function. The goal is to
decide optimal protection measures that maximize animals' dispersal in
expectation. Solving the network design problem, a special case of stochastic
optimization, would help ecologists and government officials to prioritize
environmental protection plans wisely, which is meaningful in securing our
sustainable future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nevertheless, stochastic optimization
is highly intractable because it combines two intractable problems, one of which
is the inner counting problem to compute the expectation across exponentially
many probabilistic outcomes, the other of which is the outer optimization
problem to search for the optimal policy that maximizes the expectation. This
proposal focuses on expanding a novel approach, Embedding Counting as
Optimization with Randomized Constraints (ECOR), to solve stochastic
optimization problems. ECOR approximates intractable counting sub-problems with
optimization queries subject to randomized parity constraints, which are in turn
embedded into the global optimization task. As a result, the stochastic
optimization inference can be reduced to a single joint optimization of a
polynomial size of the original problem with provable guarantees. This research
focuses on expanding ECOR into a family of approaches that is practical for
machine learning and network design applications. The limitation of the current
ECOR algorithm is mainly due to its implementation as a single, large constraint
program, in addition to the long parity constraints, which provide strong
probabilistic guarantees but are challenging computationally. The key principle
to scale up ECOR is to take an integrated view of the inner counting and the
outer maximization problem. The algorithmic contribution will be driven by the
intuitions gained from working on several real-world
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.