* 1850631
* Conference:  Building Departmental Capacity for Best Practices in Undergraduate Life Sciences Education in the Southeastern US; June, 2019; North Carolina A&amp;T State University
* BIO,DBI
* 02/15/2019,12/31/2023
* Alfredo Leon, University of North Carolina at Wilmington
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 12/31/2023
* USD 99,552.00

The Southeastern US consistently lags other regions in educational attainment
and economic performance, highlighting the need for dissemination and
implementation of best practices in teaching and learning at all levels. The
2011 AAAS publication, "Vision and Change in Undergraduate Biology Education: A
Call to Action," provides comprehensive guidelines for content, skills, and
teaching practices that are still considered the "gold standard" for
undergraduate life sciences education. The Southeast Region of the Partnership
for Undergraduate Life Science Education (SERP) will host a professional
development institute on the campus of North Carolina Agricultural and Technical
University in summer 2019, with a follow-up event hosted in conjunction with the
annual meeting of the Association of Southeastern Biologists in spring 2020. The
Institute will engage sixteen teams in a virtuous cycle of assessment and
reforms based on the recommendations in "Vision and Change." Teams will include
representatives from all institution types, from community colleges to research-
intensive universities, as well as significant representation of Minority
Serving Institutions. Institutional teams will be comprised of both faculty and
administrators to ensure representation of both grassroots and institutional
stakeholders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has two primary objectives: (1)
to develop a network of life sciences departments engaged in a cycle of
continual improvement; and (2) to conduct an evidence-based assessment of a
systems model for undergraduate life sciences reform. The Institute will employ
a strategy of shared-visioning, which requires substantial communication,
learning, and collaboration among all stakeholders. The agenda is designed to
help teams build a common language to enable discussion of important issues
(e.g., course-embedded research, metacognition, etc.), identify shared
priorities for improvement at the level of faculty, department, and institution,
and draft an action plan for short-term and long-term reform efforts. By
focusing on department-level transformation, the project builds capacity for
long-term systemic changes to educational practice and improved student
learning. Because public dissemination and formative assessment of these efforts
are critical to validating team efforts and as providing accountability for
institutional teams, a follow-up event will be held in conjunction with the 2020
meeting of the Association of Southeastern Biologists. All teams will make a
public poster presentation of their action plan, efforts to date, and initial
assessment results. A separate workshop during the ASB meeting will be used to
collect more detailed assessment data from each team, as well as provide time
for inter-team sharing of successes and challenges. Finally, a public workshop
will be conducted to introduce the general ASB membership to the recommendations
of "Vision and Change."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.