* 1850447
* Strategies: Understanding Weather Extremes with Big Data: Inspiring Rural Youth in Data Science
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Kevin Waterman, Education Development Center
* Standard Grant
* Robert Russell
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,195,985.00

This project will advance efforts of the Innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST) program to better understand and promote practices
that increase students' motivations and capacities to pursue careers in fields
of science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM). Advances in
computing technology have ushered in an era of big data in science. As
scientists increasingly rely on large, professionally collected data sets for
scientific discovery, there is a critical need to build a scientific workforce
with robust skills in making sense of multivariate data. The project will
develop and research four model curriculum units and an interactive experience
with weather scientists to promote important scientific data practices and
interest in big data science careers among middle-school students in underserved
New England rural areas. Designed as 2-week data investigations, the units will
provide students with hands-on opportunities to analyze and model large-scale
weather data collected from the summit and lower elevations of Mt. Washington,
NH (the highest mountain in the eastern United States), as well as data
collected from students' local weather stations. Students will learn to
describe, explain, model, and predict extreme weather events both in their local
settings as well as at Mount Washington Observatory, a site that has recorded
some of the most extreme weather conditions in the world. Students will conduct
these activities using the Common Online Data Analysis Platform (CODAP) and
SageModeler, two online resources developed with NSF funding to support students
in middle school and beyond with visualizing, modeling, and analyzing large-
scale scientific data. They will also learn from and interact with weather
scientists through a virtual Chat with a scientist to deepen their
understandings of their own data investigations and to gain insights into
scientific careers that use big data. The project will disseminate research
findings and educational resources through a variety of channels to reach a
diverse and cross-disciplinary group of researchers, educators, and members of
the general public. Project findings and resources will be made available
through public education websites, conference presentations, peer-reviewed and
practitioner publications, social media, and further dissemination through
conventional media including print, radio, and television.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop a new multi-faceted set of
science learning resources targeted to rural, underserved middle-school students
and research the potential of these experiences to promote these students'
interests and competence in scientific data analysis and modeling. The project
team will collect a variety of qualitative and quantitative data during each
phase to inform unit development and to address the project?s research
questions. During the early feedback phase, the team will explore the
feasibility of using WeatherX units by sharing initial unit ideas and activities
with teachers and soliciting their feedback through written surveys and focus-
groups During the alpha testing phases, the team will continue to explore the
feasibility of using WeatherX units as teachers implement the units with
students. The team will attend to any variations in how teachers enact the units
and the ways in which the units may support student interest and engagement in
data analysis, modeling, and scientific careers. To address these questions, the
project team will collect survey and focus-group data from teachers and
additional data through teacher implementation logs, teacher individual
interviews, classroom observations, student surveys, student focus-groups and
student work samples. During the later testing phases, the project team will
focus less on feasibility of unit use and more on unit enactment, mechanisms by
which the units may support student learning, and quantitative measures of
improvement in student learning and interest in data analysis, modeling, and
scientific careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.