* 1850317
* CRII: CSR: System Techniques to Exploit the Byte-Accessibility of Solid-State Drives
* CSE,CNS
* 02/15/2019,01/31/2023
* Jian Huang, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 01/31/2023
* USD 175,000.00

Flash-based solid-state drive (SSD) has been the backbone of modern storage
systems to support a growing number of data-intensive applications such as graph
analytics and databases. For decades, systems software and applications used a
generic block interface to access data in SSDs. Today it is feasible to access
SSDs in both byte and block granularity through memory mapped input/output
interfaces. However, it is still unclear how byte-addressable SSDs will be
integrated in today's memory-storage hierarchy, how will they affect the design
and implementation of systems software such as file systems, and how
applications will benefit from the byte-accessible property of
SSDs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project proposes to investigate the systems
techniques to support and exploit the byte-accessibility of SSDs in modern
memory-storage hierarchy. First, the project proposes to rethink the unified
memory-storage hierarchy and efficiently use byte-addressable SSD as part of the
main memory to ease the management and programmability of the dual byte and
block-accessible interfaces. Second, the project proposes adaptive page
migration mechanisms to enable applications to gain benefits from both byte-
addressable, large-scale SSD and fast dynamic random-access memory (DRAM)
concurrently and transparently. Third, the project proposes a new abstraction of
fine-grained data persistence which will rethink the design and implementation
of data persistency mechanisms and further reduce the associated performance
overhead and redundant writes to storage devices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As SSDs
have been widely deployed in various computing platforms, the proposed research
activities will benefit many fields of study with high-performance persistent
storage requirements including scientific computing, big data analytics, and
financial services. The project will also carve a path for technology transition
to practice through industrial collaborations, as well as facilitate research
activities for undergraduate and underrepresented students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will integrate the research developments and
results into a new course that centers around memory and storage technologies.
The resulting software, dataset, publications, and course materials will be
released through an open-source repository on GitHub:
https://github.com/sprlab/uniflash and maintained for at least five years beyond
the completion of this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.