* 1850945
* Collaborative Research: Tracking fine-scale selection to temperature at the invasion front of a highly dispersive marine predator
* GEO,OCE
* 05/15/2019,04/30/2024
* Patrick McDonald, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 04/30/2024
* USD 222,500.00

Marine invasive species pose a serious and ongoing risk to ocean ecosystems and
the economies that rely on them. Understanding how such species adapt rapidly to
new environments is key to preventing and managing invasions. Traditionally, the
focus has been on inherent traits and flexibility of an invasive species,
ignoring the potential for evolutionary change after introduction. However,
recent research has shown that some marine species may evolve specific genomic
features which allow highly efficient selection over as little as a single
generation. This project tests the importance of genomic traits in allowing
marine invasive species to survive and thrive on new shores. Its focus is on the
high-impact invasive European green crab, which has spread over 1,500 km of the
West Coast of North America since 1989 and has very recently begun expanding
into the Salish Sea. This project tracks the earliest stages of green crab
invasion into a new environment where the species is predicted to have
substantial ecological and economic impacts. Genetic differences are followed
over time and space across the entire West Coast, with a focus on crabs found in
the Salish Sea where the species is currently expanding. Genetic data is
complemented by oceanographic modeling to predict the spread of green crabs into
the Salish Sea and across the West Coast. Finally, targeted sequencing and prior
sampling are used to probe the genomic traits underlying these changes and
determine if the same traits have played a role in the species' invasive success
on other shores. Sampling for this project is conducted by Washington Sea
Grant's Crab Team, an expansive outreach and monitoring program powered largely
by hundreds of volunteers who monitor green crabs across 3,000 miles of
coastline in the Salish Sea. The results of this project are shared with these
volunteers and other stakeholders and is used to inform trans-boundary green
crab management and spread prediction on the West
Coast.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent work has hypothesized that genomic
architecture, which has been increasingly discovered to play a role in local
adaptation, may also be key to a species' ability to adapt quickly when gene
flow is high. This project integrates multiple approaches to track the speed and
dynamics of adaptation-with-gene flow across a thermal gradient in an explicit
oceanographic context using the invasive European green crab (Carcinus maenas).
Prior work in this system identified a suite of genes that appear to constitute
balanced polymorphisms whose allele frequencies correlate strongly with site
temperature against a homogeneous neutral genetic background. This project has
three main goals: 1) To examine fine-scale selection to temperature over a
comprehensive spatial and temporal data set comprising most of the species'
history on the West Coast, 2) To track the expanding range front in the Salish
Sea, comparing the genetic trajectory of individuals at the range edge with
oceanographic modeling of dispersal, and 3) To characterize the genomic regions
surrounding putative balanced polymorphisms and examine the ubiquity of their
association with temperature across globally replicated populations. This
coupled evolutionary oceanography approach represents an unprecedented test of
the speed and nature of rapid adaptation in a highly dynamic natural marine
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.