* 1850232
* Collaborative Research: RUI: Marriage Attitudes in the 21st Century.
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* DLane Compton, University of New Orleans
* Standard Grant
* Melanie Hughes
* 07/31/2024
* USD 261,666.00

Marriage is an important foundation by which individuals receive benefits
guaranteed by U. S. laws, signal their transition to adulthood, and participate
in family life. We know that attitudes towards marriage have changed in the late
20th and early 21st centuries as a function of evolving norms; there have also
been recent changes in rates of marriage in U.S. sub-populations. Yet most of
what is known about attitudes towards marriage comes from much older surveys,
some of which are based on geographically limited samples. This project examines
American attitudes and sentiments toward issues of marriage, with particular
focus on sub-populations whose take up rates of marriage have recently shifted.
There will also be attention devoted to how marriage may be shaping adult lives
and decision-making processes related to marriage in the 21st century. Findings
will help to chart how changes in attitudes towards marriage may be tied to
larger societal changes in laws, attitudes, and for whom such changes are most
notable. Findings will have implications for policies relevant to supporting
marriage as one foundation for social life in the United States.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates marriage attitudes in
the early 21st century using both quantitative and qualitative methods. The
first component will be a survey based on a national sample of 2,700 adults. The
project will build on previously tested survey questions and add questions
related to the experience of marriage as well as divorce. This will permit
comparisons across sub-groups that vary by social characteristics. The survey
will also allow comparisons across regional contexts, comparing adults in states
with varying histories of marriage support. The second component will consist of
interviews with 120 individuals. Interview questions will focus on explaining
reasons behind attitudes and decisions to marry or opt out. The sampling
strategy for the interview component allows comparisons between those living in
four different social contexts, thus enriching the regional comparisons afforded
by the survey data. The findings will inform sociological theories regarding
marriage, divorce, and related changes across the life course that implicate
both legal rights as well as family formation and
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by Sociology Program
and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.