* 1850438
* CRII: CHS: Adaptive Virtual Environments for a Prolonged Exposure Therapy of Attention Deficits on Autism Spectrum
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2023
* Yi Li, Kennesaw State University Research and Service Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 03/31/2023
* USD 174,498.00

The goal of this research is to develop and evaluate an adaptive virtual reality
(VR) system that will enable an innovative therapy for children with attention
deficit on the autism spectrum. The prevalence of autism spectrum disorder (ASD)
in the United State has grown significantly in recent years, and while there
have been some successful efforts to address this issue by exploiting VR-based
therapies, most of them merely use VR as an alternative way to simulate existing
approaches. An important feature of VR technology - the ability to generate
"impossible experiences" (i.e., experiences that cannot be created in the real
world, such as a chair disappearing upon the user's gaze) - seems to be missing
in these systems, because this feature was not available when most traditional
ASD therapies were developed. The envisaged system will employ specifically
designed "impossible experiences" to deliver an individualized therapy that
addresses the attention deficits of children with ASD. The research will improve
the learning ability for children with ASD and provide novel design guidelines
for future VR systems used in ASD therapy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will
study research questions and develop the system incrementally. The overall logic
of the system is: 1) Expose the user to a virtual environment to finish a task
(e.g., listen to a virtual teacher talking); 2) Detect the user's attention with
eye-tracking data and physiological signals, then remove all the detected
distractions (e.g., a red mug) from the virtual environment; 3) Gradually
restore all distractions into the virtual environment, expose the user to one
more distraction object at a time and reinforce the correct attention. To
implement this strategy, the PI will first explore attention capture in VR and
strategies for reinforcement in VR through short user studies. Then, the
effectiveness of the entire system will be evaluated through a six-month long,
multiple-baseline design across participants study. All the studies will be
conducted with K-12 students with medium to high levels of
ASD.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.