* 1850102
* CRII: SCH: A Computational Toolbox for Analysis of Big Brain Data
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2022
* Maria Holland, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 05/31/2022
* USD 180,870.00

The brain is our most complex and least understood organ. Due to the recent
proliferation of large public neuroimaging data repositories, researchers have
access to an unprecedented amount of data, but in many ways the amount of data
has surpassed our abilities to analyze it. With pressing health questions
attracting the interest of scientists, clinicians, and engineers, we have an
urgent need for computational tools that integrate the methods and expertise of
different fields. This project seeks to advance the analysis of big brain data
by developing, using, and sharing novel open-source computational tools for the
modeling and analysis of cortical thickness, an indicator of healthy brain
development. Through the analysis of two large data sets containing over 500
individual scans, a baseline for cortical thickness variation throughout healthy
development will be generated. Numerical simulations will also shed light on the
effect of the mechanical forces that give rise to the brain?s unique shape. The
computational tools developed will be made available for use by other
researchers to further leverage existing open access databases of MRI scans.
Beyond that, this project has the potential to produce new insights with
clinical applications in the analysis of neurological disorders such as Autism
Spectrum Disorder, Alzheimer's Disease, and Parkinson's Disease. Alongside this
trans-disciplinary project, the team will also develop a student-written blog,
intended for the general public, on interesting investigations in the field of
biomechanics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Gyrification, or the process by which the
brain develops its characteristic wrinkles and folds, is the result of both
biological processes and mechanical forces. These elements, tightly coupled and
affecting each other, affect both the form and function of the brain. This
project will increase the biological fidelity of the finite element simulations
used to model gyrification by representing cerebrospinal fluid pressure,
neuronal apoptosis, and synaptic pruning through the development of new material
models that describe heterogeneous, anisotropic, growing and remodeling tissue.
These computational simulations will generate a deeper understanding of the role
of mechanical forces in the evolution of cortical thickness, which varies
regionally both within and between individuals. By introducing a new metric of
interest that allows for the characterization of thickness variations on
arbitrarily small regions, this project will develop new computational tools for
the analysis of within-subject and between-subject variations of cortical
thickness and the characterization of these patterns in healthy development. The
successful completion of this research will result in novel computational tools
for neurological imaging analysis of big brain data in the many public
neuroimaging databases, generating additional value out of existing
resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.