* 1850422
* Uncertainty Aware Routing in Stochastic Transportation Networks with Correlated Link Travel-Times
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Samitha Samaranayake, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Siqian Shen
* 06/30/2023
* USD 174,999.00

The goal of this project is to develop mathematical models and algorithms for
enabling large-scale route planning tools that account for the uncertainty of
travel-times on road networks. The project addresses two major challenges. The
first is to develop methods for converting very large amounts of historical
vehicle trajectory data (e.g. where vehicles are at what times) into compact
data representations. The approaches that are to be developed will account for
real-time information (such as weather status), propagation in traffic
congestion (accidents slow down nearby road segments) and user preferences (some
drivers are less aggressive than others). The second stage involves developing
route planning algorithms that will efficiently integrate these rich data
models, and provide users with advanced route planning assistance. The project
is expected to have strong educational impacts by providing undergraduate
research opportunities, internships with industry, and research projects for
graduate courses and projects. The outreach activities will target women and
underrepresented minorities (including programs targeted at high school
students) to expose them to cutting edge transportation
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Enabling large-scale uncertainty aware route
planning applications requires advances in the areas of probabilistic travel-
time predictions using large-scale GPS-based vehicle trajectory data and
stochastic routing algorithms for networks with correlated link travel-times.
This project aims to solve a problem at the intersection of large-scale data
modeling and routing algorithms in the context of transportation networks. From
a technical perspective, this requires developing new models, work-flows and
algorithms that span the areas of traffic modeling and prediction, machine
learning, and algorithm engineering. The project will have a strong focus on
developing computational tractable solutions, in the context of real-world
applications, with the goal of enabling the deployment of these tools in
practice through industry collaborations. It is expected that successful
completion of the project will lead to further research on how the availability
of such route planning tools can feed back into the system and influence network
performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.