* 1850909
* REU Site: Purdue Research in Mathematics Experience (PRiME)
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2018,05/31/2021
* Edray Goins, Pomona College
* Continuing Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 05/31/2021
* USD 97,262.00

This award will provide three years of support for Purdue University to offer an
eight week summer residential program for undergraduate students to conduct
research in pure mathematics. The program, entitled Purdue Research in
Mathematics Experience (PRiME) will host eight undergraduates each summer. The
main goals of the program are (1) to provide undergraduate students with a
research experience in algebraic geometry, number theory, or probability with
the aim of producing new results worthy of publication or presentation at a
national mathematics meeting, and (2) to prepare undergraduates for a post-
baccalaureate degree in mathematics. The program will also work to increase the
diversity of mathematicians both at Purdue University and more broadly. The
program directors will place a high importance on recruiting participants from
groups traditionally underrepresented in mathematics. Additionally, the
directors of the program will invite mathematicians from underrepresented groups
speak in a Summer REU Colloquium series in which they will discuss with the
PRiME participants their professional journey. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PRiME
program will be directed by Professors Edray Goins (Purdue University), Jonathon
Peterson (Purdue University) and Pamela Harris (United States Military Academy).
The three co-directors will also be assisted by two graduate students who will
help provide additional guidance in the undergraduate students research. Each
summer the program will select eight students to participate in the PRiME
program at Purdue. Four of the students will participate in research in
algebraic geometry/number theory, and four students will participate in research
on random walks/stochastic processes. To prepare students for research there
will be a two week period with short courses on topics such as Abstract Algebra,
Complex Analysis, Differential Geometry, Graph Theory, Number Theory, Markov
Chains, and Stochastic Processes. During the course of the program, students
will also be taught important skills such as how to write with the mathematical
typsetting language LaTeX, how to use advanced symbolic computing packages such
as Sage or Mathematica, and how to prepare a technical paper of their results.
At the conclusion of the eight week program, students will present a summary of
their findings. Following the completion of the program, students will be
encouraged to present their research at a national conference and/or submit
their research for publication in a mathematics journal.