* 1850696
* Geotechnical Site Characterization with 3-D Seismic Waveform Tomography
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/16/2018,06/30/2020
* Khiem Tran, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 06/30/2020
* USD 103,277.00

Unanticipated site conditions such as highly variable soil and rock layers with
embedded low-velocity anomalies (soft soils or voids) cause significant problems
during and after construction of foundations. Knowledge of the anomalies is
crucial, as the anomalies can cause structural damage or collapse that can
result in significant property damage and occasional loss of life. This award
supports fundamental research to provide the knowledge needed to quantify
embedded anomalies and characterize variable soil/rock layers at high
resolutions. Results from this research will accelerate economical and practical
implementation of innovative non-destructive testing (NDT) methods for
protecting and improving our nation's infrastructure. The developed analysis can
be used for material imaging and characterization at various scales from
millimeters to hundreds of meters for several engineering applications such as
evaluation of geotechnical subsurface site conditions, bridge foundation scour,
concrete structural components, and asphalt pavements.

The goal of this research is to characterize both shear wave (S-wave) and
compression wave (P-wave) velocity profiles of 3-D subsurface structures at
meter scales down to 30 meter depth from surface-based seismic wave fields. The
subsurface structures consist of soil, rock, and voids filled by air or water.
To achieve the goal, the research will include (i) to develop a three-
dimensional full waveform inversion (3-D FWI) analysis of seismic wave fields
for high-resolution (meter pixel) characterization of subsurface site
conditions, and (ii) to verify the 3-D FWI analysis by full scale field
experiments. Full seismic surface wave fields will be used to quantify embedded
anomalies and characterize variable soil/rock layers, as the propagation
properties of seismic waves are modulated by the anomalies and layer interfaces.
The seismic wave fields are acquired from geophysical testing using sensors and
sources located in uniform 2-D grids on the ground surface, and then inverted
for the extraction of 3-D subsurface wave velocity structures. The research will
address inherent issues of small scale tomography including dominant Rayleigh
wave components, inconsistent wave excitation, strong attenuation, poor a priori
information, and highly variable of near surface soil/rock. Using full
information contained in the measured waveform data, the FWI analysis is
expected to provide more detailed and accurate characterization of materials
than methods currently used in practice, which use only portions of the measured
data. This will result in new knowledge in the area of engineering geophysics,
and it is a critical step toward using an effective geophysical method for site
investigations to improve design of foundations and other geotechnical
structures.