* 1850477
* CRII: RI: Strategic Interaction in Adversarial Settings with Information Hubs.
* CSE,IIS
* 03/15/2019,07/31/2021
* FEI FANG, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Roger Mailler
* 07/31/2021
* USD 190,795.00

To ensure security, public safety, and environmental sustainability, law
enforcement and security agencies often operate with a very limited budget and
resources to combat illegal activities such as attacks on critical
infrastructure, urban crimes, poaching, and illegal logging. Advanced game-
theoretic models and algorithms have been developed for analyzing threats in
such scenarios that can be described as having attackers and defenders. These
techniques have been effective in helping defenders allocate resources to defend
against threats. Now, in a modern information environment dominated by social
networks and increased connectivity in all aspects of life, defenders will need
to consider the influence of the "information hubs" (IHs) in that environment
that collect, process and disseminate information. IHs include all sorts of
connected devices in the growing "Internet of Things", as well as the people in
the social networks. This project aims to design new game theoretic models that
account for the influence of IHs on attacker-defender interactions and develop
methods to help the defender optimally select and allocate IHs for best
defensive effect. This project will also develop methods to find the optimal
allocation of defensive units given the presence of IHs so that the defender can
achieve maximal benefit with minimal resources.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Towards
gaining a full understanding of the role of IHs in adversarial settings, the
researchers will (1) develop new game-theoretic approaches that extend models
such as Stackelberg security games to allow the IHs to communicate with the
agents; (2) theoretically analyze the computational complexity of optimally
selecting and allocating IHs to maximize the defender's expected utility in the
game, and provide Mixed Integer Linear Programming (MILP)-based solution
approach to compute the optimal selection and allocation, as well as
approximation schemes and heuristic algorithms for large-scale problem
instances; and (3) develop MILP-based algorithms to compute robust strategies
against uncertainties in information collection, processing and dissemination.
The researchers will evaluate the new algorithms both in simulation and for
real-world conservation scenarios.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.