* 1850053
* CRII: NeTS: Rethinking Flow Control for Cloud Data Center Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2019,11/30/2021
* Brent Stephens, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 11/30/2021
* USD 175,000.00

Data loss is a significant problem in today's data center networks. Popular
websites like Google, Amazon, and Facebook are built on top of data center
applications that generate responses to incoming requests from end-users on the
Internet. In these applications, the work required to generate a response is
distributed across a large number of servers (computers). Unfortunately, these
communication patterns lead to frequent events of data loss in the network.
Because data loss in the network must be recovered through retransmissions, it
can dramatically increase communication latency (the time delay required for
information to travel across a network). This can ultimately translate into a
loss of revenue for these companies. Similarly, data loss is also a limiting
factor on the adoption of new technologies like Remote Direct Memory Access
(RDMA). RDMA is important because it can reduce latency and increase throughput,
and this can improve the performance of data center applications. However,
despite its benefits, RDMA is not seeing widespread adoption because RDMA
Network Interface Cards (NICs) fail to perform well when there is data loss in
the network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of our proposed research is twofold:
1) to reduce application latency, and 2) to enable important new technologies
like RDMA. This project will accomplish its goals through the design of a new
flow control protocol, namely a protocol that prevents the network from dropping
data. The plan is to create a problem-free lossless network that does not drop
data due to congestion and is also guaranteed to provide better or equal
performance to an equivalent network that does drop data. Specifically, this
project seeks to develop: new protocols for rapidly detecting and then
communicating per-flow congestion information between switches and Network
Interface Cards (NICs); novel algorithms for approximating per-flow queuing on
currently available programmable networking hardware; and new techniques for
building lossless overlay networks to support legacy devices. The software from
this project will be made broadly available for public reuse, and the researcher
plans to integrate the proposed research into courses at the University of
Illinois at Chicago.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.