* 1850938
* Intracranial EEG and Direct Cortical Stimulation Study of Stimulus-Driven and Cognitively-Modulated Emotional Processing in the Human Brain
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2019,11/30/2022
* James Gross, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Dwight Kravitz
* 11/30/2022
* USD 519,438.00

There has been a great deal of progress in the field of emotion research.
However, most of the work has been performed with methods that have not enabled
one to address what happens in the brain in the millisecond and millimeter space
at the single-subject individual level. As a result, several key questions in
the field of cognitive neuroscience have remained open for exploration. One of
these key unknowns that we are addressing in our current proposal is the
question of how brain regions specialized in processing emotional information
interact with those areas of our brain that are engaged in perceiving the outer
world. How does our perception get colored by our emotion? Our findings will
enrich our understanding of the brain mechanisms of emotion generation while
also constraining the plausibility of certain emotion theories. Our research
will not only promote the progress of emotion and cognitive neuroscience, but
also it will advance our understanding of how the mechanisms of healthy
interaction between emotional and perceptual system might be affected in
neuropsychiatric disorders and as such the proposed research will have potential
benefits to our national health, prosperity and welfare. Lastly, through
educational outreach programs, we will also support education and diversity to
benefit our society.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research is focused on the
interface between emotion and visual perception in the human brain. Our proposed
research aims to explore how stimulus-driven and cognitively-modulated emotional
processes affect our visual perception of faces. To reach the overarching goal
of the proposed plan, we will adopt a multimodal approach to measure neuronal
population activity with intracranial electrodes and probe their causal
importance by perturbing their activity using direct cortical stimulation. In
addition to intracranial electrophysiology (iEEG) and direct cortical
stimulation (DCS), we will measure subjective report, behavior, and pupillary
activity. Our research involves human subjects undergoing invasive monitoring
for several days as part of clinical evaluation for refractory focal epilepsy.
Stimulus-driven emotions are generated by biologically entrenched perceptions
that may not be necessarily accessible to conscious awareness; as such,
stimulus-driven emotions are associated with prototypical responses that quickly
prepare for action. Emotional faces, such as those expressing anger and
joy/happiness, are used to elicit stimulus-driven emotions. In contrast,
cognitively-modulated emotions are generated through cognitive processes such as
contextual information that lead to cognitive appraisal of how a stimulus
relates to one's motivations, rather than a specific perceptual stimulus per
se.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.