* 1850328
* Ecological determinants and arboreal feeding positional behaviors in Pan troglodytes, with implications for hominoid evolution
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2019,11/30/2023
* Lauren Sarringhaus, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 11/30/2023
* USD 224,691.00

Humans and apes have unique skeletal features that distinguish them from the
rest of the animal kingdom and contribute to a high degree of locomotor
versatility. The reason these features evolved is uncertain, however, they are
thought to have helped the ancestors of apes and humans to search for food in
trees. This project will examine ape locomotion in differing environments in the
wild, including forests, woodlands and grasslands, and while feeding on a
variety of foods, to determine the circumstances during which distinctive
anatomical features are used while foraging. The findings of this study will
help to determine why apes and humans evolved features such as an upright torso
and mobile shoulders, arms and hands. This project will support the education of
women and underrepresented groups at all levels of education - elementary
through graduate school - through students' direct involvement in the creation
of science education material. The outreach in this project creates cross-
cultural connections and increases the quality of science education. Students in
the U.S. and at the international research site will help create science
education outreach materials and contribute research and conservation virtual
content for a National Museum exhibit on ape and human evolution. Scientific
findings will be shared through article publications in peer-reviewed journals
and presentations at professional meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hominoids are
distinguished by an upright torso and versatile locomotion. It is hypothesized
that such versatility evolved to feed on ripe fruit in the forest canopy, since
that is what living apes tend to do. However, recent fossil discoveries show
that the earliest apes to display advanced anatomical features, such as an
upright torso, fed on leaves and fruit in a partially open environment. To
determine how locomotor versatility relates to foraging behavior, the living ape
with the broadest habitat preference, the chimpanzee, will be studied. The
central question of this research is: How does variation in arboreal habitat
structure, and variation in food type and location, correlate with arboreal
positional behavior in woodland and forest chimpanzees? This question will be
addressed using video capture and observational data on chimpanzee positional
behavior in different habitats. Linear models will be employed on observational
data to explore the relationship between positional modes and contextual
variables. Kinematic data will be extracted from limb excursions in video
footage and analyzed to determine if positional performance is correlated with
ecological and individual variables, and whether excursions are greatest for
those behaviors that rely on the advanced anatomical features of interest.
Studying chimpanzee movement in multiple contexts and habitats will assist in
predicting why hominoids evolved innovative positional behaviors and why early
hominins transitioned to a less arboreal existence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.