* 1850723
* Collaborative Research: High resolution glider observations enable  reassessment of export production in the oligotrophic Sargasso Sea
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2023
* Michael Lomas, Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 03/31/2023
* USD 203,642.00

Observations and measurements over several decades at locations like the Bermuda
Atlantic Time-series Study (BATS) site have been important to fundamental
understanding of the links between the physics, chemistry, and biology of the
ocean. At the BATS site however, despite the long history of observations, a
mystery remains: When and how is enough nitrogen delivered to surface waters to
support the biological production that is observed? The investigators will use
oxygen, nitrate, and micro-turbulence sensors on autonomous underwater gliders
to sample continuously for twenty months at the BATS site in an effort to
resolve this mystery. Gliders make it possible to measure processes at scales
that can't be captured by monthly or biweekly sampling from a ship. Regular
sampling by the BATS program will still be essential to the project, however, by
providing opportunities for calibration and validation of the glider sensors as
well as ship support for glider deployments and recoveries. The project will
also leverage existing private funding from the BIOS-SCOPE project, a multi-
institutional microbial marine biogeochemistry initiative at BATS, that will
provide partial support for glider operations. The investigators will recruit
and advise at least two NSF Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU)
students each year, and will incorporate project themes and data into
educational programs at their respective institutions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will apply new technologies to address
several factors believed to perpetuate significant underestimates of nitrate
delivery and particulate organic carbon (POC) exports in the Sargasso Sea. High-
resolution glider-based observations will be used to estimate annual net
community production (ANCP) through oxygen mass balance, and new production (NP)
through nitrate mass balance, over a period spanning an annual cycle and two
consecutive oligotrophic periods. Microstructure measurements will provide much-
needed profiles of vertical diffusivity to accurately constrain fluxes of oxygen
and nitrate and their variability over the annual cycle. Oxygen/argon ratio
measurements will be used as independent estimates of biologically mediated
oxygen changes and as constraints on glider-measured rates of oxygen
concentration change. Assessments of phytoplankton characteristics by flow
cytometry will be used to calibrate the gliders' optical sensors to in situ
biological characteristics, so that variability in phytoplankton community
structure and biomass can be discerned at the gliders' high temporal resolution
and related to simultaneously measured NCP, NP, and physical water column
structure, both above and below the euphotic zone. POC exports will be inferred
from backscatter inventories in the deeper layers. The sum of observations will
enable assessments of relationships among three independently measured proxies
for the strength of the biological carbon pump and how the system responds to
environmental forcing over the annual cycle, with particular focus on the
stratified oligotrophic months.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.