* 1850353
* CRII: OAC: Online Optimization of End-to-End Data Transfers in High Performance Networks
* CSE,OAC
* 03/15/2019,02/28/2022
* Engin Arslan, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Alan Sussman
* 02/28/2022
* USD 190,299.00

With the advancement of computing and sensing technology, the amount of data
generated by scientific applications is growing rapidly. To accommodate this
growth, high speed networks with up to 400 Gbps capacities have been
established. Despite the increasing availability of high-speed wide-area
networks and the use of modern data transfer protocols designed for high
performance, file transfers in practice attain only a fraction of theoretical
maximum throughput, leaving networks underutilized and users unsatisfied. This
project aims to develop a real-time transfer tuning algorithm to optimize file
transfer throughput in high speed networks. Improved data transfer performance
does not only enable efficient execution of distributed scientific applications
but also fosters collaboration between scientists at geographically separated
institutions by reducing time it takes to share data. This project complements
the efforts to build next generation networking infrastructure by offering a
novel solution to maximize utilization. The project also facilitates the
development of a graduate level high-performance networking course at University
of Nevada, Reno, and contribute to the education of undergraduate, female, and
under-representative students. Therefore, this research aligns with the NSF's
mission to promote the progress of science and to advance national prosperity,
and welfare. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is critical to fully utilize available
network bandwidth to meet stringent end-to-end performance requirements of
distributed scientific workflows. Yet, existing data transfer applications
(e.g., scp, bbcp, and ftp) fail to saturate the available network bandwidth due
to several factors, such as end system limitations, ill-designed transfer
protocols, and poor storage performances. Application-layer transfer tuning
offers a comprehensive solution to enhance transfer throughput significantly and
can be applied with only client-side modifications. However, finding optimal
configuration for application-layer parameters is challenging due to large
search space and complex dynamics of network and storage subsystems. This
project applies state-of-the-art online convex optimization to application-layer
parameter tuning problem as it offers performance and convergence guarantees
even under complete uncertainty. In addition to being fast and optimal, online
learning algorithms can guarantee the fair distribution of resources among users
when combined with game-theory inspired utility functions. The project aims to
improve the performance of large streaming applications under dynamic network
conditions through anomaly detection and mitigation. It has three unique and
innovative aspects: (i) It uses state-of-the art online learning algorithm to
fine tune application-layer parameters in real-time. (ii) It improves accuracy
and efficiency of sample transfers to minimize the overhead of real-time tuning.
(iii) It offers quality of service for delay-sensitive transfers (e.g., high-
speed streaming applications) through continuous performance monitoring and
adaptive tuning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by Office
of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure (OAC) and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.