* 1850779
* GEOPRISMS Postdoctoral Scholar proposal: Unravelling monogenetic volcanism in the Cascades Volcanic Range
* GEO,OCE
* 05/15/2019,04/30/2023
* Adam Kent, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 04/30/2023
* USD 299,666.00

Globally almost 1 billion people live in areas subject to volcanic hazards. In
North America, the most populated region subject to significant volcanic hazards
is the Pacific Northwest. Although the hazards associated with larger
stratovolcanoes such as Mount St Helens and Mount Hood are reasonably well
understood, a less studied type of volcano are the so call "monogenetic"
centers, smaller volcanic cones that are widely distributed throughout the
region. These typically consist of a small volcanic cone and associated lava
fields. The amount of material erupted is typically less than a cubic kilometer
total erupted volume, although larger examples also occur. However, within the
Cascade Volcanic Range, there are thousands of this type of volcanic edifice.
Their wide geographic distribution and overall short eruptive life span mean
that the locations and effects of future eruptions are different to
stratovolcanoes, and are more difficult to predict. Most monogenetic systems
have not been studied in significant detail to predict future eruption behavior.
This project seeks to gain greater understanding of the subsurface magmatic
processes associated with monogenetic volcanism in the relatively populous
Central Oregon region of the Cascades. In particular, the project will focus on
the speed and style of magma movement through the volcanic edifice during
eruptions, using a range of petrological and geochemical techniques. The project
includes the training of a postdoctoral investigator.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will focus on a number of monogenetic centers in the Central Oregon
area, including some related to Newberry Volcano (e.g. Lava Butte) and from the
MacKenzie Pass area (Collier Cone, Little Belknap Crater). For the selected
volcanoes zoned crystals, melt inclusions and melt embayments will be studied
for diffusion chronometry of major elements, trace elements and volatile species
analysis (CO2, H2O) to constrain the time between initiation of volcanic unrest
and eruption to the surface. Magma ascent rates will also be calculated based on
depth estimates from melt inclusions. The goal is to constrain the time between
when a new eruption may be detected using remote means (typically seismic
studies) and when actual eruptions might commence. Studies of melt inclusion and
crystal compositions will also allow insight into the chemical and petrological
complexity and structure of monogenetic magma plumbing systems. Overall the
results of this work will significantly improve knowledge of subduction-related
monogenetic volcanism and the hazard response required for these centers - a
hitherto less well studied type of volcanism. Evaluating eruption style
(effusive vs explosive) and ascent rates from volatile analysis, together with
calculated diffusion chronometry timescales, will give new insight into
monogenetic volcanism in a well characterized subduction zone
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.