* 1850054
* CRII: SaTC: Leveraging Userland In-Memory Objects for Cybercrime Investigations and Malware Classification
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2022
* Aisha Ali-Gombe, Towson University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 05/31/2022
* USD 174,999.00

On mobile devices, the advancement and sophistication in application development
and the great reliance on their functionality daily by many users makes them a
critical piece of evidence for digital investigations. This project focuses on
the reconstruction of app execution to recover user and fingerprint malware
activities on mobile devices. The research will provide a methodology for
investigators to easily outline user actions and strategies, and possible
malware attack blueprint without the need for prior knowledge of the target
application logic. This project will further advance digital forensics
capabilities, by engaging both undergraduate and graduate students in memory
forensics research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By leveraging in-memory artifacts for
execution reconstruction and malware classification, this project develops app-
agnostic memory forensics utilities for investigating Android applications. The
solution will recreate program execution slices from residual in-memory userland
data objects and their metadata and then map them to the loaded images recovered
from the code section of the process memory to determine the exact components
and program flows that generated the user's activity. The advantage of this
technique is it gives the investigator a clear picture of the program flow path,
showing a sequence of user events and the data involved. The newly reconstructed
in-memory program slices and loaded image files will then further serve as input
feature vectors to two distinct modalities in a multimodal learning malware
classification scheme. These unique features which together represent app
functionality and code structure when applied in the multimodal algorithm will
result in a more robust and resilient malware fingerprint that can detect
similar and obfuscated variants with a high degree of
accuracy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.