* 1850174
* Gordon Research Conference on Quantitative Genetics and Genomics, Ciocoo, Italy, February 9-15, 2019
* BIO,IOS
* 12/01/2018,11/30/2019
* Guilherme Rosa, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 11/30/2019
* USD 15,700.00

The 17th Gordon Research Conference (GRC) on Quantitative Genetics and Genomics
is entitled "The Use of Big Data in Quantitative Genetics", and scheduled for
February 10-15, 2019 in Lucca (Barga), Italy. This is timely because as datasets
become larger they demand new analytical approaches for yielding new knowledge.
Quantitative genetics and genomics refer to the fields of science that combines
concepts of genetics with computational and statistical tools to study the
evolution and function of complex traits (e.g., clutch size in birds), medicine
(e.g., cardiovascular disease), and agriculture (e.g., yield of corn). The
genetics underlying complex traits was, until recently, very poorly known. Over
the last decade there has been a revolution in research on quantitative traits
due to availability of genomic and computational technologies. However,
extracting knowledge from such data is challenging and this conference will
discuss the latest research and technological advances. The outcomes from the
conference will be an exchange of knowledge between the various uses of these
technologies to a variety of biological questions. In the longer term, there
will be benefits to medicine and to agriculture such as new drugs and
information to support personalized medicine and new varieties of crop.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Genome wide association studies have discovered many loci
that affect important traits in a wide variety of species, contributing to the
understanding of these traits. Despite the success in mapping risk loci for many
traits, the number of causal mutations that have been identified is low. To
overcome this problem experiments using a range of omic technologies are
underway. These include use of RNA sequencing to study the genetics of gene
expression and functional annotation of genomic sites, e.g. using ChipSeq. While
there are many conferences that cover parts of the same agenda as this GRC, this
is probably the only conference that brings together those working in complex
trait genetics from agriculture, medicine, and evolution in order to exchange
techniques, approaches, and technologies. The GRCs are also unusual in the large
amount of time set aside for discussion and the opportunities for informal
discussion. This leads to cross fertilization of ideas and new collaborations.
An associated Gordon Research Seminar (GRS) will take place over the course of
two-days leading up to the start of the conference for young scientists and
investigators. In the GRS there is also a strong mentoring component where
senior scientists attending the GRC are invited to the GRS for a mentoring lunch
as well as a panel discussion with graduate students and post-docs attending the
GRS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.