* 1850245
* CRII: CHS: Mutual Natural Tangible Interactions with Virtual Characters in Virtual Reality
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2019,12/31/2022
* Lila Bozgeyikli, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 12/31/2022
* USD 174,012.00

Virtual reality (VR) systems have been increasingly used in recent years in
domains such as education, training, and rehabilitation. The effectiveness of VR
systems relies on several critical factors, including interaction. Although
interaction in real-life includes mutual encounters between two or more
individuals through shared tangible objects, most VR interaction to date have
not been like that. The goal of this project is to establish a research program
that will ultimately shrink the boundary between the real and virtual worlds by
incorporating mutual tangible embodied interactions between human users and
virtual characters through shared objects that extend from virtual worlds into
the real-world. This will increase the seamlessness of the system and the
fidelity of the interaction, thereby preventing the technology from being an
obstacle or distraction and enabling the user to derive more benefit from the VR
experience. The research objectives are as follows: (1) To develop a custom VR
system that affords the proposed novel mutual tangible embodied interaction
between a human user and a virtual character. (2) To investigate the effects of
the proposed form of interaction on user performance and experience in VR
through controlled user studies and statistical analyses on the collected data.
(3) To impact future VR research by disseminating the findings and reflections.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the envisaged custom VR system, the shared objects will
be represented in two complementary forms: physical and virtual. The extension
of the shared objects from the virtual world into the real world will be
achieved through a custom projection surface and custom-developed mechanical
systems. The projection surface will be modified so that only a portion of the
physical object will be visible to the human user at all times, while the
remaining complementary portion will be rendered digitally. The mechanical
systems will include physical object parts, 3D printed attachments,
microprocessors, actuators, and motion sensors. These mechanical systems will be
employed for synchronizing the movements of the physical objects and their
virtual counterparts in real time; as one of the agents (human or virtual)
affects the corresponding form (physical or virtual) of the shared object (e.g.,
by moving or rotating it), the effect will be immediately observable on the
other form. Project outcomes will benefit not only the users of VR systems
through enhanced experiences with a novel form of interaction but also the
researchers through new findings in human-computer interaction. The research
will be carried out in three phases. Phase 1 includes the investigation and
design refinement of the proposed mutual tangible embodied interaction,
including object and transform modality, custom hardware and software, tasks,
and performance measures. In Phase 2, iterative development and in-house testing
activities will be completed. Finally, in Phase 3, evaluation activities that
include controlled user studies will take place, which will be followed by data
analysis, reflection, and dissemination of the
results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.