* 1850523
* CRII: NeTS: Embracing Dynamic Spectrum Sharing without Privacy Concerns
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Yanmin Gong, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 09/30/2023
* USD 191,000.00

The proliferation of wireless devices and bandwidth-hungry applications has led
to unprecedented demands for pervasive wireless services and made wireless
spectrum a scarce resource. Dynamic spectrum sharing has been proposed to
address the worldwide spectrum shortage and improve spectrum utilization. It
allows secondary users to access the underutilized licensed spectrum when the
incumbent users are absent. However, in such a system, abundant information
needs to be collected, analyzed, and shared, which leads to serious privacy
issues for the involved parties, especially for crowdsourced spectrum sensing
agents and the incumbent users. This project addresses such privacy problems,
relieves concerns from the involved parties, and facilitates dynamic spectrum
sharing. The researcher will actively channel the research results into the
development of undergraduate and graduate curricula, engage undergraduate and
under-represented students into research, including outreach activities to
elementary students, and improve the presence of underrepresented minorities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to limit unintended exposure
of private information and design privacy-preserving mechanisms in centralized
dynamic spectrum sharing systems while enabling efficient spectrum sharing. The
project consists of two research thrusts. The first thrust assesses the impacts
of location privacy countermeasures to radio environment map construction and
investigates how to mitigate the dilemma between accuracy and location privacy
through a novel quality-assured radio environment map construction method. The
second thrust aims to design obfuscation mechanisms to protect the operational
time privacy of the incumbent users while ensuring the spectrum efficiency in
spectrum allocation. The project will improve the current understanding of
privacy implications in the spectrum sharing paradigm with spatial and temporal
dynamism and provide insights to other wireless communication systems with
similar dynamism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.