* 1850439
* CRII: CIF: Resource Allocation in Data Center Networks: Algorithms, Fundamental Limits and Performance Bounds
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2022
* Siva Theja Maguluri, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 05/31/2022
* USD 207,000.00

Today's era of big data and the proliferation of web apps and mobile apps is
powered by enormous computing data centers, consisting of up to hundreds of
thousands of computing servers with data distributed over these servers. In
order to serve user requests, these servers need to communicate with each other,
and this is facilitated by a data center network. Design and operation of these
networks becomes more challenging as the size of the data centers increases.
Today's data centers are typically operated at very low utilizations in order to
meet stringent latency requirements of the users. The focus of this project is
to develop analytical techniques to study the delay performance of algorithms
that are used to make connections between the servers in a data-center network.
This analysis will feed the development novel algorithms that maintain low
latency and implementation complexity while improving utilization. The project
includes engagement with companies to explore the use of these algorithms,
training of graduate students, dissemination of this research through
undergraduate and graduate courses, outreach activities to high-school students
and involving undergraduate students in research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project consists of two main parts. The first develops analytical tools to study
the performance of scheduling algorithms for data-center networks. Prior work in
this area used methods based on diffusion limits and Brownian approximations,
which become unwieldy when studying data-center networks. More recent work
demonstrates the power of a much simpler drift-based approach. This project
employs the drift method to study the performance of tail latencies, and a novel
moment-generating function method will be developed to overcome the limitations
of the drift method. In the second part, these tools will be leveraged to
develop novel low-complexity algorithms for data-center networks. A key focus in
the development of these algorithms is accommodating more realistic traffic
patterns beyond the independent and identically distributed random arrivals
assumed in the literature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.