* 1850434
* CRII: SaTC: Towards Paving the Way for Large-Scale Malware Analysis: New Directions in Generic Binary Unpacking
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2022
* Jiang Ming, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 04/30/2022
* USD 174,998.00

Malware, with harmful intent to compromise computer systems, has been one of the
significant challenges to the Internet. Driven by the rich profit, relentless
malware developers apply various obfuscation schemes to circumvent malware
detection. Binary packing is the most common obfuscation adopted by malware
authors to camouflage malicious code and defeat popular signature-based malware
detection. Binary packing first encrypts or compresses malware code as data,
making it immune to static analysis. At run time, the attached unpacking routine
writes the decoded code to memory and then resumes malicious payload execution.
Over the past two decades, packed malware has been a challenge in the anti-
malware landscape. This project addresses this problem from new angles and
advances the state of the art in terms of better performance and stronger anti-
analysis resistance. The project's novelties are new methods and efficient tools
to extract packed malware payload without the prior knowledge of packers. The
project's impacts are paving the way for large-scale malware analysis and
helping people respond to emerging malware attacks
promptly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Existing generic binary unpacking work suffers
from high runtime overhead and lack of anti-analysis resistance. This project
conducts an in-depth study on an enormous variety of malware packers and reveals
promising research directions to address the long-standing binary unpacking
problem. Based on the investigator's encouraging preliminary results, this
project goes one step further to address the unsolved challenges and pave the
last mile to a complete generic unpacking solution. This project develops a
novel machine learning model to extract the semantics of the original entry
point. The proposed technique notably outperforms existing search heuristics.
This project's hybrid de-obfuscation approaches enable unpacking tools to
recover a fully functional version of the original binary, which is the ultimate
goal of unpacking technique. To achieve stronger resilience to various anti-
analysis attacks, the investigator advances the use of hardware supported lower-
level features to detecting the end of unpacking. The proposed methods can
handle a broader range of malware packers, even brand new
packers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.