* 1850832
* Synmagmatic crustal thickening and the importance of garnet fractionation in making continental crust
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2019,05/31/2021
* Cin-Ty Lee, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 05/31/2021
* USD 172,684.00

Earth has an unusual bimodal hypsometry among the rocky planets in the solar
system. Today, about 70% of Earth's surface lies below ~4 km below sea level
while the remaining parts of the Earth's surface ride above sea level,
manifested as continents. This bimodal hypsometry drives much of the mass
cycling on Earth's surface and fuels the evolution of Earth's habitability.
Understanding why Earth is the only planet with such a pronounced bimodality
rests on the understanding of why Earth has continents - one of the most
fundamental questions of geology. In addition to these scientific impacts, this
project will support a course taught on scientific illustration and field
observation. Undergraduates students will be mentored, and the team will
collaborate with instructors in the Houston area high schools to introduce
geology and natural history to under-represented minorities, and provide short
courses and lectures at Rice's continuing education program and the Houston
Museum of Natural Science.

The continental crust is felsic, meaning that it is enriched in silica and
depleted in Fe and Mg compared with the mafic oceanic crust. But how the
continental crust achieved its felsic composition when the building blocks are
mafic is unclear. In subduction zones, crustal composition correlates with
crustal thickness and arcs built on thick crust tend to be more felsic, like the
continental crust. This proposal seeks to understand the fundamental mechanism
linking crustal thickening and differentiation, with an emphasis on the role of
garnet in the formation of the continental crust. The key to testing the
hypothesis is whether garnet fractionation drives oxidation or reduction of the
residual magma. Thus, the objective is to quantify how much of the iron in
garnet is ferric, and the researchers will study samples from the North American
Cordillera and analog localities, such as New Zealand and Tibet. Ferric iron
content will be determined using the electron microprobe flank method,
calibrated against Mossbauer spectroscopic measurements. Trace element and
oxybarometric constraints on volcanic and plutonic rocks from these areas will
be conducted to evaluate whether differentiated magmas have experienced
oxidation and garnet fractionation. Combined investigation of magmas and
cumulates will provide a comprehensive view of continental crust-forming
magmatism. The formation of continental crust is the culmination of feedbacks
between climate, tectonics, magmatism, and the deep Earth.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.