* 1850605
* RR: Establishing and Boosting Confidence Levels for Empirical Research Using Twitter Data
* SBE,SMA
* 07/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Heng Xu, American University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Feeney
* 08/31/2023
* USD 361,201.00

Concerns about a reproducibility crisis in scientific research have become
increasingly prevalent within the academic community and to the public at large.
The field of meta-science, which performs the scientific study of science
itself, is thriving and has examined the existence and prevalence of threats to
reproducible and robust research. Most existing replication efforts in social
sciences, however, have focused on studies using data from statistically
rigorous designed surveys or experiments. Largely missing are replication
efforts devoted to examining those studies with organic data, including data
organically generated by ubiquitous sensors or mobile applications, twitter
feeds, click streams, etc. This project examines the inconsistent handling
practices of organic data among scholarly publications in social sciences, in
order to establish the confidence (or the lack thereof) in the conclusions drawn
from such data analysis. Since findings of social and behavioral sciences inform
policy makers on a wide variety of issues, from homeland security to national
economy, establishing the confidence of these findings is critical for the
proper usage of them, and therefore has broader impacts on all these application
areas of national priority.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, this project
starts with determining the extent of, causes of, and remedies for empirical
research using organic data that are neither reproducible nor generalizable. The
findings from this step raise awareness about the standards and tools for
collecting, cleaning, and processing organic data sets across many fields of
social sciences. In addition, this project develops new analytical frameworks
and methodologies useful for evaluating replicability and robustness of
empirical studies with organic data. The vision is for such frameworks to be
broadly used in many application domains, thereby fostering cultural change
across different fields in social sciences, and bringing the value of
reproducibility and robustness to the forefront of data intensive
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.