* 1850871
* Extreme Weather Disasters, Economic Losses via Migration, and Widening Spatial Inequality in the U.S.
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2019,04/30/2022
* Jack DeWaard, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Melanie Hughes
* 04/30/2022
* USD 308,377.00

In 2017, the U.S. set a new record of $313 billion in economic losses from
sixteen billion-dollar extreme weather disasters. Economic losses from extreme
weather disasters are spatially concentrated in states like Florida and are
remarkably stable over time. While there are many reasons that people stay in
disaster-prone areas, others choose to migrate or are forced to leave, some
temporarily and others permanently. As economic actors, migrants take with them
myriad economic activities that constitute economic losses that have not been
studied in previous research. This project will be the first to document the
size of economic losses via migration from affected areas in the U.S. after
extreme weather events. Because migration necessarily connects places to one
another, the project will also document whether and to what extent such economic
losses via migration contribute to changing spatial inequality in the U.S. as a
whole. Project results will provide input into policies concerning how to
mitigate the economic costs of extreme weather disasters in the U.S., thus
contributing to disaster recovery and economic prosperity.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This project uses county-level data from the Statistics of Income
program at the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) and the Federal Reserve Bank of
New York Consumer Credit Panel (CCP) to document and analyze economic losses via
migration from affected areas after extreme weather disasters in the U.S. over
the past two decades. Total economic losses via migration are measured in the
IRS and CCP data using information on aggregate adjusted gross income and debt-
financed consumption activities, respectively. After summarizing the size of
economic losses via migration from affected areas after extreme weather
disasters, the project will use demographic decomposition procedures to
distinguish the relative contributions of economic components (average, or per
capita, economic losses via migration) and demographic components (the
propensity to migrate, as well as population size in the affected area). Further
acknowledging the inherently spatial character of migration, this project also
documents whether and to what extent economic losses via migration from affected
areas after extreme weather disasters contribute to changing spatial inequality
in the U.S. using two variants of the Gini Index that measure spatial focusing
among flows in migration networks. Given heterogeneity in the relationship
between extreme weather disasters and migration, this project takes a case-
specific and comparative approach, focusing on three types of extreme weather
disasters, including tropical cyclones, tornadoes, and wildfires, in counties
that have experienced the bulk of economic losses over the last twenty years
according to the Spatial Hazards Events and Losses Database for the United
States (SHELDUS).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.