* 1850060
* Watershed Awareness using Technology and Environmental Research for Sustainability (WATERS)
* EDU,DRL
* 04/15/2019,03/31/2024
* Nanette Marcum-Dietrich, Millersville University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steele
* 03/31/2024
* USD 399,719.00

This project will advance efforts of the Innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST) program to better understand and promote practices
that increase student motivations and capacities to pursue careers in fields of
science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM) by developing and
testing a middle school science curriculum focusing on water and water-related
career awareness. Diverse middle school students across three regions of the
United States will become engaged in project-based learning that includes hands-
on geospatial analysis and use of national and local data to explore local
watershed issues. The project will apply principles from Universal Design for
Learning (UDL) to create an effective, scalable approach to water learning open
to all students. By providing flexibility in information presentation and
student responses, reducing barriers in instruction, and providing appropriate
supports and challenges, the project will increase access to curricula and
approaches having the potential to greatly increase awareness of and engagement
with water concepts and career pathways in learners nationwide. In conjunction
with the new curriculum, the project will produce a classroom observation
instrument that teachers can use to assess student engagement, use of UDL
supports, time on task, and content understanding during inquiry instruction.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to develop and test a student-
centered, universally accessible middle school curriculum for learning water
concepts and promoting water career awareness. To accomplish this goal, the
project will develop and implement a 12-session curriculum unit that will engage
students in use of Geographic Information System (GIS) applications and modeling
based on data collection within local watersheds, use UDL technologies to
broaden inclusivity among learners, and engage nine experienced pilot teachers
in co-designing and iteratively improving the curriculum over the three-year
development period. A quasi-experimental, experimental/comparison group research
design will be used to to answer the following research questions: 1. How does
engagement in an inquiry project-based middle school watershed curriculum relate
to students' confidence and efficacy in STEM subjects, 21st century learning
skills, and interest in STEM careers? And 2. How does UDL support all learners
(students who are intellectually gifted, students learning the English language,
students who are economically disadvantaged, or students with disabilities) of
an inquiry project-based middle school watershed curriculum? Middle school
science teachers and their students will be recruited from California,
Pennsylvania, and Virginia to participate in the project. Three teachers from
each state will be recruited to pilot the curriculum in Year 1 and provide
feedback to the curriculum team to inform curriculum and research revisions. The
learning objectives and activities will be the same for both the experimental
and comparison groups, but the comparison group curriculum will not include the
UDL technologies&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.