* 1850568
* Identifying Stakeholder Perceptions and Practices to Develop a Comprehensive Framework for Bioscience Industry Internships for Underrepresented Youth
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Kristin Bass, Biotech Partners
* Standard Grant
* Lynn Tran
* 06/30/2023
* USD 1,399,820.00

This project is funded by the Innovative Technology Experiences for Students and
Teachers (ITEST) Program. Bioscience fields are changing to keep pace with rapid
advances in technologies and scientific innovations. These fields need diverse,
prepared personnel who can meet workforce demands using cutting-edge
technologies and a deep knowledge of science. This project meets this need by
preparing underrepresented high school students for the bioscience workforce
through innovative internship experiences. This project will pair eleventh- and
twelfth-grade students with dedicated mentors from bioscience industries during
paid summer internships. Students will also participate in a workforce
preparation class, with an emphasis on biotechnology industries, as part of
their high school coursework. The project will study the perspectives and
practices of different stakeholders, including the high school biotechnology
teachers, students, and industry mentors. The analysis of several types of data
will result in an empirically-based, comprehensive framework that outlines the
elements of impactful internships in bioscience industries. Findings will be
widely disseminated to researchers and practitioners, resulting in new
approaches for broadening participation in the bioscience workforce.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building from 25 years of providing internships for high
school students in biotechnology industries, Biotech Partners will iteratively
study and improve its internship intervention, resulting in an empirically-based
framework that outlines the features of successful internships in bioscience
industries. The project will seek to answer the following research question: In
what roles and in what ways do business and industry workforce members motivate
students from diverse underrepresented populations to become aware of,
interested in, and prepare for biotechnology careers, and support teachers in
efforts to promote biotechnology workforce awareness and interest? The
internship intervention will serve over 300 high school students, 85% of whom
identify as youth of color. The internship intervention includes a high school
class focused on workforce preparation in biotechnology industries, after-school
tutoring, and paid summer internships with biotechnology firms. Research
participants include approximately 300 high school students; industry
representatives from 15 bioscience industries; six program staff members who
facilitate the internships; and four high school teachers. Using constant
comparative analytic techniques, the research team will qualitatively analyze
transcripts from interviews and focus groups with a purposefully-selected subset
of each group of research participants. Using repeated measures analyses of
variance, the research team will quantitatively analyze surveys given to
students and mentors. This project will advance knowledge about the features of
internships that foster workforce preparedness among underrepresented high
school students in the biosciences. This project will result in a comprehensive
framework for impactful internships that will be widely disseminated to relevant
stakeholders. This framework will be designed to broaden participation in the
biotechnology workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.