* 1850533
* CRII: SaTC: Automated Security Analysis of Software-Based Control in Emerging Smart Transportation Under Sensor Attacks
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2021
* Qi Chen, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 03/31/2021
* USD 174,997.00

Transportation systems are being profoundly transformed with the emergence of a
series of software-based smart transportation solutions such as intelligent
traffic signal control and autonomous driving. In these systems, the key enabler
of their functional intelligence is the sensing capability, which collects
necessary road information to enable better control decisions. However, sensor
data are collected from a public channel, i.e., the physical transportation
environment, which thus inevitably creates opportunities for attackers to tamper
with the sensing process. In this project, the investigator initiates research
efforts towards achieving a systematic understanding of the robustness of
software-based control in emerging smart transportation systems under sensor
attacks. Since transportation is a basic urban function, the successful
completion of this project is expected to proactively identify and address new
security challenges in these systems before wide deployment, and thus help
ensure the security and safety of everyday life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this
project, an automatic approach will be designed, implemented, and evaluated to
enable efficient and effective discovery of security problems in emerging smart
transportation systems. The approach focuses on discovering semantic security
problems, which for example change control decisions in the smart transportation
functions. This is because analyzing them usually leads to the discovery of
novel and domain-specific design trade-offs in an area or even across areas,
which thus has more potential to advance knowledge and guide future research. To
achieve this goal, this project will design a dynamic security analysis system
following an evolutionary algorithm approach, and propose novel solutions to
address research challenges in analysis input generation, semantic problem
discovery, and analyzing dataflow-centric decision process. This project will
concretely apply the developed system to real-world code bases of smart
transportation systems to ensure the practicality of the discovered security
problems, challenges, and solution directions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.