* 1850202
* CRII: III: Optimal Data Organization for Hybrid Transactional/Analytical Processing Data Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2022
* Manos Athanassoulis, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 05/31/2022
* USD 174,999.00

Scientific, commercial, and governmental applications increasingly rely on data-
driven insights and decision-making using both historical data and real-time
updates. New workloads are generated by social feeds, sensor readings (a common
use-case of Internet-of-Things applications) and electronic micro-payments (an
emerging model of e-commerce). They all have in common: (i) a very high volume
of transactions and (ii) a high volume of analysis queries that need to use both
historic and real-time data to provide useful and actionable insights. The
primary challenge is that these workloads have conflicting requirements, and
typically use different data systems architectures. On the one hand, we want to
be able to answer analysis queries like, "what was the most discussed topic in
each month of the past year?", or "what is the average power consumption per
neighborhood of city X?". On the other hand, we want to efficiently store
incoming updates and be able to provide real-time insights like "where do we
have a power network overload now?", or "what is the probability that a disaster
is taking place based on the social feeds of a city X?". Traditionally, data
systems were engineered to efficiently support either a transactional workload
-- that is, storing quickly new items -- or an analytical workload. The latter
typically includes changing the data layout and organization, and building
auxiliary indexing structures to allow for efficient data access. The emergence
of complex workloads has pushed towards the need to develop new systems that can
support hybrid transactional/analytical processing (HTAP). This research will
allow to execute such workloads efficiently and to anticipate workload changes
in a robust way. Ultimately, the project will make data ingestion and data
analysis a smoother process and will enable complex applications to have their
data analyzed quickly.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The researchers will build data
systems that can efficiently evaluate mixed workloads by navigating the read-
optimized vs. update-optimized continuum of data systems architectures. The key
to do so is to vary the physical data organization and find the optimal for each
use-case. Typically, data objects are physically organized in various ways
between two extremes: either they follow the ingestion order, that is, the way
they are generated or inserted in the system, or they are organized based on
their value (or a specific subset of their attributes). This "structure" (also
called "bounded disorder" in the literature) is treated as a continuum between
the two extremes. In-between, hybrid data organizations have different parts of
the dataset organized with different schemes. Transactional updates add data
with disorder, while answering analytical queries efficiently requires data with
bounded disorder. A fundamental challenge today is to find the data organization
that enables a data system to offer a tunable balance between efficient updates
and fast analysis queries. This project addresses this challenge from three
different angles. First, by formulating an optimization problem, which can be
solved at run-time. Second, by formulating a robust optimization problem which
will deliver good performance even when preliminary assumptions are not
accurate. Third, by building access methods that can exploit any inherently
limited disorder in the underlying data to reduce the data organization effort
needed for efficient analysis tasks. This research effort introduces HTAP data
systems that can optimally organize data and exploit inherently bounded disorder
while being robust in workload changes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.