* 1850115
* CRII: CHS: Modeling Analysis Behavior to Support Interactive Exploration of Massive Datasets
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2021
* Leilani Battle, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Balakrishnan Prabhakaran
* 08/31/2021
* USD 175,000.00

Scientists commonly use exploratory data analysis methods to gain insights from
their data. However, increases in the number and granularity of data sources
raise problems of scale that complicate the already difficult problem of
developing tools that help analysts manage the often-changing goals and analysis
trajectories suggested by their exploratory work. This project focuses on
improving two key systems in exploratory data analysis tools: the visualization
systems that provide graphical representations of the data, and the data
management systems that efficiently manage large-scale data on the back end to
support the analysis. The key idea is to integrate these two systems by first
inferring analysts' goals and future behaviors from their recent actions in the
visualization system, then using those to proactively construct efficient
processing queries in the data management system. Doing this should improve
system response times, which should in turn improve analysts' ability to use the
system and the insights they gain; the techniques developed will contribute to
the database, visualization, and human-computer interaction communities. The
tools themselves stand to benefit a number of scientific and industrial domains,
and the team will also use the project work to support new interdisciplinary
data science courses along with outreach and research opportunities for
underrepresented students in computer science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To improve
performance, this project will produce dynamic optimization strategies for
visual exploration systems, which infer the user's exploratory analysis goals
over time, and deploy optimization algorithms tailored to the current analysis
goal. These optimizations will address both human performance, i.e., how
effectively a scientist or analyst extracts insights and performs analysis tasks
with a visual exploration system, and system performance, i.e., how efficiently
and effectively the system responds to a user's interactions. The development of
these optimizations will be done in two phases. First, a user study will be
conducted to characterize how users interact with visual exploration systems
under different exploratory data analysis scenarios and system designs. Second,
using the collected study data, a predictive query execution engine will be
designed to infer users' analysis goals from log data and detect shifts in
behaviors over time. To boost data management system performance, existing
techniques will be adapted to leverage the predictive query execution engine,
including query scheduling of likely upcoming queries and multi-query
optimization to leverage computational overlap between recent and predicted
queries. To boost visualization system and human performance, the system will
recommend predicted next queries to analysts, while the project team will
conduct performance-driven interface design work to design new interactions
based on data collected by the predictive query execution
engine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.