* 1850362
* CRII: SaTC: Identifying Emerging Threats in the Online Hacker Community for Proactive Cyber Threat Intelligence: A Diachronic Graph Convolutional Autoencoder Framework
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2019,10/31/2020
* Sagar Samtani, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 10/31/2020
* USD 174,920.00

Hackers often target the information systems that underlie critical systems in
domains ranging from finance to healthcare. The estimated cost of defending
against and responding to hacking incidents currently runs at hundreds of
billions of dollars annually. To reduce these costs, many organizations have
aimed to develop timely, relevant, actionable, and shareable Cyber Threat
Intelligence (CTI) about security and privacy threats to support cybersecurity
decision-making. However, existing methods tend to react to known threats rather
than proactively detecting emerging ones. One promising approach to proactive
exploit detection is mining large, international, and rapidly evolving online
hacker community platforms to detect emerging threats and key actors. To this
end, this project aims to develop advanced, proactive CTI capabilities through
(1) collecting large, dynamic datasets of hacker forum posts and (2) developing
methods to analyze them to extract emerging threats, particularly malware,
through a novel graph-based method for modeling text content.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve these goals, this project aims to develop a
novel CTI framework designed to collect and identify emerging threats from
multi-million record hacker forums. To address the problem of collecting large-
scale and dynamic datasets, the team will develop advanced obfuscated crawling
mechanisms that bypass automated collection countermeasures while requiring
minimal human involvement. The data collected will be segmented into time spells
and analyzed by a novel computational algorithm, the Diachronic Graph
Convolutional Autoencoder (D-GCAE). D-GCAE is rooted in methods drawn from the
diachronic linguistics, network science, text mining, and deep learning
communities. In this project, D-GCAE will extract graph embeddings at each time
spell, align embeddings, and analyze semantic shifts of hacker terminology to
identify potential emerging threats. These tools will be evaluated against both
state-of-the-art benchmarks proposed in computer science and related domains and
through analysis of their outputs by leading CTI sharing organizations. The
datasets and tools will also be disseminated for use by cybersecurity
researchers, practitioners, and educators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.