* 1850718
* Enhancing Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion in the Coastal Sector
* GEO,RISE
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2020
* Nicole Lekus, Restore America's Estuaries
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 02/29/2020
* USD 49,634.00

As a national non-profit, Restore America?s Estuaries (RAE) is well-positioned
to bring important topics and training to the great number and variety of
professionals working within the coastal science sector across the nation.
Diversity, equity, and inclusion is a topic area that RAE recognizes as not
receiving enough attention or resources within this sector but that is
critically important for the effectiveness and sustainability of coastal science
and application for management, conservation, and restoration efforts. In order
to achieve success in these efforts, environmental institutions must be able to
effectively communicate and engage with coastal communities and to attract new
talent to the coastal workforce. Both of these endeavors will benefit from
intentional actions that serve to identify and eliminate implicit bias within
recruitment, retention, and promotion of new staff and in developing an
inclusive work environment in which professionals from diverse backgrounds feel
welcome. Among the ways that diversity in the workforce can have a positive
impact on productivity and success are through competitive advantages,
innovation, and new knowledge, skills, and perspectives involving the use and
management of natural resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;RAE proposes to conduct a
DEI workshop during its National Summit. The workshop will focus on adding a DEI
lens to recruitment and hiring in the coastal sector, including tips to cast a
wider net in recruitment efforts, mitigate bias in hiring, and support retention
and advancement in an inclusive work environment. The workshop will help
participants grapple with bias through three lenses: 1) individual bias that
manifests in our personal thoughts and interactions; 2) institutional bias that
pervades agency and organizational practices and policies (and in particular,
recruitment and hiring), and 3) bias that impacts the entire environmental
sector based on the history and legacy of conservation and environmentalist.
Participants will be left with tips and tools to meaningfully engage in this
work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.