* 1850412
* CRII: SHF: Towards the Construction of a Model for Natural Language and Source Code
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2022
* Christian Newman, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 04/30/2022
* USD 184,532.00

Source code is written using a combination of human languages, such as English,
and programming languages. Developers use a combination of the rules for human
languages and programming languages to understand code. The act of trying to
understand code is referred to as program comprehension; it is an activity that
precedes all other programming-related activities a developer might undertake
when coding. For example, before fixing a bug, a developer needs to understand
the code where the bug is present; to add a new software feature, a developer
must understand the code which will support the new feature. If a piece of code
is highly comprehensible, then developers will have an easier time maintaining,
debugging, and adding to it. To support comprehension, research must attempt to
formally model how human language describes program behavior. With such a model,
source code could be optimized to be maximally understandable by automatically
improving, or generating, human language to best describe it. This project aims
to build such a model by combining information from natural language part of
speech with a model of program behavior to assist, improve and measure
comprehension. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to formally model how
human language describes source code behavior. This will be achieved by
combining a static-analysis-based taxonomy of identifier type categorizations
with natural language techniques and identifier definition-use chains. The
combination of these three activities allow the model to measure 1) how the type
constrains the behavior of an identifier, 2) what role, in English, the words in
an identifier correlate to, and 3) what function calls the identifier is used
in. These will allow the model to understand how the English of an identifier
relates to the usage (function calls) and behavior constraints (type
constraints). The goal of this model is to formally measure the way human
languages are used to describe source code behavior such that it could be used
to train a machine to do the same. The completed model will increase the current
understanding of how developers express program behavior through human languages
and allow for this expression to be measurably optimized for increased
comprehensibility. Additionally, the model will improve modern program
comprehension techniques by allowing them to be more aware of how the underlying
source code structure and rules influence the way human languages are used to
describe program behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.