* 1850543
* Building a Learning Ecology to Increase STEM Participation Among Middle School Girls
* EDU,DRL
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2022
* Nichole Pinkard, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Russell
* 05/31/2022
* USD 990,771.00

This project will advance efforts of the Innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST) program to better understand and promote practices
that increase students' motivations and capacities to pursue careers in fields
of science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM) by engaging in hands-
on field experience, laboratory/project-based entrepreneurship tasks and
mentorship experiences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is designed to
increasie the Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM)
participation of middle-school aged girls across various out-of-school (OST)
programs in a midsized racially and socioeconomically diverse community. The
project will research and develop a program, building on the existing Digital
Youth Divas (DYD) program model, that focuses on coding, designing digital
devices (e.g., sensors, devices sensitive to touch), and digital arts and design
and that will intentionally address areas that are of interest to girls. The
project will collaborate with EvanSTEM, a collaborative of Evanston, Illinois,
community organizations that offer STEM education activities, to create a
community-led initiative learning initiative that combines STEM with the arts
(STEAM). The project STEAM ecosystem will focus on three components: the DYD
city collective that consists of out-of-school (OST) organizations that provide
STEM programming for girls; DYD Caring Adult Network (a community of parents
focused on supporting STEM activities among girls); and the Divas Circle (a
community of 5-8th grade girls from across Evanston who participate in DYD
affiliated programming and events). This project leverages collaboration with a
local community of OST providers, parents, and educators to create a system of
STEM learning opportunities, social supports and technical
infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will investigate several key
research questions: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(1) How can middle school girls better
connect with STEM learning opportunities and how can organizations more
effectively coordinate their offerings and connect them to girls?&lt;br/&gt;(2)
What factors contribute to the creation of a local STEM ecosystem that engages
and sustains girls' STEM interest and participation?&lt;br/&gt;(3) How can
parents (or other caregivers) be engaged in supporting girls' participation in
STEM and what impact does their involvement have?&lt;br/&gt;(4) What impact does
participation have on family STEM identity and on girls' long term participation
and interest in STEM activities and programs?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will use a variety of research methods and date collection including: school
district data such as student course registrations; youth surveys assessing
participation levels, interest, and impacts; online participation data that will
reveal levels and patterns of involvement; interviews with students, parents,
and providers; and case study data of a sample of participating families. The
project will share research findings widely with the educational research
community through academic venues such as professional conferences and journals
and with practitioners through professional development workshops and by sharing
resource materials and curriculum on the www.digitalyouthnetwork.org/divas
website.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.