* 1850807
* The Southern Ocean's Iron Cycle through the Cenozoic
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Ann Dunlea, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 03/31/2024
* USD 415,529.00

Iron limits primary productivity in the modern Southern Ocean. This, in turn,
reduces the amount of atmospheric carbon dioxide that is taken up by the high-
latitude oceans. These observations raise a number of fascinating and hitherto
unanswered questions, namely: what are the major sources of iron to the Southern
Ocean? How resilient or variable is the supply of iron from these sources over
geologic time? How has the iron cycle responded to long-term changes in Earth's
climate? Have changes in the iron cycle influenced those of other nutrients,
such as silica? This project will address these questions by means of a
multifaceted approach examining the origin of the sediment, deposition rates,
and quantification of iron sources therein. The detailed records obtained will
be used to examine how changes in ocean nutrient cycles relate to the major
tectonic, climatic, and biogeochemical reorganizations that have occurred over
the past 66 million years ago. The holistic framework used will consider the
interplay of these major Earth system processes and quantify their individual
roles in shaping iron delivery to the largest iron-limited biome on Earth.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will quantify the major sources of iron to
the Southern Ocean and how they changed in space and time, based on the
geochemistry of metal-rich deep-sea clay sequences drilled by the International
Ocean Discovery Program. This will be achieved by combining statistical modeling
of the origin of the clay with radiometrically-constrained deposition rates and
explicit quantification of iron sources therein. The resultant reconstructions
will be used to test hypotheses regarding: the significance of hydrothermally-
derived iron to the high-latitude oceans over the Cenozoic; how the opening of
tectonic gateways redistributed deeply-sourced iron within the Southern Ocean;
how the supply of dust-derived iron changed as Australia became a desert; and,
if there were changes in the iron cycle associated with the proliferation of
diatoms. This project complements ongoing research conducted as part of the
GEOTRACES program, will engage K-12 students from communities underrepresented
in STEM, and will support two early-career
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.