* 1850040
* I-Corps: A Wearable, Biomarker-Tracking Device Platform Using Machine Learning and Predictive Technology for Positive Behavior Change
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2018,02/29/2020
* Christina Mair, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 02/29/2020
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project revolves around
the human brain?s proclivity towards substances detrimental to human health and
wellbeing, such as dangerous amounts of sugar, salt, and drugs, which is causing
global health and safety risks. Inability to avoid these temptations shortens
lifespans, increases healthcare costs, and strains resources. This team will use
machine learning and pattern recognition AI to identify and react to factors
that result in destructive human behaviors. While the initial intent of our
product is to provide potential customers with a tool to detect and prevent
addiction overdose and relapse, offer interventions of supervised individuals,
conserve emergency response resources, and save taxpayer money, this
unsupervised learning AI could, in subsequent iterations, be used to identify
and react to any behavior -- such as unsafe driving, binge eating, or anger
management. Helping people identify the precursors to their behaviors could
serve as a type of biofeedback that gives them and their support networks timely
and individualized insights, preventions, and interventions -- some of which
could be implemented by Internet of Things enabled devices (e.g. locking a car?s
ignition; calling a sponsor; playing calm music; etc.), resulting in cost and
health benefits across many populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps
project is focused on a patent-pending platform to predict and prevent addiction
relapses and overdoses by treating those in recovery with timely interventions
using wearable devices and artificial intelligence. Detecting craving states is
supported by past and current research, and there is scientific justification
for gathering smartphone usage and biometric wearable data on drug users.
Researchers have used the combination of smartphone usage and wearables data to
predict binge drinking behavior and we plan to apply this research to opioid
use. Additionally, cocaine and opioid research uses the same wearable device as
our studies. We expand upon current research by combining just-in-time
smartphone-based interventions for people in recovery for opioid use disorders
with pattern-detection predictive models that will be trained at the population
level and refined at the individual level. We will gather data on all relevant
factors that determine drug relapse risk state: physiology, smartphone usage,
location data, self-reports, and support-network-reports. Once a high-risk state
is detected, a smartphone app-based intervention focused on behavior change will
then be implemented in a timely and customizable
manner.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.