* 1850289
* Developing Abilities and Knowledge for Careers in Design and Engineering for Students on the Autism Spectrum by Scaling Up Making Experiences
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Wendy Martin, Education Development Center
* Standard Grant
* Robert Ochsendorf
* 07/31/2024
* USD 2,249,664.00

This is a proposal submitted to the Successful Project Expansion and
Dissemination strand of the Innovative Technology Experiences for Students and
Teachers (ITEST) program. People on the autism spectrum are very capable of
leading productive lives and have interests and abilities that can enable them
to make valuable contributions to their communities. For example, research shows
that young people with autism who go to college choose science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) majors at higher rates than college students
in the general population. With one out of every 59 people in the United States
on the autism spectrum, it is essential to create programs that prepare this
segment of the population for full participation in the workforce so our society
can benefit from the unique perspectives they have to offer. This project scales
up an Innovative Technology Experiences for Students and Teachers (ITEST)
project called IDEAS: Inventing, Designing, and Engineering on the Autism
Spectrum, in which a multidisciplinary team adapted a museum-based maker program
and tested it in three autism inclusion middle schools in New York City. The
project will build on the lessons learned from that project to bring maker
programming to a wider range of students, teachers, and schools, and to increase
the education community's understanding about how maker programming can help
young people on the autism spectrum gain the social, functional, and
communication skills necessary for careers in design and engineering.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of the project are (1) to expand the program to
more autism inclusion middle schools, (2) to expand the program to autism
inclusion elementary and high schools, (3) to make the program sustainable by
facilitating local adaptation in autism inclusion schools, (4) to shift the
ownership of the program to autism inclusion schools and the city's professional
development providers and special education office, and (5) to explore more
broadly how making can support autism inclusion efforts in general. To achieve
these goals, we will establish a collaborative co-design process that will
include current partners (Education Development Center, New York University's
Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) Nest Support Project, New York Hall of Science),
as well as autism inclusion schools (teachers and principals) and an advisor
from the New York City Department of Education's Special Education Office. By
the end of this three-year project, there will be 12 Maker Programs run by 24
teachers, reaching approximately 150,180 students on and off the spectrum each
year. The team also will explore what it will take to sustain such a program and
to build the capacity of the ASD Nest Support Project to have engineering design
maker programming available beyond the life of this grant to the other districts
to which their autism inclusion model is expanding. These activities will build
knowledge in the larger special education and informal education communities
about how making can enhance autism inclusion efforts and eventually increase
the participation of young people on the autism spectrum in STEM
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.