* 1850852
* The Reliability of Survey Data: The Effects of Question Content, Context and Form
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Duane Alwin, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Melanie Hughes
* 07/31/2022
* USD 305,000.00

Vast amounts of survey data are collected each year for many purposes, including
the collection of information for government use, public opinion and election
surveys, advertising and marketing research, as well as basic research in the
social and economic sciences. Because surveys are so widely used, it is
essential that we establish a knowledge base about the measurement quality of
survey data and the attributes of questions that produce the best data. Science
well understands the reliability of multi-item measures, or scales, commonly
used in such research. But we know much less about the quality of single-item
survey questions. New data resources and modeling strategies now make it
possible to assess the reliability or consistency of measurement for these
survey measures. Based on statistical models for evaluating reliability of
measurement, this project draws upon the insights from the information gathering
process in surveys. The results of this research will provide practical
suggestions that will improve the quality of survey data, thus improving survey
research generally. The project will develop a publicly available website to
allow all survey researchers to investigate question reliability of a large
number of commonly used survey questions. Because surveys are used broadly by
science, government and the private sector to inform many policy and economic
decisions, improved information about survey measures will contribute to the
health and well being of U. S. society across multiple sectors and over
time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because surveys are so widely used, it is essential
that we establish a knowledge base about the measurement quality of survey data
and the attributes of questions that produce the best results. In order to
accomplish these aims, this project develops a set of meta-data containing
information for roughly 1200 single-item questions representative of typical
questions used in social science surveys. The database of survey questions,
developed on the basis of ten nationally (or regionally) representative panel
studies including the General Social Surveys, the Health and Retirement Study,
the National Election Studies, contains estimates of question-specific
reliabilities, along with detailed coding of attributes of the questions, such
as their content, response formats, and question length, which can be used to
evaluate the optimal properties of survey questions with respect to levels of
measurement error. Through an analysis of the reliability information and the
attributes of survey questions from these large-scale panel studies, the study
focuses on three major elements of questionnaire construction: content, context
and form. Statistical analysis will involve use of auto-regressive or Quasi-
Markov simplex modeling techniques. The resulting meta-data set will be archived
with the Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research (ICPSR)
and other suitable data archives. In addition, the project will post key
elements of these data on a publicly available website, along with images of
questions and question context involved, in a manner that allows users to
search, filter or query the data base in investigating the reliability of types
of survey questions of interest. These findings will contribute important
information to the multidisciplinary field of survey methodology, which informs
scholars in disciplines including sociology, political science, economics,
communication, psychology, law, public health, and public policy, as well as
actors in the private and governmental sectors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.