* 1850796
* REU Site:  Plant Genome Research
* BIO,DBI
* 02/15/2019,01/31/2024
* Georg Jander, Boyce Thompson Institute Plant Research
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 01/31/2024
* USD 756,514.00

This REU Site award to the Boyce Thompson Institute at Cornell University,
located in Ithaca, NY, will support the training of 14 students for 10 weeks
during the summers of 2019- 2022. Undergraduate students with an interest in
hands-on, plant-focused laboratory research are encouraged to apply. Typical
student projects will involve genome-enabled plant molecular biology research,
including gene cloning and characterization, functional genomics, expression of
exogenous genes in plants, and analysis of biochemical pathways. The research
experience will be enhanced by scientific ethics training, faculty research
lectures, and discussion of graduate school and career options. Students will
develop scientific communication skills by writing and reviewing research
proposals, presenting their results as talks in a symposium, and participating
in workshops. Undergraduates can submit applications (biographical information,
transcript, statement of purpose, and two reference letters) via the program
website, www.btiscienc.org/internships. A committee of faculty mentors will
review the applications, and students will be notified of their application
status in early March.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is anticipated that a total of 56
students, primarily from schools with limited research opportunities, will be
trained during 4 years of the program. By participating in this REU Site,
undergraduate students will receive training in advanced plant biology research
methods. Many program participants will present their research results in the
form of posters or talks at scientific conferences. The overall research
experience will prepare students for graduate school in the plant sciences and
future research careers in academia, industry, or government
service.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A common web-based assessment tool used by all REU
Site programs funded by the Division of Biological Infrastructure, as well as
on-site interviews with participating students, will be used to determine the
effectiveness of the training program. After completion of the program, the
Boyce Thompson Institute will track the future education and career paths of all
participating students. Additionally, students will be asked to respond to an
automatic email sent via the NSF reporting system. More information is available
by visiting www.btiscienc.org/internships, or by contacting the program
coordinator (Delanie Sickler, pgrp-ourtreach@cornell.edu, 607-252-6566), the PI
(Georg Jander, gj32@cornell.edu), or the Co-PI (Margaret Frank,
mhf47@cornell.edu). This award is supported by the Divisions of Biological
Infrastructure (DBI) and Integrative Organismal System (IOS) Plant Genome
Research Program in the Directorate for Biological
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.