* 1850392
* CRII: SaTC: Secure and Comprehensive Forensic Audit Infrastructure for Transparent Heterogeneous Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2019,02/28/2022
* Yonghwi Kwon, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 02/28/2022
* USD 174,379.00

Cyber attackers are increasingly targeting emerging smart devices (e.g.,
Internet of Things devices) causing devastating damages to various enterprises
and government agencies. To combat these attacks, rapid and effective
investigation is critical to understand attack paths and measure the damages.
Unfortunately, forensic logging infrastructures are not efficient and effective
enough. Many devices completely lack forensic logging systems and others rely on
ineffective logging schemes, delaying or often completely preventing forensic
investigation. This research aims to combat advanced cyber-attacks such as
Advanced Persistent Threats (APTs) that actively leverage emerging devices. It
would design and develop fundamental security primitives that improve state-of-
the-art forensic logging in terms of accuracy, efficiency, effectiveness,
reliability, and applicability. This research directly contributes to national
security by advancing research in and developing techniques for the forensic
investigation of advanced cyber-attacks exploiting emerging devices which have
recently become a new major attack vector. The investigator is committed to the
open and timely dissemination of the outcomes of the proposed research in order
to encourage future research in this area. Also, the research will be integrated
into new curriculum materials that the investigator will develop, including
dedicated lab sessions on Internet of Things forensic analysis and associated
APT investigation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to design and develop
fundamental security primitives for forensic logging: (1) Improving the current
ineffective forensic logging systems that generate confusing forensic logs which
hinder the forensic investigation significantly. (2) Reducing the space overhead
of forensic logging systems to increase its applicability. (3) Enabling forensic
analysis on unmodifiable devices (e.g., proprietary devices) that cannot be
modified and instrumented via a novel forensic causality inference technique.
This research provides the following unique set of capabilities that were not
previously possible. First is the design and implementation of a novel event-
execution path encoding scheme that can precisely capture event execution
context information. This will allow forensic analysts to disambiguate confusing
event logs. Second is a technique for instrumentation-free forensic analysis via
causality inference. Devices that do not allow any modification and
instrumentation will be traced and analyzed via other devices that are connected
to them leveraging a novel causality inference
technique.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.