* 1850259
* Long term Societal Reaction to Environmental Change
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2019,02/29/2024
* Patricia Fall, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/29/2024
* USD 189,111.00

Dr. Steven Falconer and Dr. Patricia Fall from the University of North Carolina
at Charlotte, along with Dr. Suzanne Pilaar Birch (University of Georgia), Dr.
Elizabeth Ridder (California State University San Marcos) and Mary Metzger
(Vancouver Community College) will evaluate the role of environmental change in
the dramatic abandonment of the earliest cities in the ancient Southern Levant
(modern Israel, Palestine and Jordan). This research addresses basic social and
environmental questions regarding the development of early agrarian
civilizations, and the social and physical landscapes they engendered and in
which modern societies continue to live. Interdisciplinary studies featuring
collaboration between archaeologists, geographers and earth scientists are
particularly well-suited to apply deep time perspectives to the role of long-
term environmental change, and thereby assess competing explanations for early
urban collapse, as exemplified in the Southern Levant and witnessed repeatedly
elsewhere. Understanding possible trajectories and potential impacts of ancient
environmental change holds major implications for understanding how and why the
earliest urban civilizations rose and collapsed. Accordingly, this research
illuminates the often-precarious relationships between agrarian societies, both
ancient and modern, and their ecological settings. This project takes great
pride in the training of young female scholars in archaeology and geography.
Among the five principal collaborators on this project, four are women,
including two early career female assistant professors, one of whom is of
Hispanic descent. This project will continue to recruit students from
underrepresented groups and provide opportunities that broaden their
participation in science through multiple avenues. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
close collaboration with their research team, Drs. Falconer and Fall will
evaluate several competing scenarios to explain the strikingly pervasive and
lengthy abandonment of the earliest Levantine cities 2500-2000 BC, and their
rapid and dramatic reemergence immediately thereafter. This study features a
controlled comparative analysis of environmentally-sensitive evidence excavated
from four strategically-selected Bronze Age communities along the Jordan Rift:
two in the northern Jordan Valley, Jordan and two lying just east of the Dead
Sea Basin. Each pair of excavated sites includes a village occupied during urban
abandonment (2500-2000 BC) and a village inhabited during the rebirth of cities
(2000-1600 BC). &lt;br/&gt;Fine-grained radiocarbon dating of carbonized seeds
will provide high precision chronologies for these sites. Coordinated analyses
of stable isotopes from crop seeds, and animal bones and teeth will be used to
estimate ancient rainfall and temperatures through time. Changing profiles of
cultivated crops and herded animals will portray shifting human responses to
environmental change. The analytical results from our four sites will be
compared to infer trends of environmental change, both chronologically and
geographically. Resulting trajectories of environmental change between 2500 and
1600 BC will be used to assess competing hypotheses to explain Levantine urban
collapse. In sum, this research will contribute to the growing discussion of
environmental dynamics at the heart of ancient social change with timely
pertinence for human responses to environmental change in the modern
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.