* 1850002
* CRII:CHS: Addressing Individual Differences in Human-Autonomous Vehicle Interaction in Mixed Transportation Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2019,12/31/2022
* Yiqi Zhang, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Todd Leen
* 12/31/2022
* USD 173,518.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Autonomous vehicles will change the way human
drivers interact with vehicles dramatically. Before there is 100% adoption of
autonomous vehicles (AV), we will have a mixed transportation system in which
AVs share the roads with human-driven vehicles (HV). This project investigates
how driving styles of autonomous vehicles impact decision-making, trust, and
acceptance of AVs both for the human operator and for human drivers in other
vehicles. This project will benefit the design of AVs to promote drivers' trust
of AVs in mixed traffic conditions, mitigate driver aggressiveness to improve
driver safety, address public acceptance of autonomous vehicles, and smooth the
transition into a future where autonomous driving is prevalent. It provides
researchers and urban policy-makers knowledge and methods to evaluate the
effects of AV technology on mixed transportation systems. This research will
support the development of graduate-level curricula integrating research and
practical design issues in human-vehicle interaction, providing an
interdisciplinary education for students from Industrial Engineering, Civil
Engineering, and Mechanical Engineering.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project
addresses the transitional period of mixed driving systems that are expected to
grow in the coming years by targeting three fundamental questions: (1) how to
quantify the relationship between individual differences, trust, and decision-
making in the interaction between an AV and the human operator; (2) how to
investigate driver behavior and performance in the interaction between AV and
human-driven vehicles; and (3) how to design driving styles of autonomous
vehicles that can improve driver trust and acceptance of AV technology while
mitigating the potential for offsetting behavior (e.g. drivers' tendency of
additional risk taking when they feel safer). Throughout the project, the
effects of individual differences in driving style (aggressive vs conservative),
the propensity to trust technology, and age, gender, and driving experience are
explored empirically. Corresponding design guidelines of AV driving styles will
also be proposed to improve driver safety and promote driver trust of
AVs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.