* 1850348
* CRII: III: Partition-aware Parallel Query Processing
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2019,12/31/2021
* Paraschos Koutris, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 12/31/2021
* USD 175,000.00

Society is becoming increasingly data-driven. In order to efficiently handle the
increasing amount of data, current data management systems are designed to
support massive parallelism by scaling effectively to thousands of computing
units. A critical component in the success of these systems is that they
partition the input instance in specific layouts prior to processing. The goal
of the partitioning is to improve data locality, i.e., data that is often
processed together should be located in the same physical machine. Modern
distributed large-scale systems adopt several types of simple partitioning
schemes, but the simplicity of these schemes limits the data locality that can
be achieved. This project aims to study - both theoretically and in practice -
how more advanced partitioning strategies can further accelerate parallel query
processing and speed up the data-to-knowledge pipeline in various applications
across multiple domains. It will rethink data partitioning from the ground up,
and examine it in a more holistic framework in the context of modern data
processing.

This project aims to perform an end-to-end investigation of how the design of
advanced data partitioning techniques can impact both exact and approximate
parallel query processing. To achieve this research goal, this project focuses
on three interconnected directions. The first thrust focuses on establishing
formal foundations for data partitioning techniques, and study how partitioning
theoretically impacts exact query processing. In particular, this thrust will
investigate the theoretical tradeoffs between system parameters such as storage
overhead, workload balancing, and efficiency for query execution over the
partitioned instance. The second thrust will explore how approximate query
processing can be benefited from smart partitioning methods as well. Finally,
the third thrust will develop and implement novel partitioning strategies that
aim to fill design gaps in existing techniques and address some of the drawbacks
of existing partitioning techniques.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.