* 1850837
* The Ecology of Cloning
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2023
* Jonathan Allen, College of William and Mary
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 05/31/2023
* USD 299,823.00

The recruitment of new individuals into marine communities is critical to
determine community structure and yet, many basic parts of the life histories of
marine invertebrates remain poorly described. Much of the understanding of the
recruitment of marine invertebrates is based on theories centered on per-
offspring investment, the dispersal of offspring in the ocean, and the survival
of offspring during development. A major, largely neglected, area of research of
the recruitment of marine invertebrates is the potential for asexual propagation
of offspring during the embryonic and/or larval stages, also called cloning.
Cloning is widely known to occur in diverse marine taxa, but the ecological
consequences of this phenomenon are poorly understood. This project examines the
ecology of cloning in Echinoderms, the taxon in which it is most widely
reported. The work identifies the environmental triggers of cloning and tests
the consequences of cloning at different stages in the life cycle. The work also
trains undergraduate students, K-5 students and adult learners through research
experiences, school presentations, and short courses in Maine and Virginia.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project systematically evaluates inducers and
consequences of cloning in multiple species from two temperate coastal habitats.
Specifically, the work addresses two primary questions: 1) What are the
environmental inducers of cloning and how likely are cloning events to occur in
nature? 2) What are the consequences of cloning events for the recruitment of
echinoderms into benthic communities? Current understanding of the initiation of
cloning suggests that multiple stressors can induce cloning. Yet potential
inducers have only rarely been investigated in a systematic fashion and never
across multiple species within habitats or across habitats. The current project
does both, assessing the potential for variation in biotic (algal food cues and
predator cues) and abiotic (temperature, pH and salinity) parameters to induce
cloning events in seven species of temperate echinoderms from two coastal areas
(the Gulf of Maine and the Salish Sea). In addition to identifying inducers of
cloning, very little is known about the fates of clones or the primary larvae
that produce them, and therefore the ecological importance of this developmental
phenomenon is a black box. As part of answering this second question, the
investigators track the fates of clones that are generated at three different
life stages (zygotic clones, early larval clones and late larval clones) to
metamorphosis and beyond to determine the potential contribution of cloning to
juvenile recruitment. By tracking the fates of clones to metamorphosis and in
the weeks immediately following metamorphosis, when the vast majority of
mortality occurs, they can estimate the degree to which cloning may be a viable
developmental pathway for marine invertebrates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.