* 1850404
* CRII: CIF: Robust, Principled, and Practical Adaptive Sampling with Mobile Sensors
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* John Lipor, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2022
* USD 174,990.00

A fundamental challenge to modern science and engineering is that of rapidly and
accurately sensing the environment. Harmful algae blooms impair access to
drinking water, wildfires present a persistent threat to safety in the western
United States, and traffic and industry-related air pollutants pose a risk to
growing urban populations. To combat these issues, researchers are turning
increasingly to mobile sampling devices to provide safe, persistent estimation
of environmental phenomena. However, given the vast spatial regions these
devices are tasked with covering, a key open problem is that of designing
sampling strategies to provide the highest quality of information given the
available resources. This project aims to enable mobile sampling devices to
perform efficient, autonomous monitoring of such phenomena, thereby permitting
scientists and other concerned actors to make informed, data-driven decisions.
The project also facilitates undergraduate involvement through the deployment of
the developed algorithms on an unmanned aerial system, as well as workshops to
engage underrepresented community college students in the project
goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A key task in environmental sensing is that of
determining where a phenomenon lies above a certain threshold (for example,
regions where the pollution level is above a safe limit), a problem known as
level-set estimation (LSE). Existing LSE algorithms fall short by either (1)
failing to incorporate sampling costs associated with mobile sensors, (2)
lacking theoretical guarantees, or (3) relying on strong modeling assumptions.
The technical aim of this project is the development of practical adaptive
sampling algorithms for LSE with well-understood theoretical properties. The
first thrust of the project will consider the problem of estimating the change
point of a step function in one dimension, drawing on connections between active
learning and robotic path planning to develop and analyze algorithms capable of
incorporating previously-ignored costs and handling noisy measurements. The
second thrust will consider the two-dimensional LSE problem directly via a
graph-based approach. By combining recent techniques from graph-based active
learning with Markov decision processes and reinforcement learning, realistic
sampling costs based on the distance traveled, the number of measurements taken,
and the need to return to a base station for battery recharging will be
incorporated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.