* 1850008
* CRII: CPS: Modeling Subsurface Features and Connected Autonomous Vehicles as Cyber-Physical Systems for Reciprocal Mapping and Localization
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2022
* Shuai Li, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 04/30/2022
* USD 175,000.00

Underneath the ground of modern cities exists a labyrinth of subsurface
infrastructure consisting of water pipes, utility cables, and gas lines. This
project proposes to study the use of sensor-equipped autonomous vehicles to
accurately map this complicated network and explore how to leverage the
subsurface infrastructure as invariant landmarks to provide reliable and secure
vehicle navigation. If successful, this research will result in automated tools
that make better maps of urban subsurface to improve buried infrastructure and
prevent accidents when digging is required; as well as create a new means to
navigate autonomous vehicle in cluttered and distressed urban areas during and
after natural or man-made disasters. This project will also offer career
development opportunities for participating students including those from
underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve these objectives,
multiple connected and autonomous vehicles will be equipped with ground
penetrating radar to collect radargrams of subsurface infrastructure along
coordinated trajectories. A novel algorithm will be created to detect and
identify the signatures in radargram that correspond to elements of the
subsurface infrastructure. The unwanted features such as signal interferences
and signature occlusions will be turned into useful clues to aggregate multiple
radargrams to produce complete subsurface maps. From these maps, a new
radargram-based odometry method will be devised to estimate the global poses of
connected vehicles based on partially observed vehicle-feature networks. The
methods will be tested and evaluated to determine how key parameters such as
vehicle speed and network topology affect the accuracy of mapping, localization,
and navigation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.