* 1850015
* Collaborative Research: Cross-Validation of Empirical and Physics-based ground motion predictions
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/2019,04/30/2021
* Marine Denolle, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Raterron
* 04/30/2021
* USD 167,804.00

Many densely populated areas such as Tokyo, Seattle, and Los Angeles are located
near active plate boundaries capable of producing large earthquakes. These
cities are often built on top of sedimentary basins which trap, focus and
amplify earthquake seismic energy. Prediction of strong ground motions is
critical in these areas to prevent the loss of life and property in future large
events. Here, the principal investigators pioneered a new empirical approach
which uses seismic ambient noise, for example generated by ocean waves, to
predict large earthquake ground motions. They are also expert in 3D numerical
simulations of ground-notion dynamics. The team join effort to cross-validate
these approaches in the greater Los Angeles. They use ambient noise and small
past-earthquake data to create a suite of large scenario earthquakes (magnitude
6.5 to 7.8) on the southern San Andreas fault. The simulations allow evaluating
whether the underlying geological structure may channel earthquake waves and
thereby strongly amplify the ground motions. This 2-year project will help
mitigating seismic hazards in southern California. The developped methodology
can be applied to other urban areas located in similar geological context. The
project also supports an early career female scientist and provides training to
three graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is to
characterize the coupling effect between the amplification due to seismic
waveguides and that due to source directivity. This effect may enhance shaking
intensity in sedimentary basins. The project uses southern California as a
natural laboratory. Other large metropolitan areas, such as Tokyo, Mexico City,
Seattle, Salt Lake City and Jakarta, are subjected to similar hazards. Here, the
team innovates in using cross-validation between two state-of-the-art ground-
motion prediction approaches: the ambient-noise Virtual Earthquake Approach and
3D dynamic simulations. This cross-validation allows i) establishing bounds of
confidence in the two methods, ii) examining the coupling between path and
source effects in enhancing ground motion, and iii) evaluating the extent of
nonlinear effects on future ground motions. The novelty of the project is the
unique combination of theoretical and observational seismology. In this effort,
newly collected data from dense arrays including both broadband and nodal-
seismic instruments will be exploited.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.