* 1850762
* Quantifying internal wave and mesoscale variability using Ocean Observatory Initiative data
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Ruth Musgrave, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Sean Kennan
* 03/31/2024
* USD 719,806.00

This project will use data from the NSF Ocean Observatories Initiative (OOI) to
study the effects of the ocean bottom on how wind energy travels in the ocean
interior. The OOI data will be combined with output from a general ocean
circulation model to investigate how different ocean bottom shapes affect energy
propagation and its dissipation. The primary OOI data set consists of
temperature, salinity, and velocity data obtained from sensors mounted on moored
profilers - sensor packages that travel periodically, vertically up and down
oceanographic moorings. These data are available from four OOI sites. The
project also will provide new, high quality calibrations and processing of these
data for use by the oceanographic community. The project will leverage the OOI
program to provide improved data and improve understanding of how wind forcing
and oceanographic variability influence the internal exchanges of energy in the
ocean.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project data from Ocean Observatories
Initiative (OOI) open ocean moorings will be used along with a very high
resolution global circulation model and idealized models to understand the
effects of sloping bottom topography on wind generation of near-inertial energy
and subsequent propagation and dissipation. The primary data set comprises
temperature, salinity, and velocity data from sensors integrated in McLane
Moored Profilers (MMP) located at the OOI mooring sites. The lead PI, who
developed the moored profilers used on the OOI arrays, will reprocess these data
using optimal techniques and make the data available for OOI and the
oceanographic community. The effects of mesoscale eddy fields on propagation of
near inertial wave energy will be investigated. The reprocessing of these data
from long term mooring sites at various locations around the world oceans
represents and unique opportunity to test and improve theories of the wind
driven inertial motions and internal waves.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.