* 1850749
* Sequestration of Halogens in the Sub-continental Lithospheric Mantle: Implications for Global Element Cycling
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/2019,04/30/2024
* Jaime Barnes, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 04/30/2024
* USD 350,099.00

The halogen elements (chlorine, fluorine, iodine, and bromine) play a
fundamental role in modifying the properties of fluids and minerals on Earth.
For example, the addition of halogens to fluids can cause minerals to break down
at different temperatures and pressures, as well as, increase the ability of the
fluid to transport of metals. Halogens are enriched in surface reservoirs (e.g.,
sedimentary pore fluids, sediments) compared to the Earth's mantle. The
subduction of these reservoirs brings halogens into the mantle. Halogens can
then be returned to the Earth's surface at arc volcanoes. However, mass balance
constraints suggest that more halogens are subducted to the mantle than are
returned to the Earth's surface via arc volcanism. These observations lead most
researchers to suggest that an excess of halogens are being continually
delivered to the mantle. This imbalance as implications for the long-term
chemical evolution of the Earth's surficial reservoirs and mantle. However,
several halogen reservoirs remain unquantified and may account for this
disconnect. Here it is proposed that halogens may be sequestered in the sub-
continental lithospheric mantle (i.e., the upper mantle below the base of the
continental crust) and thus not accounted for in calculations. By quantifying
the concentrations of halogens in the sub-continental lithospheric mantle, the
overall halogen budget can be constrained. In addition to the intellectual
impacts of improved understanding of elemental transfer through subductions
zones, the broader impacts involve training of graduate and undergraduate
students and participation in GeoFORCE, a summer program that engages
outstanding students from select low performing minority-serving high schools in
STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will constrain the effects of
subduction on the subcontinental lithospheric mantle halogen budget and the
extent to which the subcontinental lithospheric mantle may act as a major
halogen reservoir and control the overall halogen budget by "isolating" halogens
from the subduction zone cycle for potentially long periods of time. This work
will also provide insights as to how subduction processes modify the halogen
concentrations and ratios in material returned to the convecting mantle. Bulk
halogen concentrations, as well as, in situ halogen concentrations of hydrous
(e.g., chlorite, amphibole, antigorite) and anhydrous minerals (e.g., pyroxene,
olivine) of mantle xenoliths from the western United States that have been
geochemically modified by the subducting Farallon slab will be measured. These
data will be compared with other lithophile tracers of subduction input and melt
depletion. The subduction-influenced xenoliths will be compared to non-
subduction-modified mantle xenoliths and abyssal peridotites, which will serve
as a baseline for halogen content in the convecting
mantle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.