* 1850005
* Collaborative Research: Testing Models for Early Paleozoic Deposition, Volcanism, and Biotas of Sibumasu: Implications for Tectonics and Paleogeography
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Blair Schoene, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Yurena Yanes
* 06/30/2023
* USD 217,951.00

The time period between 505 to 485 million years ago was a dynamic time in
Earth's history and included extensive volcanic activity and the evolution of
ancient organisms that then occupied the world's shallow oceans. Unfortunately,
there are few places in the world that have the volcanic ash beds that are
needed to really understand the timing of events during this period. However,
there is one region where the record of ancient volcanoes and their ashes has
survived: an ancient fragment of Asia called "Sibumasu", which comprises parts
of Thailand, Malaysia, Myanmar, and southwestern China. In Sibumasu, ashes and
sedimentary rocks with fossils are layered in many thick sections, offering the
opportunity to obtain high precision dates from the ashes, and insight into the
feedbacks between the physical and biological worlds during this transformative
time in Earth history. In addition, this project will incorporate the training
of graduate and undergraduate students across three U.S. institutions and will
partner with a complementary UNESCO funded IGCP668 project on Sibumasu that
supports the participation of scientists from developing countries to attend
meetings and workshops in Thailand, Myanmar, China, Japan, and the USA.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will determine the age of the rocks found in
the Sibumasu region in order to understand the pattern of Earth-Life
interactions. To do this, the team will incorporate a multidisciplinary approach
to the project including extensive field sampling, paleogeographic analyses of
fossils, geochemical rock characterization, and a variety of geochronologic
techniques. Further, the team will work in partnership with the Myanmar
Geosciences Society to produce an illustrated children's book in Burmese
featuring the fossils of Mt. Hsingmango, and what they say about regional Earth
history. The story also will be modified for use with the National Institute of
Design's chitrakatha workshop for India's nationally ranked graphic art students
and will form the basis of an animated story of India's migration across the
Tethys Ocean and collision with Asia that will have broad educational reach
across the subcontinent.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.