* 1850052
* CRII: AF: Enriched Topological Summaries for Inverse Problems
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2021
* Justin Curry, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 06/30/2021
* USD 174,074.00

With Big Data comes the need for succinct data summaries that are easy to
visualize and understand. Topological Data Analysis (TDA) offers a particular
suite of computational tools for summarizing and visualizing shape in high-
dimensional data sets. These tools have been used in recent years to guide new
discoveries in cancer research, neuroscience, materials science, image analysis,
and many areas where shape, broadly construed, is of importance. However, by
summarizing data in a succinct way certain important differences between data
sets can often go undetected. This project provides a new mathematical framework
for precisely measuring how lossy the most popular methods in TDA are. By
developing new ways for quantifying how large-scale differences go undetected,
the project offers enrichments of current topological methods to obtain novel
data science tools with greater distinguishing power. The awarded funds will go
primarily to fund a graduate student to aid the PI in basic research and
development of these enriched topological summaries. Computational experiments
on data sets of public interest, e.g. time-varying socio-economic indicators and
weather data, will be carried out to test performance of these tools against
current state of the art methods. Additionally, the PI will incorporate these
novel methods into the data science curriculum at the PI's host institution and
recruit students from historically under-represented groups to be trained as the
nation's next generation of data scientists.

This project is an ambitious extension of earlier work undertaken by the PI and
provides a targeted attack on the inverse problem for the main objects of study
in topological data analysis: the merge tree, which tracks how connected
components of the sub-level set of a function evolves; Reeb graphs, which tracks
connected components of the fiber of a function; and the barcode/persistence
diagram, which is a collection of intervals/points in the plane that represent
an algorithmic pairing of critical points of a function on a space. The PI
showed in earlier work how merge trees determine the associated barcode and
provided a precise enumeration of how many distinct merge trees have the same
barcode. By identifying functions on the real line that are related by an
orientation preserving coordinate transformation, the PI showed how a novel
enrichment of the merge tree---the chiral merge tree---faithfully captures these
equivalence classes of functions and offers exponential distinguishing power
over the barcode for time-series analysis. This project aims to carry out
similar analysis for functions on surfaces, with an eye toward improving the
classification performance of persistent homology in image analysis, and for
Reeb graphs, to better integrate with level-set persistent homology. By carrying
out a careful study of inverse problems in each of these settings, novel
enrichments analogous to the chiral merge tree will be developed. Additionally,
to make these enriched topological summaries useful for data classification
tasks, novel metrics will be defined for comparing each of these summaries and
algorithms will be developed for the efficient computation of these metrics.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.