* 1850349
* CRII: III: Multiresolution Tensor Learning for Scalable and Interpretable Spatiotemporal Analysis
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2020
* Qi Yu, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Wei-Shinn Ku
* 07/31/2020
* USD 190,998.00

A Framework for Scalable and Interpretable Spatiotemporal Data
Analysis&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The past few decades have witnessed an explosion
of large-scale spatiotemporal data. &lt;br/&gt;At the same time, domain experts
and policy makers need data analysis tools that are explainable &lt;br/&gt;in
order to trust and deploy them. However, analyzing spatiotemporal data is highly
challenging, &lt;br/&gt;as such data often demonstrates complex correlations,
high dimensionality, and contains multiple &lt;br/&gt;spatiotemporal
resolutions. Meeting this challenge will require new methods that can handle
highly &lt;br/&gt;correlated data, generalize to higher dimensions, and reason
at different granularities. &lt;br/&gt;To address these challenges, this project
will develop a spatiotemporal data analysis framework &lt;br/&gt;that is both
scalable and interpretable. The project will apply this framework to tackle
challenging &lt;br/&gt;problems in climate informatics, sports analytics, and
intelligent transportation. This project will &lt;br/&gt;establish a large-scale
spatiotemporal data repository and distribute open source software to
benchmark&lt;br/&gt;research progress. The educational component will develop
new courses geared towards the intersection of &lt;br/&gt;machine learning and
spatiotemporal analysis. Additionally, the principal investigator plans to
continue outreach activities &lt;br/&gt;that involve giving tutorials,
organizing workshops at relevant conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long term
goal of this project is to improve the scalability and interpretability of
&lt;br/&gt;spatiotemporal analysis tools. The principal investigator has
initiated a framework of tensor learning that &lt;br/&gt;can capture higher-
order correlations and address high-dimensional issues. This project will
&lt;br/&gt;significantly expand the framework to exploit the multiresolution
nature of spatiotemporal data. &lt;br/&gt;In particular, the principal
investigator will develop a multiresolution tensor learning framework and
integrate this &lt;br/&gt;framework into existing models, including latent
factor models, Gaussian processes and graph neural &lt;br/&gt;networks. This
approach leverages fast tensor optimization algorithms to recognize
spatiotemporal &lt;br/&gt;patterns at multiple granularities. This project will
lead to novel techniques to automatically &lt;br/&gt;discover latent semantics,
quantify uncertainty, and learn feature representations from
&lt;br/&gt;spatiotemporal data in a scalable and interpretable fashion. It will
further contribute &lt;br/&gt;to our burgeoning understanding of advanced
optimization and statistical tools such as &lt;br/&gt;multigrid optimization,
tree-based Gaussian processes and geometric deep
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.