* 1850083
* Acquisition and Commissioning of a Carbonate Preparation Device for Stable Isotope Analysis
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2023
* Alan Mix, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Carlin
* 03/31/2023
* USD 147,274.00

This project supports the purchase, installation, and commission of a new
computer-automated device that dissolves fossil shells and other mineral
materials made of calcium carbonate, to prepare them for specialized analysis of
their carbon and oxygen isotopic composition at high precision. The investment
in this equipment enhances the analytical capabilities of a stable isotope
facility that is used by a large community of US scientists and will facilitate
a broad range of experiments for decades. Isotopes of carbon in fossil shells
are useful as a chemical fingerprint of how carbon moves between various forms
such as carbon dioxide in the atmosphere, dissolved carbon in the ocean, and as
carbon incorporated into organic materials formed by plants and animals.
Isotopes of oxygen are typically used to trace changes in physical environments,
such as past temperature changes, and movement of water through evaporation,
rain, or snow, growth or melting of glaciers, and freshwater flows into the
ocean. This is important for fundamental understanding of the natural
interactions between climate and life on earth, and provides scientific
background for policy interests of the United States related to changes in
natural environments. The equipment supports education and training of students,
including experiential learning in STEM fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Kiel-
IV high-vacuum acid-digestion device acquired through this project is enabling
new research directions and improves the analytical capabilities of the Oregon
State University/College of Earth, Ocean, and Atmospheric Sciences Stable
Isotope Laboratory for measuring oxygen and carbon isotopes in ultra-small
samples of carbonate (such as fossil foraminifera and other biogenic
carbonates). The instrument is attached as an inlet system to an existing
ThermoFisher 253Plus isotope-ratio mass spectrometer. This new equipment serves
a large community of NSF-funded investigators, so will facilitate many projects.
Primary applications are in paleoclimatology and paleoceanography. The equipment
is also used in STEM experiential learning for students at the undergraduate and
graduate levels. Over the past five years, more than 100 students from
institutions throughout the US have used the existing facility; educational
opportunities are expected to grow as the facility is updated with modern state-
of-the-art equipment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.