* 1850302
* Innovative Science, Technology Engineering, &amp; Mathematics Explore Project
* EDU,DRL
* 12/15/2018,11/30/2022
* Cynthia Trawick, Morehouse College
* Standard Grant
* Toya frank
* 11/30/2022
* USD 1,325,768.00

This project will advance efforts of the Innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST) program to better understand and promote practices
that increase students' motivations and capacities to pursue careers in fields
of science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM) by engaging in hands-
on field experience, laboratory/project-based entrepreneurship tasks and
mentorship experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Morehouse College will engage 36
students from underrepresented groups in grades 6 through 10 in a 3-year STEM
technology program that will include a four-week summer program, hands-on field
experience, and Saturday academy during the academic year. The program utilizes
a project-based framework designed to provide underrepresented minority students
with challenging technological learning experiences. Specifically, the project
will expose students to innovation and creativity in STEM disciplines within the
context of real-world problem-solving scenarios utilizing entrepreneurial
concepts in to promote academic success in middle school and high school and
prepare students academically to attend a college or university. The goals of
the project are: 1) Increase student awareness and knowledge of educational
opportunities and STEM careers. 2) Increase student knowledge, skills and
practices represented in STEM and/ or STEM workforce. 3) Increase broadening
participation of underrepresented populations in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is a collaboration of the Division of Science &amp; Mathematics and the
Morehouse College Entrepreneurship Center with local school districts and local
industry partners. The project is a global model for higher education and
industry collaborations with programs that connect education with student
leadership development, and community-focused resources. This project provides:
(1) supplemental STEM education; 2) hands-on laboratory project-based
entrepreneurial experiences; 3) role models from academia and industry; and 4)
parental involvement. The research questions will address the following: (a)
What factors and key experiences effectively promote awareness of STEM careers,
motivation to pursue a STEM career, and persistence in undertaking education
pathways to those careers, particularly among students from underrepresented
populations? (b) In what roles and in what ways do parents, mentors, caregivers,
and other community members motivate students to become aware of, interested in,
and prepared for STEM careers? Research questions will be answered with both
descriptive statistics and outcome analysis. Qualitative and quantitative
measures will be used. Techniques will include surveys, interviews, focus
groups, document analysis, and measures of
participation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.