* 1850753
* Collaborative Research: Quantifying Abyssal Circulation and its Variability
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2019,02/28/2023
* Geoffrey Gebbie, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 02/28/2023
* USD 206,950.00

The global ocean has absorbed over 90% of the excess anthropogenic heat between
1971 and 2010, with about 10% of that going into the deep ocean and contributing
to global and local sea level rise. Despite these broad societal implications,
the mechanisms driving the deep warming are still poorly understood. This
project aims to improve our understanding of these mechanisms through a global
study using a new method to utilize chemical tracers (in this case
chlorofluorocarbons; CFCs) to overcome previous obstacles due to limitations
from sparse data. The analysis will capitalize on a growing data set of
detectable CFC concentrations throughout the deep ocean as anthropogenic tracers
enter and circulate along the bottom limb of the overturning circulation of the
ocean. This data set allows for both defining new pathways that bring new waters
into the deep ocean and assessment of the variability in deep water formation
rates. The variability will allow for correlations with surface conditions to
evaluate driving mechanisms so that they can be included in climate models. In
addition, this work will update decadal trends in abyssal warming, anthropogenic
carbon uptake, and deep steric sea level rise annually through the end of the
project in 2021. The results will help to close current global energy, carbon,
and sea level budgets and advance our understanding of the physical mechanisms
forcing the distribution of anthropogenic heat and carbon throughout the ocean.
This work will demonstrate and explain modes of deep variability previously
unknown for use in climate models leading to improved long-term climate
projections under increased CO2 emissions, therefore enabling better societal
adaptability to changes to come. The project will support a third year graduate
student for his PhD work at SIO. In addition, smaller summer projects will be
made available for undergraduate summer students through the Scripps Institution
of Oceanography Undergraduates Research Fellowship (SURF) program. The project
will produce gridded global CFC, deep ocean warming, and steric sea level rise
data products that will be made available to the broader scientific and
educational communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall objective of this
proposal is to understand the variability in the bottom limb of the Meridional
Overturning Circulation (MOC) in order to quantify, explain, and forecast the
role that the deep ocean plays in ocean heat and carbon uptake. The deep ocean
is warming at a significant rate with important climatic implications for sea
level rise and ocean heat absorption. Despite these broad societal implications,
the mechanism driving this deep warming is still poorly understood and difficult
to simulate in climate models, decreasing our ability to predict how the climate
will change under increased CO2 emissions . One hypothesis is the warming is
driven by a decrease in deep water formation around Antarctica. The deep CFC
data will be used to produce annual gridded maps within neutral density surfaces
around the globe by modeling the oceanic subsurface response and fitting the
data within its uncertainty. The gridded CFC dataset will allow for inference of
deep circulation, ventilation, and assessment of any interdecadal change in
locations with multiple decades of data. It will validate any observed
interdecadal variability by comparing to changes in tracer age, oxygen, and
volume of deep water along repeated hydrographic sections. The decadal
variability will be compared to observed deep warming trends in order to
identify if these changes are causing the recent accumulation of heat in the
abyssal ocean and explore any mechanisms driving the variability. This work will
allow better characterization of the mean and variability of the deep transport
along the bottom limb of the MOC and how it has affected deep-ocean
temperatures. The new method to find tracer transport from CFCs to provide an
improved estimate of deep ocean circulation, ventilation, and variability will
also lay the groundwork for future monitoring of global deep-ocean
warming.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.