* 1850517
* CRII: CHS: Estimating the Financial, Social and Ethical Impacts of Algorithmic Crime Analysis
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Shion Guha, Marquette University
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 07/31/2022
* USD 175,000.00

This research seeks to understand the financial, social and ethical impacts of
crime analysis algorithms. Misapplication of algorithms has the capacity for
great harm and discrimination, notably when applied in sentencing decisions
about criminal offenders. Inspecting and investigating algorithmic biases for
their real-world impacts is an extremely novel but increasingly important area.
The current literature has mostly focused on philosophical and sociological
critiques of algorithms. What is sorely needed is a mathematical and
computational investigation that builds on these socio-technical critiques in
order to provide contextual and quantitative evidence for actual impact. We need
to know how people's biases, assumptions, norms and values play into algorithmic
perceptions and applications. More specifically, governments often seek to apply
algorithms to crime analysis with the usually stated justification of financial
efficiencies, reducing human error and smoothening bureaucracies. Therefore,
this research seeks to understand the practical, financial, social and ethical
impacts of deploying algorithms in the criminal justice system in order to
develop evidence-based policies.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project has four
main objectives. First, using crime mapping as a lens of inquiry, the project
will investigate the perceptions of financial, social and ethical dimensions of
algorithmic crime analysis, to uncover both qualitative and quantitative
insights about how laypeople and experts perceive its various implications.
Second, the research will deconstruct popular algorithms used in crime analysis
in order to understand specific points at which bias may occur and statistically
better variants that may mitigate them. Third, it will compare and contrast each
biased variant with its less biased counterpart to compute metrics about
financial, social and ethical impacts, providing quantitative implications for
biased criminal justice policy. Fourth, as a result of the first three
objectives, this proposal will help expand initial efforts to build a community
of like-minded scholars, though organizing a summer workshop involving
practitioners, researchers and students to educate and co-create a community of
practice around ethical, fair, accountable and transparent
algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.