* 1850170
* Collaborative Research - Cholinergic and sleep regulation of human memory and learning
* SBE,BCS
* 11/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Sara Mednick, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 08/31/2019
* USD 193,116.00

The ability to learn and remember facts, experiences, and skills is critical for
a wide range of human activities. Although how experience is encoded into
memory, how such memory is then consolidated and later retrived have been
extensively studied by psychologists and neuroscientists, a critical context in
which memory processing taking place has been understudied. That is the natural
rise and fall of the neurochemicals that are known to influence a wide range of
brain functions through the sleep and wake cycles. Here Dr. Sara Mednick of the
University of California, Riverside (UCR) and Dr. Michael Silver of the
University of California, Berkeley (UCB) and their colleagues will investigate
how acetylcholine (Ach), a major neuromodulator known to play a critical role in
learning and memory, might differentially affect neural processing at the stages
of encoding, consolidation, and retrieval. Rivastigmine a drug for treating
Alzheimer's Disease, will be given to human subjects to increase Ach just before
training (encoding), just after training (consolidation in the waking state),
just before bedtime (sleep-dependent consolidation), and just before testing
(retrieval). Brain electrical activity will be monitored using high-density
electroencephalography (EEG) to characterize how different cortical regions are
affected by both natural variations in ACH associated with sleep-wake cycles and
by pharmacological treatment. Together, these experiments will provide the
critical empirical data to test theories of learning and memory that take into
consideration of dynamic changes in
neuromodulation&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Acetylcholine has been associated with
Alzheimer's disease, a neurodegenerative disease that affects over 5 million
Americans. Better understanding of ACh's role in mechanisms of memory will help
treat patients with the disease and also develop tools for enhancing healthy
memory as well. A better understanding of neurochemical mechanisms of learning
and memory will also help improve educational practice and applied training
regimes, and investigations of the role of sleep in this project will help
emphasize the importance of sleep in a society that has record low levels of
sleep and impaired functioning due to poor sleep habits. Dr. Mednick and Dr.
Silver will develop teaching modules and courses on the roles of sleep and
acetylcholine and learning and memory as well as a course on sleep methods that
will help train students to conduct research in this area. Finally, Dr. Mednick
will present public lectures on the health benefits of sleep at local Hispanic-
serving public hospitals and will work with the UCR Health Center to promote
napping and healthy sleep habits in college students through Nap-Ins and other
university-wide events.