* 1850405
* Caminos a la Ciencia/Pathways to Science: A Program Designed to Recruit, Retain, and Develop Latinas in STEM Disciplines
* EDU,DRL
* 03/01/2019,02/28/2023
* April Marchetti, Randolph-Macon College
* Standard Grant
* Alicia Santiago Gonzalez
* 02/28/2023
* USD 1,082,291.00

This is a multi-year project aimed at advancing efforts of the Innovative
Technology Experiences for Students and Teachers (ITEST) program to better
understand and promote practices that motivate Latinas to pursue educational
pathways to science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM) occupations.
The project will work toward identifying and addressing the factors which
influence Latinas' levels of engagement in pursuing STEM education throughout
their high school years. These factors will include (a) accessibility to STEM
learning opportunities; (b) language issues that affect their participation in
these activities; (c) level of family or community encouragement to pursue STEM
education; and (d) financial pressures, such as providing support for the family
or child care. The project team consists of Randolph-Macon College, which serves
as the backbone organization, working together with a group of STEM-focused
Fortune 500 corporations and nonprofits, as well as state and local government
and local public-school systems. The program will identify promising students
during their freshman year of high school based on recommendation from a teacher
and a written essay. Selected students will be invited to campus for each of
three consecutive summers (after the freshman, sophomore, and junior years)
where they will participate in targeted activities. These activities will be
designed to accomplish several goals: (a) to create a cohesive cohort with an
identity embracing intellectual interdisciplinary STEM enquiry; (b) to develop
and nurture leadership skills; (c) to expose the cohort to prominent successful
Latinas in STEM fields; and (d) to develop skills leading to success in applying
to and persisting in a college environment. Synergistic activities will be
included for these students and their families to extend the goals into the
academic year. At the conclusion of each summer, students will earn modest
scholarships to an accredited institution of their
choice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research questions will be (1) How does
engagement, including attitudes, interest in STEM disciplines, and interest in
pursuing college education in STEM change for the target population, compared to
initial measures of these constructs?; (2) To what extent do partnerships with
STEM-focused corporations and nonprofits account for change in engagement
observed in participant cohorts?; and (3) To what extent does parental
involvement and other external factors account for an observed engagement change
in the focus population? To answer these questions, the project will use
multiple data collection pathways, including (a) the Student Attitudes Toward
STEM (S-STEM) Survey, which measures changes in confidence and efficacy in STEM
subjects, 21st century learning skills and interest in STEM careers; (b) pre-
and post-camp surveys, which measure interest in STEM topics, and family
engagement; and (c) observational assessments of engagements with family
members. The focus population will consist of Latinas. The project will follow
one third of the population for five years, one third for four years, and one
third for three year to collect pertinent data past the end of the funding
period to follow the entire cohort through the second year after graduation from
high school. Data interpretation strategies will include longitudinal-trend
analysis of engagement change and explanatory analysis of the factors that
contribute to that change. The main outcome of the project will be the
identification of factors that are associated with a successful Latina's pathway
from high school to college. The project will conduct formative and summative
evaluation to make improvements and adjustments to the program, as well as to
determine potential scalability of the work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.