* 1850743
* CRII: CIF: Learning Hidden Structures in Networks: Fundamental Limits and Efficient Algorithms
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2018,03/31/2021
* Jiaming Xu, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 03/31/2021
* USD 174,351.00

The problem of learning hidden structures in network data arises in many
contemporary applications such as recommender systems, network privacy, and
genomics. This problem intersects high-dimensional statistical inference and
large-scale network analysis. On the one hand, classical statistical paradigm
focuses on optimal statistical performance of learning algorithms, while it
neglects computational complexity that becomes increasingly critical as network
data gets big. On the other hand, computer scientists mostly focus on
computationally efficient approximation algorithms for worst-case instances,
while they neglect the underlying statistical structures that can be potentially
exploited to improve the algorithm performance. This research combines both
statistical and computational perspectives to characterize fundamental
performance limits and develop efficient optimal algorithms for learning hidden
structures in networks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research has two interrelated
thrusts: graphon estimation and graph matching. Graphon estimation learns the
underlying generating mechanism of a network from a single snapshot of the
network. Graph matching matches the vertex sets of two graphs with correlated
edges to minimize the number of adjacency disagreements. This research involves:
(1) developing efficient algorithms for graphon estimation and graph matching by
exploiting insights from spectral graph theory, convex relaxations, and
statistical physics; (2) deriving sharp statistical performance limits by
drawing tools from information theory, convex duality theory, and random matrix
theory; (3) identifying fundamental computational barriers which limit
computationally efficient procedures from attaining the optimal statistical
performance. The investigator also deploys the algorithms developed in this
research to real network data, leading to fast and accurate algorithms for
preference elicitation in recommender systems, de-anonymization in social
networks, and DNA assembly in genomics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.