* 1850153
* CRII:RI:A Multi-level Framework for Text Specificity
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2022
* Junyi Li, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 05/31/2022
* USD 190,496.00

Language specificity, which captures the level of detail in text, varies
throughout discourse as a reflection of speaker intent: general content makes
high-level observations or claims, while specific content provides concrete
details. Appropriately gauged specificity is a characteristic of well-organized
text and plays a crucial role in comprehension. Intelligent systems that make
predictions of sentence specificity have been useful for natural language
processing tasks such as summarization and argumentation mining, as well as for
linguistic analyses in fields such as forensic science, political science, and
education. However, existing systems are domain-specific tools that operate only
on the sentence level. This project addresses a series of challenges to enable
domain-agnostic, multi-level analysis of specificity, bringing together concepts
across computational methods, linguistic analysis and corpora development. It
opens up venues of applying specificity as a pragmatic tool in a wide range of
disciplines, including those where the use of computational methods is rapidly
emerging. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To substantially advance our understanding and
practical use of text specificity to capture information organization in
discourse, this CISE Research Initiation Initiative (CRII) project aims to (1)
develop effective specificity prediction systems that work across multiple
domains, (2) develop annotation guidelines and datasets to capture specificity
in a nuanced way, (3) develop techniques to predict specificity from multiple
levels of linguistic analysis (words, phrases and sentences). Throughout these
tasks, the project draws connections between specificity variations in text,
their pragmatic functions, and their impact on discourse structure. This project
also develops new methods that integrate text specificity in natural language
generation tasks, for example, dialog generation
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.