* 1850949
* Belmont Forum Collaborative Research: Future ArcTic Ecosystems (FATE): drivers of diversity and future scenarios from ethno-ecology, contemporary ecology and ancient DNA
* GEO,RISE
* 03/15/2019,02/28/2022
* Beth Shapiro, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 02/28/2022
* USD 186,169.00

Innovative research on the complex interaction of socio-economic and global
environmental trends on biodiversity and ecosystem services is needed to help
develop more informative scenarios for addressing environmental and human
development challenges. Coupled natural-human systems; improved scenarios of
biodiversity; and ecosystem services that couple the outputs of both direct and
indirect drivers such as land use change, invasive alien species,
overexploitation, environmental change, pollution, and models of impacts of
these drivers on biodiversity and ecosystem service are needed to overcome these
challenges. These holistic approaches provide a methodological state-of-the art
that results in more accurate quantitative assessments and environmental co-
benefits of biodiversity and ecosystem services. This research builds on such
methodology to examine changes in Arctic ecosystems that are currently
experiencing dramatic change with immediate impacts on ecosystem services
involving food production, climate regulation, natural resources, and cultural
integrity. This research will integrate indigenous knowledge and cutting-edge
scientific approaches to develop long-term profiles of changes in the
distribution and abundance of key Arctic species over time. Broader impacts of
the work include international collaboration between Norway, Sweden, Finland,
France, Germany, Canada, and Denmark as well as UNESCO. This large international
collaboration will help build bridges between countries and communities with
interests in the Arctic; engage stakeholders ranging from local communities to
national environmental protection agencies, including indigenous peoples; and
develop a far-reaching and rich, public data resource on Arctic systems that
will be available to natural and social scientists across countries and
disciplines. In addition to the development of new processes that will allow the
recovery of ancient DNA from sediments and their integration with other data
types, this project will develop ecological forecasting models that incorporate
how the diversity of organisms in the Arctic has changed in the past and is
likely to change in the future. Additional impacts include the integration of
science and education and training students to be the next generation of
international scholars. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports U.S.
researchers participating in a project competitively selected by a coalition of
26 funding agencies from 23 countries through the Belmont Forum call for
proposals on "Scenarios of Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services". The call was a
multilateral initiative designed to support research projects that contribute to
the development of scenarios, models, and decision-support tools for
understanding and solving critical issues facing our planet. The goal of the
competition was to improve and apply participatory scenario methods to enhance
research relevance and its acceptance and to address gaps in methods for
modelling impact drivers and policy interventions. It was also to develop and
communicate levels of uncertainty associated with the models, to improve data
accessibility, and fill gaps in knowledge. Funds support U.S. participants in a
large international consortium that will develop ecological forecasting models
that incorporate chemical, physical, and multi-taxa ecological data. The models
will include input from a broad spectrum of stakeholders, including indigenous
peoples. Goals of this project are to dramatically improve understanding how the
diversity of organisms in the Arctic has changed over time and is likely to
change in the future. Participants in this effort from other countries are
funded through their associated national funding organizations. The U.S.
component of the work will generate records of the changing distribution and
abundance of plants and animals across the Late Pleistocene and Holocene by
isolating environmental DNA from long sediment cores collected from lakes across
the circumpolar North. These data will be combined with that from international
collaborators about changes in the distribution and abundance of species over
time taken from records from local communities and indigenous peoples extending
back generations. The full suite of information will be used to address: how the
diversity of living organisms has changed over time at different locations in
the Arctic; determine how different these changes have been across space and
time; tease out what the ecological and anthropogenic drivers appear to be in
changes in Arctic biodiversity; and figure out how to combine quantitative
ecosystems measurements with anecdotal and recorded accounts from local
communities who interact with the vegetation, climate, herbivory, and other
anthropogenic influences. With this information, model-generated scenarios will
be created that support sustainable ecosystem management in the face of
accelerating socio-ecological transformations occurring throughout the
circumpolar North.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.