* 1850430
* Virtual Access to STEM Careers (VASC)
* EDU,DRL
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2023
* Toni Pence, University of North Carolina at Wilmington
* Standard Grant
* Chia Shen
* 04/30/2023
* USD 394,606.00

This project will advance efforts of the Innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST) program to better understand and promote practices
that increase students' motivation and capacities to pursue careers in fields of
science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM). To meet the diverse
needs and future demands of a STEM workforce, national initiatives have
highlighted the importance of encouraging students from underserved groups to
explore STEM careers. This project, called Virtual Access to STEM Careers
(VASC), investigates a problem-based learning curriculum designed to remove some
of the traditional barriers that prevent underserved students from participating
in authentic STEM learning opportunities. Focused on grades 3-5, VASC employs a
range of activities in Immersive Virtual Environments using multiple platforms
and in different interaction modalities to meet the needs of schools which lack
the resources and infrastructure to invest extensively in costly technologies.
The strategic emphasis placed at the elementary level underscores the importance
of preventing "a crack in the STEM pipeline" when transitioning to middle school
level coursework where research indicates students who once had interest in a
STEM career often lose interest. The first phase of VASC focuses on STEM career
exposure in marine, geological, and computer sciences. To capture learner
curiosity, students will investigate the life cycle of the loggerhead sea
turtle, a species that nests widely on North Carolina beaches and is currently
listed as Threatened under the Endangered Species Act. The sea turtle is a
wonderful and powerful model for building the VASC learning platform because
during their lifespan, they travel great distances (thousands of miles during
migrations) and experience a wide range of physical and chemical ocean
conditions, as well as substantial ecological interactions with numerous marine
plant and animal species. Thus, understanding the life cycle of a sea turtle
exposes young learners to numerous STEM applications as well as the careers of
those that investigate and protect sea turtle populations. Students will also
take on the roles and responsibilities of different STEM occupations "in the
field" as well as in the "lab" when engaging in the problem-based learning
model. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Goals for this project include 1) developing
virtual technologies using input from conservationists, scientists, and the
educational team, 2) constructing a STEM curriculum that is accessible to
underserved populations, and 3) implementing an iterative assessment process of
the curriculum which will allow for testing and retesting modifications
effectively and efficiently. Researchers aim to advance Situated Cognition
Theory through combining Problem Based Learning and Immersive Virtual
Environments as an innovative pedagogical model to effect change. In order to
test the efficacy of the VASC curriculum, the following research questions will
be examined: (1) What learning experiences involving emerging technologies
effectively enable diverse populations of students to gain familiarity and
relevant competencies with these technologies, and what factors influence the
outcomes of the learning experiences? and (2) What culturally-responsive
instructional and curricular practices and models used by teachers enhance
student understanding of and interest in STEM occupations and what factors
influence the outcomes of the practices and models? The research team of science
education, special education, and computer science faculty from the University
of North Carolina Wilmington works closely with community stakeholders including
Bald Head Island Conservancy, Fort Fisher State Recreation Area, and MarineQuest
which serves as an educational outreach program situated at the university. This
partnership is equipped to provide the necessary real-world examples of STEM
careers, programming to engage participants, and locations to inspire
curricular, technological, and experimental
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.