* 1850510
* CRII: SaTC: Towards Efficient and Scalable Crowdsourced Vulnerability-Discovery using Bug-Bounty Programs
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2019,02/28/2022
* Aron Laszka, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 02/28/2022
* USD 174,201.00

Many organizations and companies have recently chosen to use so-called bug-
bounty programs, which allow outside security experts to evaluate the security
of an organization's products and services and to report security
vulnerabilities in exchange for rewards. Bug-bounty programs provide unique
benefits by allowing organizations to publicly signal their commitment to
security and to harness the diverse expertise of thousands of security experts
in an affordable way. Despite their rapidly growing popularity, bug-bounty
programs are not well understood and can be mismanaged. As a result, bug bounty
programs can waste substantial resources and they rarely live up to their
potential to improve cybersecurity. This project will significantly improve the
efficiency of bug-bounty programs by collecting and publishing comprehensive
datasets on the bug-bounty ecosystem, by establishing a sound theory of bug-
bounty programs, and by providing practical recommendations for organizations
and regulators. The project will directly benefit organizations and companies by
enabling them to manage bug-bounty programs more efficiently, which will allow
them to eliminate security vulnerabilities at a lower cost, and it will also
benefit users by improving the security of products and
services.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will have four research thrusts. The
first thrust will build a dataset that captures the entire bug-bounty ecosystem
by collecting activity data and rule descriptions from public bug-bounty
programs, conducting interviews and focus-group studies with experts who
regularly participate in programs, collecting social-media posts, and
incorporating existing datasets, such as vulnerability databases. The second
thrust will analyze this dataset to understand the ecosystem and its actors'
incentives and actions, and to characterize processes, such as discovering and
reporting vulnerabilities and rewarding reports. To code textual data, the
project will first develop a terminology and taxonomy of bug-bounty related
concepts. Driven by the results of the data analysis, the third thrust will
develop a formal model of the bug-bounty ecosystem, which will incorporate
technological processes as well as behavioral and economic incentives. To
capture all aspects of such a complex ecosystem, the project will employ models
and techniques from multiple disciplines and areas, including economics and
cybersecurity. Building on this model, the fourth thrust will propose and
evaluate novel approaches for improving the efficiency and scalability of bug-
bounty programs. The project will consider policies for individual bug-bounty
programs, such as rules for rewarding vulnerability reports, as well as
mechanisms for regulating bug-bounty programs and for instigating coordination
between them. The research project will also involve graduate students from
underrepresented groups, who will have an excellent opportunity to engage in
interdisciplinary research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.