* 1850373
* CRII: SaTC: Secure Instruction Set Extensions for Lattice-Based Post-Quantum Cryptosystems
* CSE,CNS
* 02/15/2019,01/31/2022
* Aydin Aysu, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 01/31/2022
* USD 174,751.00

The emergence of quantum computers poses a serious threat for existing security
standards, which motivates post-quantum cryptography (PQC) research. Various PQC
schemes have been proposed for standardization, whose mathematical soundness are
under investigation. Unfortunately, even a mathematically sound cryptography
scheme may be attacked at the implementation level. The primary research goal of
this project is to develop secure implementations for lattice-based
cryptosystems, a major class of PQC encryption proposals. This work specifically
addresses the fundamental power and electromagnetic side-channel vulnerabilities
of physical implementations which may leak information.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project is a novel
framework that employs instruction set extensions to compose side-channel
protected software, which can provide comprehensive side-channel security. By
contrast, research on side-channel analysis of lattice cryptosystems have so far
been limited to point solutions that evaluate a single instance. The research
tasks are to extract a set of common operations for lattice-based cryptosystems,
to build side-channel resistant versions of these arithmetic computations, to
use a side-channel aware compiler for re-composing the software with the
protected instructions, and to evaluate/benchmark side-channel security and
countermeasure overheads.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the
project include disseminating publications, distributing open-source hardware
and software, and bridging the research on computer architectures and hardware
security. This bridge is critical as secure computer architectures currently
exclude physical side-channels in their threat model. This work may also help
the ongoing quantum-secure encryption standardization effort led by the National
Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), by evaluating the submitted
lattice cryptography-based proposals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
use a repository with multiple back up servers to store and log the data, and
the major results and hardware and software products will be made publicly
available by using resources over the world wide web. Further information on the
project repository will be made accessible at
https://research.ece.ncsu.edu/aaysu/research.html. The repository is intended to
be actively maintained for the duration of the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.