* 1850072
* Case Study of Experiential, Capstones in Industry: Understanding High School Students Interest and Preparation for STEM Careers
* EHR,DRL
* 02/15/2019,01/31/2022
* Elizabeth Zulick, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Ford
* 01/31/2022
* USD 397,785.00

The aim of this project will be to help school students, particularly under-
represented minorities and females, to access careers in science, technology,
engineering and math (STEM). The strategy will be to study a demonstrated
successful learning model that integrates traditional high school STEM
curriculum with real world projects from the STEM business community. The study
will illuminate how the components of the program work together to support
students' motivation and preparation for STEM careers, in particular female and
minority students. The findings of the study will make it possible to implement
the program in similar contexts across the nation. A better understanding of
experiential learning within a public school district context can potentially
impact tens of thousands of students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
project is to conduct an exploratory case study of Blue Valley Center for
Advanced Professional Studies (BVCAPS) which is the founding location of the
Center for Advanced Professional Studies (CAPS) network. CAPS will provide
programming that includes STEM capstone experiences (in medicine, bioscience,
technology, or engineering) for public school high school juniors and seniors.
Guided by the theoretical and conceptual constructs of social cognitive career
theory and high-quality project-based learning, this study will seek to answer
the following research questions: 1) How does the CAPS model support students'
motivation and preparation for STEM careers? 2) What aspects of the BVCAPS model
contribute to increased female and under-represented minority student motivation
and preparation for STEM careers? The qualitative exploration will be used to
create a set of validated and reliable instruments that can be used to study
this and similar programs more broadly as they relate to motivation and
preparation for STEM careers. This study will build on the literature in high
school STEM education in the area of project-based learning and capstone
experiences in high school and add to the developing literature on high school
STEM experiential learning. Measurement tools created by this study will enable
examination of the capstone model in programs within the network of schools
(over 10,000 students in more than 80 school districts within 13 states across
the US) and more broadly. In addition to the potential impact of the measurement
tools themselves, the findings of this study will address how other STEM
educators can support the motivation and preparation for students in STEM
careers, in particular female and minorities. Information gleaned in this area
will help advance high school STEM reform and preparation for post-secondary
careers and learning opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.