* 1850983
* Ocean Carbon Biogeochemistry Project Office
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2024
* Heather Benway, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 07/31/2024
* USD 4,420,308.00

This award will support the activities of the Ocean Carbon and Biogeochemistry
(OCB) Project Office, based at the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution. The OCB
Program was created in 2006 as one of the major activities of the U.S. Carbon
Cycle Science Program to promote, plan, and coordinate multidisciplinary
activities and research opportunities involving the ocean carbon cycle. OCB
supports a continually growing scientific network that fosters interdisciplinary
collaborations and advances our mechanistic understanding of marine ecosystem-
carbon cycle dynamics and their responses to environmental change. The OCB
Project Office, as the hub of the OCB Program, coordinates high-impact community
activities that bring different disciplines together to advance scientific
understanding in all aspects of ocean carbon cycle research. OCB activities
provide an effective interdisciplinary model and forum for scientific inquiry
and discussion that have yielded numerous benefits in the form of new
collaborations and funded projects, field campaigns, manuscripts, special
journal volumes and other publications such as science plans, and opportunities
to engage with U.S. and international science planning initiatives.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this award is to continue NSF support of
the OCB Project Office and its community activities. Activities proposed for the
next five years include OCB's annual interdisciplinary summer workshop and
community-driven scoping workshops, small group, training, and capacity building
activities, which are grassroots, community-driven efforts determined through an
annual open community solicitation. OCB will continue to engage scientists and
broader audiences on issues pertaining to the ocean carbon cycle through early
career engagement and travel support; development and distribution of education
and outreach products; and high-impact communication platforms, including a new,
more navigable and attractive website (us-ocb.org), topical informational
websites (e.g., ocean fertilization), a highly subscribed (&gt;1,800 members)
eNewsletter The Ocean Carbon Exchange, and social media platforms. With its
responsive style, OCB will also continue to facilitate timely scientific
synthesis activities and strengthen partnerships with U.S. and international
partner programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.