* 1850878
* Roots, Weathering, and the Terrestrial Phosphorus Cycle of the Late Devonian
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2019,01/31/2025
* William Gilhooly III, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 01/31/2025
* USD 411,915.00

For the first 4 billion years of Earth history, the land surface was devoid of
biological activity. There were no plants, no forests, no roots, and little to
no soil. Then, in a geologic blink of an eye, a whole series of evolutionary
advances began on land about 400 million years ago. Plants evolved to make
harder, more rigid cell structures, allowing them to reach above their neighbors
to catch sunlight and downward with roots to both capture more energy and to
develop stabilizing structures. These early roots weathered the crust and formed
the first soils on Earth; however, the areal distribution of plants was sparse
and early soils were rarely retained. Eventually, in the late Devonian period
(roughly 330 million years ago), a forest ecosystem of an ancient fern-like
tree, known as Archaeopteris, emerged, and the Earth's surface never lost its
forest cover or soils since that time. The development of soil fundamentally
changed the way weathering and erosion occurs, as the newly evolved plant acids
enhanced the chemical weathering of rock into sediment. The ramifications of
this massive transformation of the earth surface have been explored from several
fronts, including mass extinctions in the oceans by a weathering pulse and
release of phosphorus from land inducing a fertilization effect, similar to the
excessive algal growth from fertilizer runoff and the modern Gulf of Mexico Dead
Zone. But the scenario of a phosphorus-driven mass extinction in the ocean has
never been corroborated at the source?namely using land-based records to see if
soil development really did result in a dramatic loss of phosphorus from the
landscape, and if so, whether this amount of phosphorus was adequate to drive a
global "Dead Zone" in the ocean. Investigators will explore this critical
interval by examining nutrient geochemical records stored in ancient lake
sediments nearer the weathering sources. This work will involve an international
collaboration and will train graduate and undergraduate students in
geochemistry, geobiology, and earth history. Additionally, researchers will
develop learning exercises for elementary and junior high students to explore
the modern environmental issues of the Gulf of Mexico Dead Zone by looking
through the lens of past examples of eutrophication.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Investigators will quantify what impacts the proliferation
and declines of various root-based ecosystems had on soil weathering and
terrestrial cycling of the key global nutrient phosphorus. They will
additionally examine relationships between carbon/nitrogen/phosphorus, carbon
and nitrogen isotopic compositional changes, and geochemical proxies of
weathering intensity during these terrestrial evolutionary steps to explore how
the emergence of the modern soil systems impacted total soil nutrient and carbon
balances. They will constrain terrestrial phosphorus mass balances to provide
quantitative estimates of phosphorus export to the oceans, key evidence by which
to test extant models of mid-late Devonian episodic oceanic anoxia. Their
results will be coupled with complementary work done on palynology and isotope
geochemistry by colleagues at the University of Southampton. The overarching
hypothesis is that a temporal record of soil phosphorus transformations can be
resolved from the sedimentary record of lacustrine systems in the mid-late
Devonian. The intellectual merits of this work are to: (1) constrain terrestrial
nutrient evolution during the late Devonian in reference to the extant
paleobotanical record in a stratigraphic manner (which paleosols, as time-
integrated records, do not independently do), (2) explore the potential role of
nutrient limitation in driving evolution and extinction during one of the most
dynamic transitions in terrestrial weathering and erosion conditions in Earth
history, and (3) develop critical input data to constrain ocean reconstructions.
Broader impacts include: (1) a significantly greater understanding of
terrestrial nutrient dynamics, thus informing the broader geobiological
community, (2) advanced training for a PhD student in biogeochemistry and Earth
history, (3) facilitating research collaborations between IUPUI and Southampton,
and informing several educational endeavors, including targeted class content
applications and a science outreach program for 3rd ? 9th grade students with
inadequate access to STEM resources at their schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.