* 1850221
* CRII: RI: Explainable Recognition of Social Relationships from People's Linguistic Interactions
* CSE,IIS
* 03/15/2019,02/28/2022
* David Jurgens, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 02/28/2022
* USD 206,999.00

Social relationships between people influence not only what is said but how a
message is said through linguistic cues for aspects like respect, politeness, or
solidarity. These stylistic aspects not only reflect a particular social
context, but can also affect how the recipient interprets the message itself.
These relationships are often multifaceted and come with different linguistic
expectations. For example, while parents, professors, and police may all choose
the language of authority, in their respective interactions with children,
students, and the community, their language reflects a broader set of linguistic
expectations in how they relate to others. This project aims to study social
relationships and their effect on language by building new technology that
recognizes the linguistic cues of relationships resulting in significant
improvements in everyday interactive language technologies such as voice
assistants, translation, and summarization and lead to more natural human-
machine interactions by improving the ability of machines to understand social
aspects of communication that cannot be obtained from the words alone. This
research will also support an interdisciplinary cohort of PhD and undergraduate
students and the development of a graduate-level course on Computational
Sociolinguistics with open access materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CISE
Research Initiation Initiative (CRII) project investigates social relationships
and their impact on language by developing new algorithms, methods, and
datasets, building upon sociolinguistics theory to create a new framework for
studying the interplay of language and relationships in real-world social
environments. This project contains two main phases. The first phase develops
new deep learning methods to accurately infer people's relationship from
linguistic cues in their conversation. To support this effort, it also
constructs a new, massive corpus of interpersonal conversations from real-world
settings and from fictional settings in movies, television, and literature. The
second phase builds interpretable computational models of communication that
explain how a relationship is signaled through linguistic choices in
communication, while also disentangling the linguistic influences of the
conversational partners' identities. These models enable testing and extending
social science theories about relationship and social organization. Further,
this project also introduces a new natural language understanding task for
identifying messages that are offensive only in certain contexts, where the
linguistic cues violate social norms for a relationship, helping to further
improve technologies to better the public's online
experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.