* 1850287
* CRII: SCH: Designing for Supportive Accountability: Using Conversational Agents to Sustain Patient Engagement in Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Saeed Abdullah, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 07/31/2023
* USD 174,818.00

Approximately 8 million adults in the United States suffer from Post-traumatic
stress disorder (PTSD) in a given year. It causes staggering individual and
societal costs including higher mortality risk and significant national health
care expenditure. While evidence-based PTSD treatments exist, their
dissemination is limited due to logistical issues (e.g., cost and lack of
trained professionals). To address these issues, recent studies have used mobile
technologies for intervention and treatment delivery. However, ensuring
engagement and adherence to these technologies remains a serious challenge. This
project aims to address these engagement and adherence issues by developing a
finite-state conversational agent (CA) for therapeutic content delivery and day-
to-day illness management. Findings from this project can lead to more effective
methods for keeping people engaged. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
conversational agent will provide interactive psychoeducation, assessment tools,
and personalized illness management strategies to patients with PTSD. It will
support turn-taking and interactivity, which will result in active information
flow in both ways rather than just passive delivery of information content. The
implementation of the CA will involve dialogue management, handling user input
for branching, and delivering appropriate message for a given context. For
sustaining longitudinal user engagement, it will leverage the Supportive
Accountability model with a specific focus on maintaining social presence and
process accountability through personalization, goal setting, and contextualized
support. The CA will be developed as a stand-alone module that can be
incorporated into a mobile app. This will streamline the deployment of the
system to patients. The project will collect real-world data to determine domain
specific usability issues and information needs. It will also perform a
systematic evaluation to understand the causal pathway between a CA and patient
engagement. That is, it will assess what components of a CA work for patients,
in what contexts, and for how long. Publications and source code resulting from
the project will be publicly available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.