* 1850389
* CRII: CHS: Examining a Multimodal Approach to Lowering the Burden of Food Journaling
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2022
* Daniel Epstein, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 06/30/2022
* USD 174,999.00

People use personal journaling methods to develop better habits and make
informed decisions about health and well-being. Activities such as food
journaling become burdensome, inaccurate, or incomplete over time due to poor
design of supportive devices and single-platform constraints. In this project,
the investigator plans to use internet-of-things (IoT) functionality to develop
a system with integrated and multimodal input capabilities to support food
journaling. An integrated device platform will be developed to support data
input from multiple devices such as smart phones, wearables, and laptops. An
iterative, user-centered design methodology will be applied. Prospective users
will be selected for usability studies, and the prototype will be validated by
comparing multimodal IoT-enabled food journaling to other common food journaling
applications. Benefits include more usable technologies for personal journaling
to support mental and physical health, stress management, and personal
wellbeing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will center around two
participatory design investigations. The research team (1) will examine how
people with healthy eating goals use lightweight technology probes developed for
journaling food via voice description, photography, or text description. This
probe deployment will inform recommendations for how platforms can support
collecting data collaboratively across input modalities. These recommendations,
and an iterative design process to improve usability, will inform a full-
featured multimodal food journaling tool. The research team (2) will then
compare the developed tool against design strategies typical of commercial and
research food journals, again with people who have healthy eating goals. The
comparison will be mixed-methods, combining perceptions of the value and burden
of the technology through validated survey instruments with semi-structured
interviews discussing the challenges of each approach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.