* 1850665
* Conference on Establishing an Evidence-Based Approach to Understanding and Countering Mass Violence
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2019
* Daniel Nagin, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 12/31/2019
* USD 49,895.00

Mass violence has become a common occurrence in the United States. Mass violence
takes many forms: family massacres, terrorist attacks, shootings related to
other crimes (like robbery), gang violence, and other incidents in which
offenders attack targeted individuals and/or random strangers. The phenomenon of
indiscriminate mass public violence, often directed at strangers, particularly
has generated the most public alarm in recent years. Mass public attacks appear
to have increased in regularity and severity, leading to a heightened sense of
national fear in our communities, schools and colleges, and so on. While such
events are seemingly random, they are likely not, and therefore possibly
preventable in many instances. Indeed, these events are linked by numerous
themes: mental illness, domestic violence, grudges, bigotry, political
polarization, copycat behaviors, and the rise and more open behavior of fringe
groups, to name a few. Mass violence has become an urgent problem that needs an
updated and contemporary research evidence-base, translation activities to turn
that research into effective interventions, and improved social services to
ensure the interventions are implemented well. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals
of the two day conference will be to: 1) review research that has been conducted
on mass violence; 2) determine points of consensus in the available research; 3)
identify gaps in research knowledge and points of substantial disagreement; 4)
identify policy implications stemming from established research knowledge; and
5) develop research recommendations to address knowledge gaps and controversies
in the field. Following the conference, findings will be communicated to
researchers and policy makers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.