* 1850342
* CRII: III: Buffer Management for Non-Volatile Memory
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2022
* Joy Arulraj, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 05/31/2022
* USD 175,000.00

Fifty years of research in database systems has focused on a canonical two-tier
&lt;br/&gt;storage hierarchy with the volatile memory and durable storage
technologies. &lt;br/&gt;A database system's buffer manager provides efficient
access to data stored &lt;br/&gt;on storage by migrating it to volatile memory.
The data migration policy &lt;br/&gt;employed by the buffer manager in existing
systems is predicated on the &lt;br/&gt;assumptions that storage is orders of
magnitude slower than volatile memory. &lt;br/&gt;But emerging non-volatile
memory technologies are poised to upend these design &lt;br/&gt;assumptions.
They provide fast accesses like volatile memory but with &lt;br/&gt;persistent
writes like storage. The traditional approaches for buffer &lt;br/&gt;management
are incompatible with this new hardware landscape. This project
&lt;br/&gt;outlines a research agenda to study and develop novel buffer
management &lt;br/&gt;techniques for non-volatile memory. The project will
result in algorithms for &lt;br/&gt;shrinking the cost of large-scale in-memory
data processing. The key lessons &lt;br/&gt;learned from this project will be
integrated into the graduate-level course &lt;br/&gt;on database systems at
Georgia Tech, educating students about the challenges &lt;br/&gt;and
opportunities in non-volatile memory database systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
technical aims of the project are divided into three interacting research
&lt;br/&gt;thrusts. The first thrust develops a taxonomy of data migration
policies for &lt;br/&gt;volatile and non-volatile memory technologies. What
makes this different than &lt;br/&gt;earlier attempts is that the buffer manager
will dynamically leverage all the &lt;br/&gt;data flow paths enabled by non-
volatile memory to improve the database system's &lt;br/&gt;performance. The
second thrust develops a machine-learning model for &lt;br/&gt;automatically
tuning the data migration policy for an arbitrary workload and
&lt;br/&gt;storage hierarchy. Due to the unique price, capacity, and performance
&lt;br/&gt;characteristics of non-volatile memory, it will be challenging for
database &lt;br/&gt;administrators to size the different levels of a multi-tier
storage hierarchy. &lt;br/&gt;The third thrust develops a storage system
recommender to help administrators &lt;br/&gt;identify the optimal hierarchy for
their target workloads. These three &lt;br/&gt;research thrusts will be
complemented by a comprehensive evaluation plan. &lt;br/&gt;This research effort
will have a profound impact on the adoption of &lt;br/&gt;non-volatile memory
technologies and will enable cost-effective, large-scale&lt;br/&gt;data
processing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.