* 1850045
* CRII: SHF Software and Hardware Architecture Co-Design for Deep Learning on Mobile Device
* CSE,CCF
* 02/15/2019,01/31/2022
* Cong Wang, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 01/31/2022
* USD 175,000.00

Smartphones have become an indispensable part of our lives, acting as the
primary tool for many essential functions. A smartphone carries a rich set of
data with all kinds of personal information. Powered by machine learning, mobile
applications are utilizing these data for better quality of service. Current
practice requires users to offload computation tasks to the cloud with incumbent
challenges on privacy, performance and user experience fronts. Boosted by the
dramatic increase in mobile processing power, this project seeks to bring
machine intelligence to mobile devices. The results are expected to inspire both
theoretical and system research in the areas of software foundations for
embedded machine intelligence. Lessons learned through this project will be
fundamentally important in the designs of the next generation mobile operating
system and hardware architecture. The results will be disseminated through
publications and talks. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to develop a
high-performance, privacy-preserving and energy-efficient mobile-based platform,
with an application of behavioral authentication. The research will study the
optimal representation of sensing data and develop a compact and powerful neural
network architecture. All computation including both inference and training will
be performed on the mobile device. A protocol to enable feature transfer between
the mobile and the cloud will be developed to reduce overfitting and speed up
model convergence, along with a new training algorithm to exploit cache locality
and mitigate the memory bottleneck. The optimal combinations of batch size and
learning rate will be explored within memory constraints and accuracy
requirements to minimize training time. The problem of when and how training
should be scheduled on a mobile device will be investigated by considering low-
level operation with high-level user interaction to achieve a good balance
between performance and resource consumption. All these modules will be
integrated and implemented in Android and evaluated on various smartphone
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.