* 1851976
* REU Site: Dynamic Urban Environmental Systems and Sustainability in Newark, NJ
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Alexander Gates, Rutgers University Newark
* Standard Grant
* Aisha Morris
* 08/31/2024
* USD 387,969.00

The Dynamic Urban Environmental Systems and Sustainability (DUESS) REU site in
Newark, New Jersey engages students in research related to the environment and
sustainability in urban settings. Participants are from groups underrepresented
in the Geosciences, include community college students, and either attend urban
institutions or live in urban areas. The focus on urban systems allows students
to conduct research relevant to their daily lives and communities, and
demonstrates how scientific research can benefit society. Students are mentored
by research active faculty at Rutgers University-Newark, receive professional
development training, participate in enrichment activities, and interface with
Newark community organizations and local government. Students are guided to
pathways from community college and 4-year programs to careers in research.
Creating career pathways for underrepresented students is essential, as racial
minorities comprise 33% of the U.S. population, but only 14% of employed
scientists and engineers. This represents an untapped human resource potential
for STEM careers. Maximizing human resource potential is especially critical for
urban areas, such as Newark, where there is a need for trained professionals to
advance local environmental and sustainability efforts. The DUESS REU is
designed to reinforce the interest of the students in Earth and Environmental
Sciences, and have them appreciate the value of organized scientific research.
It provides a critical link from success in college to graduate school and a
potential research career. The result is improved participation and diversity in
the Geosciences, and an increase in the number of appropriately trained
scientists to meet the growing need nationwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DUESS REU
participants will investigate the impact of concentrated human activity on the
environment (soils, water, air, biota) and sustainability in urban systems.
Students develop research projects within areas of faculty research expertise in
Near Surface Geophysics, Urban Geochemistry &amp; Biogeochemistry, and Urban
Ecology, Sustainability &amp; Biodiversity. The participants are primarily
underrepresented minority (URM) students from 2-year and 4-year urban
institutions. Students conduct DUESS themed research with faculty mentors;
participate in professional development to integrate the research experience
with the educational pathway; and engage in supporting activities that promote
student-student, student-faculty and student-community interactions. The DUESS
REU has six goals. 1) Recruit and provide research experiences and support for 3
cohorts of 12 academically talented students who are at least 60% URM and 50%
Community College students by leveraging other NSF and non-NSF-funded programs
at Rutgers University-Newark. 2) Develop an integrated research program for
undergraduates that exposes them to cutting edge geoscience techniques. 3)
Develop a research experience that builds from learning research techniques to
helping formulate research plans. 4) Develop a model to engage urban URM
students in advanced research by making it pertinent to their lives and
interests. 5) Establish a clear pathway to encourage students to pursue careers
in science that involve research. 6) Change the culture of the program to better
incorporate integrated undergraduate research into the curriculum. This project
will increase the number of underrepresented students pursuing careers in
research and science, through a model for group place-based research in an urban
environment that may be replicated in urban areas
nationwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.