* 1851532
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Governance, Urban Planning and Religious Modernity
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2019,06/30/2020
* Hussein Agrama, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 06/30/2020
* USD 0.00

Religious revival movements have become a prominent part of the global political
landscape in recent decades. Whereas many once assumed that modernization and
urbanization would be accompanied by secularization, faith-based movements and
their political effects have only become more relevant worldwide. Religious
politics have not only transformed the political sphere; politicization has also
changed religion and religious practices. This project, which trains an
anthropology graduate student in methods of scientifically rigorous and
empirical data collection and analysis, explores what impact the
institutionalization of religion in government has on transforming the public
sphere, urban space, and practices of piety. By examining the effects of
governance on religious practices, urban planning, capitalism, tourism, and
identity, the project advances our understanding of modernity and state-building
in socio-religious contexts. The project also broadens the participation of
groups historically underrepresented in science, contributes the education of
underrepresented groups, and builds capacity and scientific infrastructure
through international cooperation in these scientific research
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Fellow, under the supervision of Dr.
Hussein Agrama of the University of Chicago, proposes to explore how shrine
pilgrimage and its material relationship to shifting practices of governance,
religious pilgrimage, and piety impact the organization of urban space, cultural
beliefs about modernity, and conceptions of self and community. This project
examines how institutionalization of religion has affected popular practices of
religiosity, specifically a network of shrines in a range of urban and non-urban
settings with varying levels of state political oversight. The research will be
conducted at three sites (in major city, a secondary city that is known for its
shrine, and a city that has been rebranded as a hub for religious tourism).
Utilizing interviews, participant-observation, and archival, research will
investigate how pilgrims, locals, urban planners, architects, and other
stakeholders understand the transformation of these sites. This research will
contribute to debates in political anthropology about governance, theories in
the anthropology of religion about pilgrimage, mobility, and tourism, and
analyses in urban anthropology about space and sectarian identity. Findings from
this research will provide insight into how religious politics are lived on the
ground and how the administrative and bureaucratic practices of governance in a
modern state transform the role of religion in public
life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.