* 1851012
* Trojan Horses in the Marine Realm: Protist Parasite-host Dynamics in Coastal Waters
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2019,02/28/2023
* Virginia Edgcomb, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 02/28/2023
* USD 813,745.00

The ecological importance of parasitic dinoflagellates has been recognized for
some time, particularly during epidemic outbreaks that cause mass mortality of
their hosts, damage to aquaculture, and render commercially valuable Crustacea
unpalatable. The dominate parasitic dinoflagellate group found in international
global ocean surveys is referred to as MALV II Syndiniales. In the planktonic
environment, the MALV II Syndiniales group not only exerts top-down controls on
their prey populations, but based on their apparent ubiquity and abundance, they
likely shape the pools of nutrients in marine water columns. Data on cultured
samples reveals this hyper-diverse group can infect a wide range of protist
hosts, as well as copepods, and fish larvae. Gaps in knowledge of the
specificity and dynamics of the host-parasite interactions contribute to
difficulties in estimating the impacts on the coastal ecosystems. In this
project, researchers combine novel methods in microscopy, genomics, and
chemistry to track host-parasite dynamics at a coastal site over an annual cycle
followed by modeling to assess the impacts on microbial ecosystem dynamics. The
researchers will engage undergraduate and high school students in field and
laboratory research activities. In addition, support for a graduate student is
included along with plans to disseminate the research results more broadly
through publications and presentations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Syndiniales
parasitism is a widespread, albeit under-studied symbiotic interaction in the
marine environment and little is known about regulation of protist populations
by these parasites. In spite of their cosmopolitan distribution in the global
ocean and their apparent abundance in molecular datasets of protist marker
genes, little is known about the ecology of these parasites and almost no
genomic data exists for them. In this project, the researchers combine high-
resolution sampling, water chemistry (including nutrients) analyses, molecular
marker gene analyses, fluorescence in situ hybridization, single cell genomics,
and modeling to produce the first focused assessment of host-MALVII parasite
dynamics and ecology at the community level in a coastal marine ecosystem. The
researchers will evaluate temporal dynamics of host and parasite diversity and
will examine temporal variation in levels of infection of the protist community
and host-parasite specificity using high-resolution sampling in Salt Pond,
Falmouth, MA, and in situ hybridization microscopy. Molecular approaches include
amplicon tag high throughput sequencing, leveraging the emerging third
generation sequencing technology, Oxford Nanopore's MinION to elucidate host-
parasite identities. The researchers will also apply advances in single-cell
genome sequencing to inform on strain-specific genome content, including the
molecular mechanisms underpinning protist parasitism. Contributions to pools of
particulate and dissolved organic matter will be estimated for several of the
most commonly infected host taxa in Salt Pond using laboratory experiments,
providing the first set of values for modeling impacts of Syndiniales parasitism
on pools of organic and inorganic nutrients.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.