* 1851603
* Understanding the Interactions between Recoverable and Permanent Deformations in Shape Memory Alloys
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Samantha Daly, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 05/31/2024
* USD 403,674.00

Shape memory alloys are metallic materials that exhibit unique properties,
including superelastic behavior. This research is targeted towards guiding the
processing and design of these alloys for their rapidly expanding use in
biomedical devices, aerospace and automotive components, and other applications.
Nickel-Titanium (NiTi) will be examined because it is the most widely used and
modeled shape memory alloy, and results from this work applied to improving its
performance in practice will have the broadest impact. This research will use
newly developed experimental approaches - including the ability to measure
microscale deformations by tracking nanoparticle assemblies in a scanning
electron microscope - to map and understand how these alloys recover large
deformations, and what deformation remains permanent. Machine learning
approaches will be applied to relate deformations to atomic structure, enabling
an improved understanding of the effects of processing and furthering the
ability to both model and design shape memory alloy components. In addition to
this new information, the techniques developed in this research will be valuable
contributions to the experimental mechanics infrastructure that can be used in
investigations of a wide host of materials. Several outreach activities are
planned, including science days and competitions to introduce students from
elementary school to college to experimental mechanics and materials.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research will experimentally characterize the
interactions between stress-induced martensitic phase transformation and
dislocation slip in polycrystalline shape memory alloys, specifically the impact
of microstructure on the nature of these interactions and the superelastic
behavior that results. Full-field, high resolution deformation mapping will be
combined with high-dimensional clustering and computer vision approaches to
segment and identify transformation and slip with respect to microstructure,
shedding light on stochastic and deterministic contributions. This research will
experimentally address a core difficulty in predicting the behavior of
polycrystalline shape memory alloys, which is the existence of strain
incompatibilities between the grains. Current constitutive models are largely
evaluated by the comparison to experimental stress-strain curves. However, this
comparison is not ideal in that it is between two different length scales:
macroscopic curves are being compared to micromechanics based models. The
results from this research will offer experimental insights into the
intragranular interactions that are critical to the behavior of shape memory
alloys, experimentally validate the underpinnings of the constitutive models,
and quantitatively address hypotheses that are under active debate; such as the
hypothesis that transformation and plasticity can occur synergistically, with
plasticity providing a bridging mechanism across grains that are poorly oriented
for transformation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.