* 1851317
* Assessing the Costs and Benefits of Cultural Practices
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2022
* David Lawson, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 01/31/2022
* USD 199,074.00

In some societies, traditional marriage customs may produce brides and grooms
under the age of 18. International development groups refer to these as "child
marriages" and consider them to be damaging to well-being, particularly for
girls. Therefore, with wide support from Western nations, including the United
States, significant resources are invested in campaigns to eradicate these
practices. However, this movement has also been critiqued for relying on a
notion that there is a clear and absolute boundary between childhood and
adulthood that lies at 18 years. In fact, there is surprisingly little objective
information available about why "child marriage" remains prevalent in some
places despite its purported harmful consequences. The research supported by
this award will address this question. Results from the project will support
policy recommendations, and contribute to a wider critical engagement with the
notion that early transitions to adulthood are necessarily harmful in all
circumstances. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research will be carried out in north
western Tanzania among a Sukuma population where around one-third of girls marry
before 18 years. Data collection will take place within a demographic
surveillance site managed by the Tanzanian National Institute of Medical
Research. Taking a mixed-methods approach, qualitative and quantitative data
will be collected over a two-year period. To build an understanding of early
marriage grounded in ethnographic reality, rather than stereotype, the project
will first utilize focus group discussions and in-depth interviews to identify
perceived risks to wellbeing that characterize female adolescence and the role
of early marriage in elevating or mitigating such risk. Multiple dimensions of
female wellbeing (physical and mental health, education, food security,
empowerment, and community respect) will then be assessed via a large
quantitative survey, and analyzed to determine if 18 years emerges as a
meaningful threshold demarcating harmful marriage, or whether alternative age
categorizations, if any, better predict variation in wellbeing. Quantitative and
qualitative data will then be used test the hypotheses that early marriage is
either the product of parental coercion and a parent-offspring conflict of
interests, or whether it is better understood as a parental strategy to enhance
the success of daughters. Finally, the project will quantify associations
between age at menarche, first reproduction and marriage to explore hypothesized
links between physiological and behavioral transitions into adulthood. The
project includes the mentorship of an American Postdoctoral Scholar, research
experience opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students, and capacity
building for longer-term international collaborative
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.