* 1851034
* An Ethnographic Investigation of Contexts of Trust and Distrust
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Susan Ellison, Wellesley College
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 05/31/2024
* USD 85,130.00

The research supported by this award examines how ordinary citizens, national
governments, and international organizations make use of accusations of fraud.
Ordinarily, the term fraud is applied to illegal behavior. Globally, however,
fraud allegations seem increasingly to provide a more general language to
express extreme dissatisfaction with both instiutions and individuals for
actions that range from the merely misleading to the truly unlawful. This
research investigates why the use of the language of fraud has expanded, the
political and social effects this entails, and how people re-build trust in the
wake of perceived betrayals. The research is important because trust is
necessary for healthy economies and robust democratic political systems.
Research findings will therefore be of interest to both policy makers and
citizens who seek to promote civic participation and economic
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will be undertaken in the
conjoined cities of La Paz and El Alto, Bolivia. This site was chosen due to
Bolivia's long history of donor-sponsored (including American-backed) rule-of-
law reforms and concurrent projects encouraging entrepreneurship and the
financial inclusion of the poor. Indeed, Bolivian fraud accusations frequently
sit at the intersection of these two objectives: urging people to embrace
entrepreneurship to lift themselves from poverty and ongoing efforts to stem
economic crimes. The project builds on the researcher's decade-long fieldwork in
Bolivia, allowing for longitudinal analyses and comparative data collection and
the efficient use of funding. The researcher will gather data through a
combination of qualitative research methods, including ethnographic participant
observation, interviews, and archival research. Interviews will be conducted
with regulatory officials, jurists, foreign donors, and NGO representatives to
investigate the priority given to economic crimes and specifically fraud as an
object of intervention. Archival data will provide insights into shifting
regulations, historic pyramid scheme cases, and patterns in criminal cases
related to fraud. Ethnographic research will focus on pyramid schemes and quasi-
legal multilevel marketing companies. Findings from this research will
illuminate the history, uses, and effects of fraud accusations and contribute to
social science theory of fraud as a changing global
category.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.