* 1851723
* REU Site: Aquatic Chemical Ecology at Georgia Tech
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Martial Taillefert, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 07/31/2023
* USD 308,651.00

The Georgia Institute of Technology (Georgia Tech) in Atlanta, GA will host a
Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Site program from 2020-2021. The
program will focus on Aquatic Chemical Ecology and will bring ten undergraduates
to the Georgia Tech campus for a ten-week internship each summer. Mentors will
be selected from the departments of Biological Sciences, Chemistry &amp;
Biochemistry, Chemical &amp; Biomolecular Engineering, Earth &amp; Atmospheric
Sciences, and Civil &amp; Environmental Engineering. Students will participate
in independent research and a variety of professional development activities
designed to immerse them in a vibrant research culture, expose them to multiple
career paths in science and research, and equip them with key skills for future
success. This project supports national goals of developing the next generation
of scientists and the scientific workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU Site
program explores the role of chemistry in shaping ecological processes. Chemical
cues are used by a wide diversity of macro and microorganisms to locate food,
evade predators, select mates, launch cooperative behaviors, construct social
hierarchies, and choose suitable environments. REU student research projects
explore questions of chemical ecology in aquatic ecosystems, for example
focusing on the chemical basis of predator-prey, host-parasite, or mutualistic
interactions in environments such as coral reefs, salt marshes, or diverse
freshwater ecosystems. The Georgia Tech REU Site will provide a total of twenty
undergraduates with internships over the two-year period. The program conducts a
national search for applicants and seeks to engage students from schools with
limited research opportunities. Funding for this program supports student
stipends, housing and travel to attend the program, and student professional
development activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.