* 1851939
* Collaborative Research:  The Impacts of Racial Discrimination on Housing Choice and Economic Well-Being in the United States
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Peter Christensen, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 08/31/2023
* USD 179,000.00

This award funds research on how renters choose where to live. The choice of
residential location is a critical economic decision for households in the
United States. Renters search for housing that best meets their needs given
their budget. This includes considering affordability, the specifics of the
apartment or house as well as desired neighborhood features. However, some
renters may face discrimination from landlords and property managers. Housing
market discrimination could steer renters into specific neighborhoods and
distort the housing search process. This project seeks to understand how
possible discrimination affects the search process. The team will conduct an
innovative field experiment to see how discrimination affects housing searchers.
The team will use the results to develop estimates of the social costs of
discrimination in rental housing markets. The project will yield new insights to
improve fair housing policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Experimental research on
discrimination on housing markets has ignored the role of housing search, making
it difficult to disentangle the effect of discrimination behavior on household
sorting from the effects of location characteristics. This project integrates a
field experiment with an online rental housing platform with a welfare-theoretic
framework that takes housing search into account. The field experiment will make
use of an innovative use of supercomputing infrastructure to send inquiries to
rental housing listings. By examining how landlords and property managers
respond to rental inquiries, they will be able to evaluate the impacts of
possible discrimination on the choice sets faced by some renters. The welfare-
theoretic approach accounts for impacts of discrimination on multiple
neighborhood characteristics. It is currently unclear whether discrimination
disproportionately hinders the location decisions of households who have
preferences for certain attributes of housing or neighborhoods: affordable
housing, school quality, safe neighborhoods, or harmful pollution exposures.
This project will examine whether certain types of renters are
disproportionately affected by discriminatory behavior in the housing market.
Finally, the project will give us more accurate estimates of the lost social
welfare from housing discrimination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.