* 1851985
* REU Site:  Interdisciplinary REU in the Structure and Function of Proteins
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2019,02/28/2023
* Cherie Dotson, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/28/2023
* USD 338,448.00

This REU Site award to the University of Michigan, located in Ann Arbor, MI,
will support the training of 10 students for 10 weeks during the summers of
2019-2021. Participants will conduct research in the areas of biochemistry,
biophysics, computational chemistry, enzymology, molecular biology and plant
biology. The research projects featured in this program mostly involve studies
of the structure and function of proteins. In addition to the research activity,
students will participate in a journal club and a series of weekly seminars
focused on ethics, scientific communication, career paths in science and
graduate school admissions. Rising sophomores, juniors or seniors majoring in a
STEM (science, technology, engineering and mathematics) discipline are eligible
for participation. Interested students must have an interest in pursuing a
graduate degree (MS or PhD) and/or a career in a STEM discipline. All
participants must be U.S. citizens or permanent residents. Applications will be
reviewed by an admissions committee consisting of several faculty mentors and
the PI. Decisions will be made by mid/late March.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is
anticipated that a total of 30 students, primarily from schools with limited
opportunities for research, will be trained in the program. Students who are
from underrepresented ethnic/racial groups and those who are US veterans or 1st
generation college students are strongly encouraged to apply. Students will
learn how research is conducted, and many will present the results of their work
at scientific conferences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A common web-based assessment
tool, used by all REU Site programs funded by the Division of Biological
Infrastructure (DBI), will be used to determine the effectiveness of the
training program. Additional evaluations and assessments of the program and its
impact will be conducted. Students will be tracked after the program in order to
determine their career paths and post-program activities. Students will be asked
to respond to an automatic email sent via the NSF reporting system. More
information about the program is available by visiting
https://pharmacy.umich.edu/reu, or by contacting the PI (Dr. Cherie Dotson at
crdotson@umich.edu) or the co-PI (Dr. Emily Scott at
scottee@umich.edu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.