* 1851449
* Signaling and Matching
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2023
* Andrew Postlewaite, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 06/30/2023
* USD 447,580.00

This award funds research in the economic theory of matching and signaling. Many
economic and social interactions are well "described as two" sided markets.
Examples include matching students to schools, residents to hospitals and
workers to firms. Economists have studied all of these situations using the
tools of economic theory. This research typically assumes that all parties know
the consequences from any possible match, so that participating individuals can
evaluate the benefits of any possible match. This assumption is not very
realistic. For example, colleges do not directly know the ability of applicants.
They do however have access to tests (such as the SAT) and other signals of
ability. When applicants understand that tests and other signals will be used to
assess underlying ability, they will prepare for the tests as well as attempt to
manipulate the signals. This raises the possibility that such test preparation
will make it more difficult for schools to accurately evaluate the ability of
applicants, leading to schools using additional criteria to evaluate students
(such as extracurricular activities). Applicants will of course respond to this
by changing their extracurricular behavior. The result is an arms race with
colleges looking at various school extracurricular activities, athletic
participation, violin compositions, starting charities, etc. Students then
engage in these activities because even though their signaling value is small
when everyone is doing so, not engaging becomes a negative signal. A similar
dynamic may exist in job markets. This award will fund research to understand
the underlying forces that govern this kind of strategic interaction between
organizations who choose the criteria by which to evaluate applicants and the
response of applicants to increasingly more demanding criteria.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The basic model will be a two-sided market of incomplete
information. One side (applicants) have privately known abilities while the
other side (schools or firms) use signals to infer the ability of students. In
the absence of test preparation, standard positive assortative matching will
match higher signaling students with higher quality schools. Test prep is a
strategic choice by students that influences the inferences schools will make
about ability, quite possibly decreasing the informativeness of the test. The
decreased informativeness of test scores leads schools to add additional
signaling variables related to ability, for example, taking advanced placement
(AP) courses. While in the absence of manipulation, having taken AP courses
might be informative about ability, once students learn that colleges pay
attention to this, many students who have no interest in those courses may take
them to "signal" their ability. This decreases the informativeness of this
signal, just as test prep decreased the informativeness of tests. A central
focus of the investigation is the endogeneity of potential signals chosen by the
uninformed schools. Understanding the nature of this endogeneity will shed light
on the vulnerability to manipulation of different activities and so the
stability over time of equilibrium sets of signaling
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.