* 1851256
* Collaborative Research: Recent Changes in Shelfbreak Exchange on the Northeast Shelf: Process-Oriented Observations of Salinity Maximum Intrusions
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Christopher Glass, Commercial Fisheries Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 07/31/2024
* USD 149,973.00

This project will examine warming of the continental shelf of the northeast US
and determine the relationship to warm core rings from the Gulf Stream.
Historical observations from several sources including the Ocean Observatories
Initiative (OOI) Pioneer Array will be analyzed to determine the connection
between shelf warming and warm core rings. A field campaign will include
observations from autonomous underwater vehicles equipped with sensors to
observe the dynamic processes that govern the warm and saline intrusions of
water. The results will yield insights into how and why warming events occur on
the continental shelf. The trend in warming on the New England shelf has
implications for regional climate and local commercial fisheries. The project
includes collaboration with the Commercial Fisheries Association and
communication of research results to local fishing communities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will use field observations and analyses of
historical data to examine process known to drive exchange between the shelf and
warm core rings on the Northeast U.S. continental shelf and the relationship to
recent warming on the shelf and slope region. The study will focus on the
pycnocline salinity maximum and Gulf Stream warm core rings. The field work,
which will take place during two cruises (in 2020 and 2021) will employ
autonomous underwater vehicles (AUVs) equipped with sensors to profile velocity,
temperature, salinity, microstructure, turbidity, chlorophyll, fluorescence, and
colored dissolved organic matter. The observations will be used to produce
three-dimensional maps of one or more saline intrusions and to distinguish
between the relative importance of double diffusive and turbulent dynamics in
the pycnocline salinity maximum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.