* 1851613
* Collaborative Research: Paleoclimatic and Palenvironmental Characterization of Early Pleistocene Sites
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2019,02/28/2023
* Miriam Belmaker, University of Tulsa
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/28/2023
* USD 275,238.00

This research will investigate the impact of climate and environmental change on
the migration of early human ancestors out of Africa and their adaptation to
novel environments 1.8 million years ago. Previous scholarship on climate-human
relationship focused on unique morphological and behavioral adaptations of early
humans to hot, arid and open savanna habitats, and causally linked the dispersal
of early humans with the development of savanna grasslands in Eurasia. However,
evidence for an expansion of a savanna corridor at broad millennial temporal
scales and/or at a global continental spatial scale is ambiguous and
necessitates consideration that disparate climatic processes operating on
narrower temporal scales and local spatial scales may have played a critical
role in this cardinal and foundational event. Novel, state-of-the-art,
complementary and interdisciplinary methods derived from archaeology and
geosciences are well-placed to break new ground by focusing on seasonality and
other high-resolution spatial and temporal climatic and environmental patterns
as some of the driving forces for dispersal of early Homo. This collaboration of
archaeologists, geochemists, paleontologists, and geologists from the United
States, Israel, Republic of Georgia, and Australia will explore the unfamiliar
pattern of seasonality, climate and environment which early humans faced in the
Levant. Knowledge of the type, extent and degree of past biological human
adaptation holds promise for illuminating issues on the distributions and
capacities of modern humans in varying climatic regimes. The research will
provide a platform for fostering professional and public discourse on the
interactions throughout time among climate, environment, and human responses,
enhancing science education across multiple academic levels, and supporting the
recruitment of undergraduate students from underrepresented groups through
mentoring aimed to create leaders in scholarship, research and public life.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will derive new data on the local
climate and environment of two archaeological sites in Israel and the Republic
of Georgia dating from 2 - 1.2 million years ago, which are the some of the
earliest sites of humans out of Africa. Combining new dating methods,
archaeological excavations, fossil analyses across the spectra of morphology,
histology and chemistry will permit rigorous evaluation of the links between
climate, environment and hominin population dynamics. Furthermore, the team will
generate new comparative methods for the study of paleoclimatology and
paleoecology, which will be used for developing a comprehensive database that
will be made publicly available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.