* 1851990
* REU Site: Undergraduate Inquiry at the Forefront of Energy, Environmental, and Biochemical Research
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2024
* Philippe Buhlmann, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 04/30/2024
* USD 253,980.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site award to the University
of Minnesota-Twin Cities, located in Minneapolis, MN, supports the training of
10 students for 10 weeks during the summers of 2019-2021. In this program,
funded by the Division of Chemistry in the Mathematical and Physical Science
Directorate, participants work on addressing some of society's important
biochemical, energy, and environmental problems at a major research university
using top facilities and instrumentation. The participants' research experiences
are supplemented with extensive hands-on training and mentoring. All
participants deliver presentations on their summer research, participate in an
end-of-summer research symposium, and have an opportunity to present their work
at a national chemistry meeting. Professional development is fostered by a visit
to a local industrial or government laboratory and by weekly joint luncheons for
all fellows with topics on ethics, effective oral and written communication, and
career opportunities. To increase the program's impact and sense of community
among the participants, undergraduate students are encouraged to volunteer for
an outreach program that gives children the opportunity to perform hands-on
chemistry experiments at local community libraries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
individual research projects encompass a wide range of chemical research,
including multimetallic catalysts for small-molecule activation and
functionalization, modeling structure and reactivity in molecular systems,
studying protein-protein interactions, and synthesis and self-assembly of
renewable resource block polymers. This program's recruitment effort places an
emphasis on attracting underrepresented minority and economically disadvantaged
students and encouraging participants to consider careers in chemistry-related
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.