* 1851954
* REU Site: Computational and Data Intensive Astrophysics at the University of Florida
* MPS,AST
* 05/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Desika Narayanan, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* James Higdon
* 09/30/2023
* USD 342,400.00

This award is for starting a new REU Site at the University of Florida with a
focus on computationally intensive research in astronomy and astrophysics. The
new program will take advantage of cutting-edge supercomputing available at the
University of Florida as well as the newly established Informatics Institute. In
addition to working in areas of astronomy, students will develop computer skills
that will prepare them for a wide range of careers. The program will recruit
students nationally, but will place particular focus on regional students with
otherwise limited research opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
projects available to students include cosmological simulations of the growth of
galaxies and their properties, simulations and analysis of cosmological
microwave background observations using next generation ground-based
experiments, and simulations of future space-based gravitational wave data and
analysis. Students will be trained in the development and use of supercomputing
codes and facilities with a focus on astrophysics. The skill set is transferable
to a number of careers both in and outside of the STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.