* 1851899
* Randomized Controlled Trial of the Effects of Rapid Rehousing on Single Adults
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* James Sullivan, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 08/31/2023
* USD 349,200.00

This research will use experimental methods to measure the effectiveness of
temporary housing assistance to assisting homeless single adults known as the
Rapid Re-Housing Program (RHH) Program to achieve housing stability. Governments
generally provide housing assistance through long-term rental subsidies or
vouchers. Previous research shows that long-term vouchers can prevent future
homelessness but also reduce incentives for employment. A shorter duration
subsidy could provide services to a larger group of people given limited
budgets, but it may also not be enough to permanently move people out of
homelessness. This research will follow people receiving RRH and a group
receiving usual care. Comparing homelessness, housing, employment, health,
criminal justice, and other outcomes between the two groups will provide a
measure of the effectiveness of RRH in improving those outcomes. The results of
this research will provide important inputs for developing policies to provide
housing for the homeless and thus improve the well-being of American citizens.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will use a randomized control trial
method to study the effects of the Rapid Re-Housing (RHH) program on long term
housing stability, health and other social outcomes of homeless single adults.
The project will randomly select 360 participants for the program and
approximately 360 participants for a control group referred to usual care. This
research project will test the hypothesis that providing RRH to homeless single
adults will improve housing stability leading to decreases in homeless shelter
entry, housing moves, and hospital visits for program participants. Housing
stability outcomes will be measured using homelessness service usage and changes
to address histories in consumer reference data. Criminal justice, health, and
other outcomes will be measured using county linked administrative data. The
results of this research will provide important inputs for developing policies
to provide housing for the homeless and thus improve the well-being of American
citizens.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.