* 1851152
* Diagnosis of the Sensitivity of Type B Cyclones to the Structure and Evolution of Their Upper-Tropospheric Precursors
* GEO,AGS
* 05/15/2019,04/30/2024
* Brett Hoover, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Yu Gu
* 04/30/2024
* USD 860,978.00

Mid-latitude surface cyclones, the familiar "low-pressure systems" seen on
surface weather maps, are significant organizers and producers of precipitation,
strong winds, and rapid changes in temperature. The development and subsequent
intensification of these surface cyclones (cyclogenesis) is often preceded by
the development of a disturbance 9-13 kilometers above the surface (i.e., the
upper-troposphere and lower-stratosphere). Studies of cyclogenesis have revealed
two stages: First, development of an upper-tropospheric front and associated
extrusion of stratospheric air into the upper and mid-troposphere associated
with wind shear in cyclogenesis. Second, a period of development during which
shear is converted to curvature in cyclogenesis. It has been shown that
processes of extrusion of stratospheric air into the upper-troposphere and the
subsequent conversion of these two steps are not only important in configuring
the upper-trough for subsequent cyclogenesis, but also in shaping the subsequent
intensification rate of the cyclone. It is unclear how these processes
synergistically interact or what individual importance each of these processes
assumes in cyclogenesis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will explore how
small changes to the initial conditions of simulated upper-tropospheric cyclone
precursors impacts the evolution of the surface cyclone. The results of this
proposed project will provide insight into the timing and location of critical
processes occurring in the upper-troposphere prior to cyclogenesis and
potentially offer insight into improvements in reducing the uncertainty
associated with predictions of the intensity of these weather events. The
fundamental research conducted in this project is consistent with NSF's mission
of promoting the progress of science. The broader impacts of the proposed
activity include the training of graduate students, the organization and hosting
of a workshop to explore the predictability of cyclones and their lifecycles,
and the organization of a session on mid-latitude lifecycles at the 2022 annual
meeting of the American Meteorological Society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study
proposes to investigate the dynamics of midlatitude cyclogenesis events by
addressing the sensitivity of extratropical cyclone development to the evolution
of the upper tropospheric cyclogenetic precursor (UTCP) within the framework of
case studies of simulated observed cyclogenesis events. The project combines two
well-developed diagnostic techniques (i.e., quasi-geostrophic (QG) diagnostics
and adjoint-derived forecast sensitivities) to understand an outstanding issue
related to mid-latitude cyclogenesis: the sensitivity of the Type-B cyclone
lifecycles to perturbations to the cyclones' upper-tropospheric cyclogenetic
precursors. The unique combination of the diagnostic approaches allows for
previously unexplored research into understanding the separate and interactive
roles of upper-tropospheric, pre-cyclogenetic, barotropic and baroclinic growth
processes in modulating surface cyclone lifecycles. We will use a novel
experimental approach termed the sensitivity-perturbation-response-diagnosis
(SPRD) procedure. SPRD employs adjoint-derived sensitivity gradients for
individual cases to construct optimal perturbations that elicit particular,
prescribed responses in the simulated cyclone life cycle for which synoptic-
scale QG and potential vorticity (PV) inversion diagnostics of the perturbed
cyclone evolutions are performed. Employment of this procedure will result in a
comprehensive examination of the structure and evolution of optimal initial-time
perturbations influencing the cyclone's development, as well as a test of the
appropriateness of the simplifying assumptions in the adjoint model to each
particular case.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.