* 1851928
* Collaborative Research: Informal risk-sharing and private initiative to mitigate local environmental risks
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2019,04/30/2024
* Prabhat Barnwal, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 04/30/2024
* USD 445,834.00

For thousands of communities in the United States the environment, natural or
contaminated, presents challenges to human health. These risks are often highly
localized and therefore avoidable. Many Americans depend on well water that
often is below the standards set by regulatory actions pursuant to the Safe
Drinking Water Act. One approach to reduce contaminants is to rely on the
government to mitigate these risks and reduce the welfare impact of adverse
outcomes through the provision of local public goods, including safe drinking
water and health services. Government provision of such public goods, however,
is not always adequate. The assumptions underlying this project is that such
limitations may be overcome by (a) exploiting private risk to achieve greater
cooperation, building upon the "veil of ignorance" concept of John Rawls to
foster cooperation for public goods; (b) departing from the pitfalls of either
extreme of public or private goods only by focusing on sharing of privately-
owned resources; and (c) exploring how information and social-networks increase
cooperation as well as encouraging private investments in mitigation
technologies. To test these concepts, the researchers have chosen as context a
major disaster of natural origin: toxic levels of arsenic in groundwater pumped
by millions of private wells across Bangladesh. Information on individual risk,
in this case well tests for arsenic, are provided in ways that encourage greater
cooperation and investment through the sharing of safe wells and the
installation of new safe wells. The findings have implications for environmental
policy in the United States as high-resolution data on water, air, and soil
quality become increasingly accessible to citizens. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More
specifically, this research studies the role of risk-sharing and social networks
in perception and mitigation of local environmental risks. The research team
focuses on two aspects: increasing cooperation for risk mitigation and
increasing private investment in risk mitigation technology. This project is
based in a setting where these two factors become particularly important due to
a lack of government-provided resources for reducing environmental risk. The
research first tests whether informal insurance, where compliance may be
primarily enforced by existing social structure and reciprocity norms, can
effectively counter the undersupply of local public goods. Then, the team
studies how social-networks can help in increasing cooperation, adoption and
investment in risk mitigation technology. To understand the channels, this
project explores how information on risk can facilitate more cooperation and
risk mitigation. This relatively low-cost approach is different from the current
approach of the government of Bangladesh which is focused on expensive
infrastructure of limited reach. The study is a randomized controlled trial in
rural Bangladesh, where the researchers randomly assign interventions on (a) ex-
ante risk sharing, (b) information provision on risk, and (c) the demonstration
of intermediate-depth wells which yield low arsenic. The original data allow the
research team to test the effectiveness of these interventions in terms of
mitigation efforts and reduction in arsenic exposure to the population. The
experimental design allows for documentation of the causal impact of the
interventions. The research team intends to share the results with policy makers
and organizations so that lessons learnt here can be applied in similar
settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.