* 1851664
* Evolution and Adaptation: Ambiguity Attitudes with Optimal Risk Preferences
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2022
* Todd Sarver, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 06/30/2022
* USD 404,913.00

This award funds research in economic theory. The project seeks to advance how
economists study individuals who must make decisions when the environment and
possible outcomes are uncertain. People often appear to avoid these kinds of
situations, preferring to safe and well-understood options over choices that
seem risky, uncertain, or ambiguous in their benefits. Understanding how risk
and ambiguity affect choices is important not only for predicting a host of
individual decisions, such as saving, investment, education, and job selection.
This kind of economic theory is also important assessing the impact of different
policies, technological changes, or other economic factors on the economy. Not
surprisingly, ambiguity aversion and pessimistic attitudes towards risk have
played an ever-increasing role in applications to macroeconomics and finance.
The research effort will address a gap in our current economic theory. It will
provide a better model of how individuals make use of new information about
risky and ambiguous situations. The model will also help us understand how
attitudes towards risk and ambiguity compare across individuals. Finally, the
new theory may offer sharper predictions. The team will use an approach based on
evolution and adaptation to build this new theory. The project could develop new
tools for use by business managers and policymakers, who often must form
accurate predictions of how customers, employees, citizens, and other
individuals will behave in risky situations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While there
is now an abundance of research providing decision-theoretic foundations to
models of ambiguity and risk aversion, much less is known about how evolution
might select between competing models and approaches. This project will advance
basic theory regarding risk and ambiguity by providing an evolutionary
foundation for a new model, the adaptive model, that imposes significant
structure on ambiguity and risk aversion. Important features will be that
preferences should be dynamically consistent, even at the cost of
consequentialism, and that different ambiguity preferences go hand in hand with
departures from expected utility theory in the context of risk. Depending on how
effectively individuals of a genotype can adapt the expression of their
phenotype, the adaptive model can nest variants of several prominent models in
the literature as special cases. This will permit the evaluation of these models
based on a new set of primitive assumptions and will extend the general insights
about the structure of preferences under uncertainty and their updating to
applications of those models in the contexts of finance, macro and policy
choice. The project will also help strengthen the interdisciplinary bridge
between the fields of decision theory and evolutionary
biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.