* 1851368
* Collaborative Research: Transforming Carbon in the Deep Sea
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Alexander Bochdansky, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 03/31/2024
* USD 364,838.00

Through understanding the biological pump (the ocean's biologically driven
sequestration of carbon from the atmosphere to the ocean interior and seafloor
sediments), scientists know that the world's oceans absorb more carbon dioxide
than it returns to the atmosphere. While much is known about the biological
processes largely responsible for the transfer of carbon into the deep sea, very
little is known about the microbial decay and subsequent remineralization
processes that occur when the carbon reaches the deep sea. Using newly-designed
deep-sea incubators deployed off the east coast of the United States,
researchers will explore the microbial communities and remineralization
processes that transform carbon in the deep sea. The incubators will be filled
with tracer-labeled algae or fecal material mimicking the diet and waste
products of animal plankton. The tracers allow the researchers to follow the
material through the microbial food web, and simultaneously determine the net
release of carbon dioxide during the incubations. Using a combination of genetic
analysis and novel analytical techniques, the researchers will be able to
identify the organisms involved in the decay processes and rates at which
changes occur at the single-cell level. Results will shed light on these
understudied biological phenomena and contribute to an improved understanding of
the global carbon cycle. In addition to novel advancements in oceanographic
technology, the research supports graduate and undergraduate student education,
and public outreach through partnerships with the Virginia Aquarium and National
Ocean Sciences Bowl to increase ocean science literacy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
this project, researchers will study the organisms, mechanisms, and physical and
ecological factors that modulate the remineralization of organic material in the
deep sea. The methods include using in situ incubations of well-defined and
stable isotope-labeled sources of organic carbon (live and dead phytoplankton
and fecal pellets of zooplankton) with natural microbial communities. The
incubations will take place northeast of Cape Hatteras, a region characterized
by strong offshore transport of phytoplankton carbon. Net carbon dioxide release
rates will be measured over time by conversion of Carbon-13 labeled organic
carbon to 13CO2 . The dependence of degradation rates on the source material,
seasonality, oxygen concentration, and the type of microbial colonizers will be
assessed. Parallel laboratory experiments will elucidate the exact shape of the
time course of carbon release by phytoplankton into dissolved organic and
inorganic fractions as well as determine how representative laboratory and ship-
board generated values are relative to those obtained in situ. Target eukaryotic
and prokaryotic taxa are identified by fluorescence in-situ hybridization (FISH)
after the incubations and individually interrogated using Raman
microspectrometry to investigate the relative Carbon-13-enrichment rates in
organisms assimilating labeled detrital carbon. This multi-faceted approach will
provide better constrained parameters for ecosystem and biological pump models
and shed light on carbon balances of the deep sea. The research contributes to
the development of new oceanographic technology, including new deep-sea
incubators and application of single-cell Raman microspectrometry to natural
microbial communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.