* 1851052
* Heat Transfer Across Nanostructured Metal-Semiconductor Interfaces
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2018,01/31/2021
* Aaron Schmidt, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ying Sun
* 01/31/2021
* USD 226,299.00

Removing heat from semiconductor devices such as transistors is one of the
primary challenges facing many technologies with high commercial and
environmental impact, such as next-generation cell phone networks, electric
vehicle power converters, laser diodes, and solid-state lighting. Much of the
heat buildup occurs at the interface between the semiconductor device and the
substrate material to which it is attached. This project focuses on reducing the
resistance to heat flow at this interface by modifying it with nanostructures
(i.e. arrays of sub-micron wires and cones) in a way that will allow heat to
more easily travel from the semiconductor into the substrate. If successful,
this project will result in a reliable method to greatly improve the performance
and efficiency of many technologies based on semiconductors. In addition, this
research will have an educational impact through the training of graduate and
undergraduate students, and through participation in K-12 outreach programs.

The specific research objectives of this proposal are 1) create a scalable and
transferrable method to enhance thermal transport across an interface using a
novel technique of nanostructuring at the interface; and 2) advance the field of
thermal transport by proposing then validating multiscale models of phonon
transport across nanostructured interfaces. The research plan describes an
approach to rationally design and fabricate arrays of high-aspect-ratio
nanostructures on the mating surfaces of two materials and then bond them
together in a fault-tolerant approach with a soft wetting metal such as indium.
The project focuses on improving thermal transport between wide bandgap
semiconductors and high thermal conductivity substrates, with an emphasis on
diamond. The interfaces will be measured using thermoreflectance techniques and
compared with a multiscale model that incorporates results from first principles
calculations for phonon transport in nanostructures into a larger scale
continuum model. The results of this project will pave the way for understanding
and optimizing interfaces for improved heat transfer between materials with
widely different atomic structures and phonon properties.