* 1851987
* REU Site: Nanoscale Physics and Materials REU and RET at Penn State
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2024
* Jorge Sofo, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 04/30/2024
* USD 349,996.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: &lt;br/&gt;Science, technology, and engineering
careers are becoming increasingly dependent on a breadth of knowledge that spans
multiple disciplines. This Research Experience for Undergraduates and Teachers
at Penn State University addresses this need for multi-disciplinary breadth by
engaging a highly diverse group of 10 students and two teachers in cross-
disciplinary research in nanoscale physics and materials. Students and teachers
will learn and apply cutting-edge scientific techniques and experience the
challenges and rewards of working in a collaborative, interdisciplinary research
environment. Undergraduate students will also participate in career development
activities focused on fortifying the non-technical skills necessary for success
in scientific research, including scientific communication and skills for
building mentor-mentee relationships. Activities include scientific seminars,
professional networking events, outreach activities, and participation in a
national conference. Teachers will gain materials science knowledge and transfer
their experiences back to their students, influencing them and their community
through the development of teaching resources with their peers and Penn State
faculty. This research experience aims to inspire and prepare students of all
ages to pursue careers in science and engineering, with specific goals to
increase representation in science from underrepresented groups, including
minorities and women. Most students from this program matriculate to graduate
programs in science and engineering or begin careers in science
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: &lt;br/&gt;This Research
Experience for Undergraduates and Teachers in nanoscale physics and materials
emphasizes the investigation, creation and/or manipulation of novel
nanostructures and low dimensional materials in order to understand and harness
their electrical, optical, magnetic or quantum mechanical properties. Students
will participate in 10 weeks of mentored research in projects ranging from the
fundamental study of novel physics in topologically active thin films,
nanoparticles, few-layered and 2D materials, to the design, testing and
application of these materials in devices. Teachers participate in a similar
6-week research project coupled with education-themed scientific workshops.
Through their research, students and teachers will have the opportunity to be
trained on state-of-the-art materials synthesis and characterization equipment.
Complementing their research, students also participate in career development
activities aimed at preparing them for and exposing them to scientific research
in nanoscale physics and materials. The culmination of their research
experiences will be to present their work at a cross-disciplinary undergraduate
research symposium at Penn State and some will travel to present their findings
at a national conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.