* 1851210
* Collaborative Research: Multiyear autonomous measurement of N-loss in the ETNP ODZ
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Craig McNeil, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 02/29/2024
* USD 1,444,318.00

Several regions of the deep ocean naturally contain almost no oxygen. Because of
this lack of oxygen, microbes living in these regions live in ways that differ
from those in oxygenated waters consuming nitrate ions instead of oxygen for
respiration. Use of nitrate for microbial respiration results in the production
of nitrogen gas which is called denitrification. The resulting removal of
nitrate has consequences for the whole ocean as nitrogen is an important
nutrient controlling plant growth; however, whereas plants can use nitrogen in
the form of nitrate, they cannot, with a few exceptions, use nitrogen gas. There
remains a number of uncertainties regarding how much denitrification occurs in
the ocean, what controls it, and how it varies in time and space. Traditional
studies of ocean denitrification have been limited by the time ships can be at
sea and the relatively small proportion of the ocean they can observe. Our
project plans to remedy this problem by using vehicles called floats that can
operate autonomously in the ocean for three years or more as they drift with
currents over hundreds of kilometers. We will outfit ten floats with sensors to
measure oxygen and nitrogen gas which will be placed throughout the oxygen
depleted region of the Pacific Ocean to the west of Mexico. This is the largest
such region in the ocean from which we have two years of results from a
prototype float which validated our approach. This study may well transform our
understanding of ocean denitrification and ultimately benefit society as a whole
through greater confidence in predictions of the ocean's nitrogen cycle and
capacity to fix carbon dioxide under current and future conditions. Application
and further development of float systems using commercially available technology
will directly benefit successor studies, and more broadly showcase the use of
water-following platforms to tackle difficult oceanographic problems. Advances
from this study are expected to carry over to other disciplines including ocean
biogeochemical modeling. Outreach activities, support for an early career
scientist, and student training are included in the project. For the outreach
activities, the investigators plan to tie into well-established after-school
programs serving underrepresented populations in Massachusetts and established
opportunities for public presentations using float related display materials at
the University of Washington. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Oxygen deficient zones
(ODZs), despite constituting a small fraction of total oceanic volume, play
important roles in regulating global ocean carbon and nitrogen cycles including
hosting 30 to 50% of the global loss of fixed nitrogen. Unfortunately, current
uncertainty in ODZ nitrogen loss derives from substantial temporal and spatial
variability in rates that remain under-sampled by ship-based measurements. While
local regulation of nitrogen loss by oxygen and organic matter availability are
well accepted, temporal/spatial variability in the nitrogen flux is likely a
result of the influence of physical forcings such as remote ventilation,
seasonal variability, and mesoscale eddies. Understanding how the impact of
physical forcings on nitrogen loss as mediated through oxygen and organic flux
will be required to fully understand the causes and consequences of any future
ODZ expansion. To improve our understanding of ODZ nitrogen loss, we will carry
out a multiyear, autonomous float-based observational program to address
outstanding questions regarding bioavailable nitrogen loss in ODZs. As the
largest ODZ and region of our pilot deployments, our operation area will be the
Eastern Tropical N. Pacific (ETNP) where our study will determine over a multi-
year period, in-situ nM-level oxygen and biogenic nitrogen on float profiles
spanning geographic gradients in oxygen and surface productivity. For the first
time, our study will also determine in situ nitrogen loss rates from changes in
nitrogen concentration during 1 to 2 week Lagrangian float drifts along a
constant density surface. A pilot 2 yr float deployment in the ETNP documents
our ability to do so. Critically, our float-based approach more closely matches
the frequency and distribution of observations to the expected variability in
biogenic nitrogen production as compared to prior work and will dramatically
increase the data density for this region by acquiring &gt;500 profiles/drifts
for nitrogen and &gt;1000 profiles for nM oxygen.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.