* 1851717
* Heterogeneity, Household Behavior, and the Transmission of Aggregate Shocks
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Adrien Auclert, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 03/31/2024
* USD 495,998.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI Last Name: Auclert&lt;br/&gt;Title:
Heterogeneity, Household Behavior, and the Transmission of Aggregate
Shocks&lt;br/&gt;Proposal ID: 1851717 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most of
the models used to study monetary and fiscal policy abstract away from
inequality and assume that households are rational and perfectly informed about
the state of the economy. Considering households that are heterogenous with
respect to their consumption, income, wealth, and information sets imposes
challenges in modeling. This research develops a codebase in modelling
heterogenous decision makers using recent advances in theory and computation.
The developed toolkit will include codes, extensive documentation in the form of
notebooks, as well as teaching materials. The developed codebase will provide
researchers and policy makers a useful toolkit in considering heterogenous
households by simplifying the computation and estimation of complex
macroeconomic models. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research on heterogenous agent
models leverages new advances on the computation of equilibria in sequence space
by jointly solving the equations characterizing equilibrium across all periods
for time paths of the unknowns, given initial conditions on the distribution and
other states. For models that are linearized to first order with respect to
aggregates, the sequence and the state space approaches deliver the same impulse
responses, but the sequence space has computational advantages for
heterogeneous-agent models: it allows for a wider class of shocks, is easily
scalable, and can achieve large speed gains. The developed toolkit will require
as input the equations characterizing equilibrium, including specification of
heterogeneous-agent ?blocks?. The toolkit will then automatically perform
computation of steady state and transition dynamics for given shocks. Extensions
will allow estimation as well as computation of optimal
policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.