* 1851293
* I-Corps: 6Sensing: Chip-scale Raman sensors
* TIP,TI
* 11/15/2018,04/30/2020
* Juejun Hu, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Behrooz Shirazi
* 04/30/2020
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to provide
on-chip optical sensors that enable faster and cheaper production of drugs and
chemicals. Pharmaceutical R&amp;D and production rely heavily on chemical
analysis to provide insight into the processes at play, however analytical
instruments do not follow the latest manufacturing trends towards single-use
technologies and smaller batches, or even continuous production. Integrated (on-
chip) photonics is an attractive sensing platform thanks to its small form
factor, robustness, large multiplexing capability, and tight optical confinement
that enhances light-matter interactions. This project will pioneer the large-
scale use of integrated photonic sensors starting with chemical sensing, paving
the way to other applications. By enabling a better understanding of the
reactions at play in manufacturing processes, the proposed technology is poised
to impact the pharmaceutical market and help improving public
health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project aims to develop the first
practical implementation of a microchip-scale optical spectrometer. Integrated
photonic product remain scarce due to several barriers at the fabrication and
packaging levels. This project will mitigate these issues to offer equivalent
sensitivity and performance to large benchtop optical spectrometers in a
dramatically smaller form factor. This will be realized by combining recent
advances in integrated photonic component design, photonic chip architecture,
and optical packaging. The proposed sensor will enable novel chemical sensing
applications and help with the understanding of processes at play in areas such
as cell-based manufacturing and continuous-flow chemical
manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.