* 1851321
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  The Integration of Extra-Clinical Contexts and Genetic Disease Diagnosis
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2021
* Stacey Langwick, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 04/30/2021
* USD 23,602.00

Genetic medicine has emerged as a global healthcare and research priority.
However, the finding that specific diseases vary in prevalence across
populations has given rise to questions and concerns that extend beyond the
biological. These are such questions as, Will diagnosis become the impetus for
discrimination in the funding of research or the availability of treatment?
Could an association between diseases and sub-populations become a tool for
political organizing or social and cultural differentiation? The anthropological
research supported by this award will investigate these issues through a focus
on sickle cell disease, a group of blood disorders that affects the blood's
ability to carry oxygen. Sickle cell is the most common genetic disease
worldwide and affects as many as 100,000 Americans. Because sickle cell is also
uneven in its distribution, it is an appropriate domain for investigating
concerns about changing understandings of the relationship between genes and
social life. Genetic diseases increasingly dominate the landscape of biomedicine
worldwide, and this project will help to understand the socio-political
implications of these shifts.

The research will be conducted by Cornell University anthropology doctoral
student, Rebekah Ciribassi, with guidance from Dr. Stacey Langwick. The
researcher has chosen to conduct the research in Tanzania, because it has one of
the world's highest rates of children born with sickle cell disease. Because
sickle cell in Tanzania is at the center of a growing network of infrastructure,
advocacy, research, and care, including widespread testing, the disease is
discussed widely in the public forum, which will make any socio-political
relationships easier to uncover and track over time than would be the case where
the disease is less common or less talked about. The researcher has identified
two areas of the country, Mwanza and Zanzibar, where people are grappling with
sickle cell disease but where the political, racial, and social histories
through which they make sense of an inherited disease are very different. This
funding is for the second phase of the research, the component to be carried out
in Zanzibar. The investigators will gather data from (1) medical practitioners
who work in sickle cell disease care in a hospital setting; (2) sickle cell
advocacy group participants; and (3) diagnosed families. She will employ a mix-
method social science approach including: archival and discourse analysis;
participant observation in hospital clinics; and interviews and life history
interviews with diagnosed families. The investigators will build a comparison
between the data collected in the Zanzibari context and the data collected in
Mwanza, with special attention to emergent themes around blood; kinship (e.g.,
inheritance and reproduction); race and ethnicity; and nation. The resulting
analysis will assess how genetic medicine integrates with extra-clinical
contexts. The results of this research will offer an important contribution to
literature on the Ethical, Legal, and Social Implications (ELSI) of genetic
medicine. Findings from this research will contribute to social scientific
theory and to improved policy regarding the increasing spread of genetic medical
infrastructures.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.