* 1851631
* East Tennessee STEM Teacher Scholarship Program
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2026
* Scott Kirkby, East Tennessee State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Lewis
* 04/30/2026
* USD 718,697.00

With support from the NSF Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce), this
Track 1: Scholarships and Stipends project aims to help address the national
shortage of highly qualified STEM high school teachers in high-need school
districts. This project has three parts: 1) a summer teaching internship program
for undergraduate STEM majors, which is designed to recruit students into the
teaching profession; 2) scholarships and mentoring for a Master of Arts in
Teaching (MAT) program; and 3) a mentoring program and continuing professional
development for newly-minted teachers to retain them as teachers. An innovative
feature of the project is its plan to support 40 summer teaching internships for
STEM undergraduates, as a pathway to recruit students into the MAT scholarship
program. Through this effort, undergraduate STEM majors will serve as teaching
interns at science museums, summer science camps, and local non-profit science
educational organizations. While interning, the students will be actively
mentored by University faculty, staff at the partner facilities, and local high
school teachers. These internships are intended to help students gain confidence
in their ability to teach and inspire them to continue participation in the
project as Noyce Scholars in the MAT program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over five
years, this project plans to provide scholarships to 30 STEM graduates to
support their entry into and completion of the MAT program. The MAT program will
provide pedagogical knowledge and residency experiences to prepare STEM
graduates for a career in teaching. The project will target graduates in
Physics, Chemistry, Engineering Technology, Computer Science, and Mathematics,
which represent the highest need STEM fields in the region. This program has
three sequential goals to recruit, prepare, and retain highly qualified STEM
high school teachers in high-need districts in eastern Tennessee. The summer
internship will be an essential component of the recruitment program. To capture
the impact of the internship, the Noyce team will use regular journal entries
written by the interns and a survey developed by the American Physical Society
to investigate whether participation in such internships changes undergraduate
attitudes toward teaching as a profession. The results of this study will be
disseminated to the STEM education community at science education conferences
and submitted for publication in science education journals. Once the STEM
undergraduate students graduate and are recruited as Noyce Scholars, the MAT
program will provide them with a comprehensive background in education,
including STEM teaching strategies and pedagogy. When the Scholars transition to
full-time teaching, the project will provide three years of induction support to
enhance their success. The recruitment, training, and retention strategies used
in this program will build a strong network and develop partnerships that will
support a long-term goal of increasing the number of highly-qualified STEM
teachers who are placed into high-need schools. The Noyce program supports
talented STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12
STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 STEM teachers to become STEM
master teachers in high-need school districts. It also supports research on the
persistence, retention, and effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need
school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.