* 1851430
* A high-density, high-precision zonal section of nitrate isotopes across the South Indian Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Daniel Sigman, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 09/30/2023
* USD 296,546.00

The ocean covers most of the Earth's surface, and its physical, biological, and
chemical processes determine many aspects of Earth's climate and the chemistry
of the atmosphere. Biologically available nitrogen (or "fixed N") is an
essential nutrient for the microscopic plants (phytoplankton) in the ocean. The
supply of fixed N can limit the growth of phytoplankton and the capacity of the
ocean to absorb carbon dioxide, the most important greenhouse gas. Following the
flow and transformation of fixed N is a powerful approach for understanding how
the physics, biology, chemistry interact to determine the biological fertility
of the ocean and its storage of carbon dioxide away from the atmosphere. With
such an understanding, we may be able to predict how the ocean will change in
response to human activities and thus affect the conditions for life in the
future. Nitrate (NO3-) is the primary form of fixed N in the ocean, and both its
nitrogen (N) and oxygen (O) atoms occur in more than one mass, or "isotope": 14N
and 15N for N and 16O and 18O for O. The ratios of these isotopes are affected
by biological processes, and so isotopic measurements of nitrate reveal
processes at work in the ocean that are otherwise hard to disentangle. Moreover,
the isotope ratio of N in the ocean through time is recorded in the organic
matter of the sediments that accumulate on the seafloor. Thus, the isotopes
allow us to reconstruct important features of the past ocean, such as how the
sequestration of carbon dioxide by ocean life has changed over past climate
changes, which may indicate how this sequestration will change in the future.
This project will produce the largest data set so far on the isotopic
composition of nitrate in the Indian Ocean. The Indian Ocean is one of the three
major basins of the global ocean, the one that has been studied the least, and
it may prove to be the best basin for reconstructing past surface ocean
conditions because of the abundance of microfossils in its sediments. The
measurements of nitrate isotopes generated in this project will serve many
purposes. As one example, it will allow for a determination of the circulation
path by which nitrate is transferred up from the deep waters to the sunlit
surface waters where growing phytoplankton require this nutrient. As a second
example, the measurements will help to calibrate new nitrogen isotopic methods
for reconstructing past ocean conditions, which utilizes the organic matter
trapped in the fossil shells of foraminifera, a type of zooplankton. In order to
explain these goals and to spread our understanding of the ocean to educators,
each of the two years of the project, a 1-day workshop will be held for the
Teachers as Scholars program of the Princeton University Program in Teacher
Preparation, which brings middle and high school teachers to Princeton to
interact with faculty and learn about important scientific questions and
research. The workshop will focus on accessing and visualizing ocean data sets
and other oceanographic content for active learning in the classroom.
Undergraduates will be involved in the research through summer internships,
junior projects, and/or senior theses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
produce analyses of the nitrate 15N/14N and 18O/16O ratios in samples collected
during the upcoming 2019-2020 GO-SHIP I05 zonal section across the South Indian
Ocean from South Africa to Australia at 30-33 deg S. Nitrate 15N/14N and 18O/16O
provide critical constraints on the cycle and input/output budget of marine
fixed N. The I05 nitrate isotope data will be broadly useful, potentially
serving as a cornerstone in the global ocean's nitrate isotope data set. Given
the lack of nitrate isotope measurements in the Indian Ocean, especially in the
main basin away from the low-[O2] regions to the North, this project will fill a
major geographic gap. Moreover, it will provide dense spatial and depth coverage
with the highest level of precision currently available, allowing for novel
hydrography-based calculations of N fluxes. The nitrate isotope samples will be
taken from the same bottles from which the GO-SHIP hydrographic and
biogeochemical measurements will be made, maximizing the power of the nitrate
isotope data set. The data set will be of use to the growing number of numerical
ocean model simulations including biogeochemistry, for identifying regional
oceanographic processes, and for ground-truthing paleoceanographic
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.