* 1851918
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: The Effects of Micro-Finance Access on Economic and Social Outcomes of Low Income Women
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2019,09/30/2022
* Nusrat Jimi, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 09/30/2022
* USD 33,652.00

Studies of the effects of access to micro-finance on economic and social
outcomes for women have mainly focused on short-term effects. Moreover, there
are few empirical studies that establish a causal effect of microcredit credit
access on women's empowerment, economic outcomes and other social outcomes. This
proposed research project will use field experiments to study the long-term
effects of micro-finance access on a number of outcomes for low income women.
The study will be based on a follow-up survey of low income women in a 2012
experimental study of access to micro-credit. The study will gather and analyze
information about health, and education as well as women's empowerment (decision
making power within their households) seven years after their initial access to
micro-credit. This will be one of the first experimental studies of microcredit
that focuses on long run outcomes rather than on short-run outcomes. The
evidence would help determine whether microcredit provision can be used as an
effective anti-poverty program. The results of this research project will
provide important inputs into the formulation of policies to reduce poverty in
the U.S. and around the world. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In contrast to
earlier studies that find positive and significant short-run effects of
microcredit on investments in education, health and women's decision-making
power, recent randomized control trial (RCT) studies find no such effects. An
important question is whether these differences in outcomes are due to
differences in time frames or differences in methodologies. This research
project will investigate the long-term effects of micro-credit access on
investment in health, education, and three aspects of women empowerment---
economic, demographic, and psychological---women empowerment. It will conduct an
RCT follow-up of a 2012 study of the effects of microcredit access among low
income women on their socioeconomic outcomes. This project will contribute to
our understanding of the linkage between women's access to credit and
improvements in health and educational outcomes as well as women?s empowerment.
The results of this research project will contribute to the US's ability to
craft effective policies to reduce poverty among low income
populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.