* 1851821
* Studies on the Data-Driven Economy and School Choice
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2024
* Yeon-Koo Che, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 04/30/2024
* USD 284,999.00

PI Last Name: Che&lt;br/&gt;Title: Studies on the Data-Driven Economy and School
Choice&lt;br/&gt;Proposal ID:
1851821&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research consists
of several projects. The first project looks at how data-driven recommendations
inform our decisions and how decisions in turn affect what data is collected for
the recommendations. This project is useful in understanding and evaluating the
implications of the rapidly growing information technology and its use to guide
our every day decisions. The developed framework also advances the knowledge on
how internet platforms may collect data from individuals and use them to
recommend products or to make hiring decisions. The second project looks at
school applications by students and considers that students make mistakes in
these applications. These mistakes in turn affect forecasting reforms in the
application procedures. The third and fourth projects are theoretical tools that
will be useful for researchers that work in related areas. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The first project develops a conceptual framework for understanding
data-driven recommendations that increasingly guide our every-day decisions by
considering the feedback mechanism between the recommendations and our
decisions. Understanding this feedback process identifies the nature of
externalities and potential inefficiencies, leading to deeper understanding and
possible policy implications about the new markets guided by data-driven
recommendations. The research also addresses the concern that the increasing
reliance by employers on third-party algorithms to screen job candidates may
adversely affect inclusion in employment. The second project advances mechanism
design in school choice by considering that students make mistakes in
applications and uses this framework for school matching based on rankings and
lottery. The third and fourth projects advance the state-of-the-art research in
dynamic persuasion and monotone comparative statics analysis topics that are of
central interest in economic theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.