* 1851429
* I-Corps Teams Program: Autonomous Robotic Mower applied to Labor Shortage in Landscaping
* TIP,TI
* 11/15/2018,04/30/2020
* Amardeep Kaur, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Shearman
* 04/30/2020
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is a solution to
the labor shortage problem in landscaping organizations. Current solutions to
the employee recruitment and retention problem lack technological innovation.
Primarily, landscaping organizations hire more employees to offset resigning
employees, pay higher wages, attend careers fairs, post newspaper/online ads,
and hire H2B workers. The Department of Labor H2B visa program supplies
approximately 10% of the landscaping workforce. According to a variety of
sources, including in-person customer interviews, labor shortages in the
landscaping industry are a major factor inhibiting landscaping companies'
growth. This research team is developing a product to assist American small
business with continuing to serve their customers and grow their businesses.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project proposes robotic technology to help
solve the labor shortage problem. Using robotic embedded technology the research
team has implemented advanced algorithms to guide a robot prototype along a user
defined trajectory. The mechatronic design of the product combined with the
algorithm development gives hopeful insight into robotic prototypes'
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.