* 1851282
* The Pragmatics of Typography
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Keith Murphy, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 02/29/2024
* USD 209,801.00

Communication among humans is known to be complex, which is perhaps why some
technologies of communication go unrecognized by their users. For example,
written communications, whether public signage, billboards, books, instruction
manuals, or even consumer electronics interfaces, depend on the purposeful
deployment of typefaces and fonts. The typeface or font chosen in each case
carries its own meaning, which influences the message received and resonates
with readers through these shared cultural forms, even if readers are unaware.
Surprisingly, considering typeface's ubiquity and importance, this area of
social life has been little studied. Social scientists have examined typeface
primarily in narrow, cognitive terms, such as by studying relative readability.
But much wider research is needed to understand how the many different typefaces
that populate societies are created, selected, and used, and how they ultimately
build and influence communication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Keith M. Murphy, an
anthropologist at the University of California at Irvine, will undertake an
ethnographic and discourse analytic investigation of how varieties of printed
language mediate communication. The research will focus on typographic design
and pedagogy; decision making around the use of typeface for public
communication; and the curation and cultivation of typographic knowledge. Data
will be collected through semi-structured interviews, participant observation,
video-recorded activity analyses, and archival research, in studios, classrooms,
and archives, primarily in San Francisco, Los Angeles, and New York City. Data
analysis will include an innovative use of techniques from archaeology to
examine relations between typographic specimen categories and contexts of use.
Findings from this research will elucidate how typeface influences the messages
people send and receive. Theoretically, the research expands upon social
scientific understanding of the materiality of human
communication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.