* 1851094
* Collaborative Research: The Impact of Impurities and Stress State on Polycrystalline Ice Deformation
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2024
* Ian Baker, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 07/31/2024
* USD 469,370.00

The ice of the polar ice sheets is among the purest substances on Earth, yet the
small amount of impurities --such as acids-- are important to how the ice flows
and what can be learned from ice cores about past climate. The goal of this
project is to understand the role of such acids on the deformation of
polycrystalline ice by comparing the deformation behavior of pure and sulfuric
acid-doped samples. Sulfuric acid was chosen both because of its importance for
interpreting past climate and because it can lead to water veins in ice at low
temperatures. This work will focus on the location, movement, and impact of
acids in polycrystalline ice that are more complex than in single crystals of
ice. By deforming samples and performing microstructural characterization, the
role of acids on deformation rate, grain evolution, and the movement of the
acids themselves, will be assessed. The work will lead to the education of a
Ph.D. student at Dartmouth College, introduce undergraduate students to research
at both the University of Washington and Dartmouth College.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite the ubiquitous use of the constitutive relation
for ice commonly referred to as "Glen's Flow Law", significant uncertainty
exists particularly with regard to the role of impurities and the development of
oriented fabrics. The aim of this project is to improve the constitutive
relationship for ice by performing deformation tests and microstructural
characterization of pure and sulfuric acid-doped ice. The project will focus on
sulfuric acid's impact on ice viscosity, fabric evolution, and diffusivity.
Sulfuric acid can have both direct and indirect effects on the mechanical
properties of polycrystalline ice. The direct effects change the dislocation
velocity and/or density, and the indirect effects change the grain size and
fabric. The complexity and interaction of these effects means that it is not
possible to understand the effects of sulfuric acid by simply examining ice core
specimens. In this project, the team will deform four types of ice: lab-grown
ice samples doped with similar-to-natural concentrations of sulfuric acid, lab-
grown high-purity ice, layered doped and pure ice, and natural ice from
Antarctic ice cores. Deformation will be performed in both uniaxial compression
and simple shear. The addition of simple shear tests is critical for relating
the laboratory-observed deformation behavior to the behavior of polar ice sheets
where the shear strain dominates ice motion in basal ice. After deformation to
strains from 5 percent up to 25 percent, the microstructural development will be
assessed with methods including a variety of scanning electron microscope
techniques, Raman microscopy, synchrotron-based Nano-X-ray fluorescence, and ion
chromatography. These analysis techniques will allow the determination of 1) the
segregation and movement of impurities, 2) the rate of grain-boundary migration,
3) the number of recrystallized grains; and 4) the full orientation of the ice
crystals. The results will enable both microstructural modeling of the effects
of sulfuric acid and numerical modeling of diffusion in ice cores. The net
result will be a better understanding of ice deformation that improves ice-core
interpretation and ice-sheet modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.