* 1851696
* REU Site: Spatial Models and Electoral Districting
* SBE,SMA
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2023
* Jim Thatcher, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 03/31/2023
* USD 351,598.00

This project is funded from the Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
Sites program in the Directorate for Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences
(SBE). It has both scientific and societal benefits, and it integrates research
and education. This REU Site Program, "Spatial Models and Electoral
Districting", supported by the University of Puget Sound and the University of
Washington Tacoma, produces cutting-edge research and the next generation of
experts on the socially and politically urgent issue of electoral districting.
Bringing together work in geography, mathematics, data science, and computer
science, the REU Site both advances scientific knowledge and furthers the
national interest. The REU Site produces unique, timely, and important research
on redistricting in the years immediately prior to decennial redistricting. It
emphasizes the participation of students from traditionally underrepresented
gender, economic, and racial identities within the academy and STEM fields. This
REU engages these students through research-driven approaches to civic
participation and produces both an interdisciplinary research agenda and policy-
relevant results. Further, through the support of students less likely to
otherwise participate in research opportunities, the REU's impact is not simply
on those who participate, but also on the disciplines and career paths the
participants diversify and improve throughout their careers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By taking a synergistic approach to the computational,
geographic, and political aspects of electoral redistricting, the REU Site
encourages unique and new ideas to emerge at the center of an important, timely
societal question. Each summer the program supports two research teams, each
consisting of two research mentors and six students over an eight week program.
Training will include GIS, the python programming language, and other technical
skills. During the first three weeks, REU participants will interact with
invited experts from political science and public policy, among other fields, to
help ground their projects in existing scholarship and public concerns. The REU
Site's primary goals are to: (1) provide a high-quality research experience to
non-traditional REU students, specifically focusing on underrepresented gender,
economic, and racial identities as well as students from smaller colleges with
fewer research opportunities; (2) train students and researchers in
interdisciplinary approaches with broad real-world implications, preparing
students for potential graduate research or careers in the burgeoning fields
surrounding data science and geospatial technologies; (3) help researchers gain
experience in producing collaborative, pertinent research with undergraduate
students. Participants are trained using a number of high-impact pedagogical
techniques that help empower a new generation of diverse scholars engaged in
community-informed research and public policy
creation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.