* 1851032
* Collaborative Research: Dynamic Marine Landscapes: Feedbacks and spatial patterns of corals and their associated fishes
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2019,11/30/2023
* Craig Osenberg, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 11/30/2023
* USD 383,760.00

Nearshore habitats such as coral reefs, seagrass beds, and oyster reefs perform
a number of services including reducing storm protection, nutrient cycling, and
water purification. Many of these habitats have experienced widespread loss and
fragmentation due to human activities. This loss threatens the services these
ecosystems provide to humans as well as the extraordinary biodiversity of fishes
and invertebrates that live within them. However, there is still a lot that is
unknown about these habitats which makes it difficult to understand the likely
impacts of habitat loss or the benefits of habitat restoration. This research
focuses on habitat loss and fragmentation in coral reef ecosystems. The focus of
the research is to understand how habitat loss and fragmentation affects the
biodiversity of fish and crustaceans on coral reefs in the South Pacific.
Because many creatures living within the coral offer important benefits to the
coral such as defense from coral predators and removal of sedimentation, this
research also seeks to better understand how changes in the biodiversity and
abundance of fish and invertebrates associated with corals, affect the capacity
of corals to withstand future impacts, such as sedimentation and outbreaks of
coral-eating seastars. Understanding whether habitat loss alters the capacity of
corals to withstand stress in an increasingly stressful world is critical to
devise effective strategies to manage and protect coral reefs and the many
services they provide to society. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many marine systems are
characterized by habitat-forming foundation species, which harbor a diversity of
occupants, and whose dynamics are thought to drive resilience of entire
ecosystems As a result, there is widespread concern over the ongoing loss and
fragmentation of biogenic habitats such as seagrass beds, oyster reefs, kelp
forests, and coral reefs. Yet, without a more complete understanding of marine
landscape ecology, we struggle to predict how the degradation or restoration of
habitat will alter ecosystem dynamics, function, and resilience. Most research
in marine landscape ecology has focused on spatial patterns of occupant
abundance and biodiversity; however, the causes and consequences of these
patterns are rarely explored. An important but understudied consequence of
variation in occupant density is that it may alter how occupants interact with
their biogenic habitat. Because occupants can benefit biogenic habitat or harm
biogenic habitat, changes in occupant density can affect habitat growth and
survival. Consequently, habitat-driven variation in occupant density should feed
back to alter habitat dynamics and the spatial patterning of the habitat. In
summary, we are limited in our understanding of why patterns in landscape
ecology exist, how these patterns alter the population dynamics and spatial
patterns of the occupants as well as their habitat, and what the implications of
habitat degradation or restoration will be. The central objective of this
proposal is to examine the causes and consequences of the nonlinear relationship
between occupant abundance and the amount of biogenic habitat. Specifically, we
will: (i) examine the habitat-based mechanisms that produce spatial variation in
occupant density; (ii) quantify how habitat-driven occupant density feeds back
to alter habitat growth and survival; and (iii) apply this knowledge to
understand how bidirectional habitat-occupant interactions affect the long-term
dynamics, create novel spatial patterns, and drive variation in how systems
respond to and recover from disturbances.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.