* 1851916
* REU Site: Practices and Perspectives in Nanoscience and Chemical Biology
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2023
* Indika Arachchige, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 03/31/2023
* USD 312,309.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates site award to Virginia Commonwealth
University, located in Richmond, VA, supports the training of 8 students for 11
weeks during the summers of 2019-2021. In this program, funded by the Division
of Chemistry in the Mathematical and Physical Science Directorate, Professors
Indika Arachchige and Suzanne Ruder and colleagues in the Department of
Chemistry host an REU site with a focus on nanoscience and chemical biology. The
undergraduate participants engage in practical training in research techniques
(practices) with career preparation and scientific awareness activities
(perspectives) in chemistry. The participants take part in research projects
ranging from catalysis to the study of protein-protein interactions to
biomolecule design. Alongside research, training in professionalism, ethics, and
career planning continues throughout the summer with weekly lunch meetings,
seminars, and workshops. Participants also have the opportunity to tour a local
pharmaceutical facility (Pfizer) and participate in mock interviews and panel
discussions with industrial scientists, introducing them to varied aspects of
real-world positions in the chemistry profession. With existing faculty contacts
from participants' institutions and use of social media, participants establish
mentoring relationships which also help to gauge the impact of the REU on each
participants' career path. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research projects available
for participants include development of novel inorganic materials for catalysis,
sensing and imaging; single molecule techniques to understand protein-protein
interactions; novel chemical gradients for separation science; redox-active
covalent organic frameworks for energy storage; and rationally designed
biomolecules for therapeutics. Participants are introduced to the fundamentals
of highly interdisciplinary nanoscience and chemical biology concepts through
first-hand experience conducting research, providing them a unique training and
specific technical expertise not generally obtained in undergraduate labs.
Participants are particularly recruited from primarily undergraduate
institutions and historically black colleges and universities, providing
research experiences to participants who may not otherwise have access. The
broader impacts of these endeavors are that the participants will have a unique
opportunity to learn nanoscience and chemical biology concepts and take the new
knowledge back to their institutions, while promoting a diverse scientific
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.