* 1851389
* Collaborative Research: Shoreward Sediment Transport: Combining Highly Resolved Field Observations and Modeling to Examine Fundamental Processes Controlling Shoreline Adjustment
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Sourabh Apte, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 06/30/2024
* USD 859,404.00

Shoreward sediment transport is responsible for building and maintaining
shorelines on wave-dominated coasts. Due to their oscillatory motion waves move
sediments back and forth and the net transport, averaging over many waves and
conditions, is responsible for accretion or erosion of beaches. Shoreward
sediment transport is critical to understanding how beaches rebuild in response
to rising sea levels, storms, and the construction of engineered coastal
structures. Improved understanding of shoreward transport, the focus of this
study, will enable better model parameterizations to predict this response and
forecast the potential recovery of the coastline following a storm. The
fundamental processes underlying wave-driven shoreward transport are among the
least understood and most elusive processes in nearshore oceanography. Numerous
competing theoretical mechanisms are likely to contribute, but there is a
critical lack of validation data to determine their relative importance. The
proposed work is an interdisciplinary collaboration that brings together
oceanography, fluid dynamics, and engineering to address the scientific
fundamentals of a problem with significant societal implications. Field
measurements of turbulence and sediment will be carried out on a natural beach.
The experimental data will be combined with advance numerical modelling
techniques that will allow identification of the most important wave-driven
shoreward mechanisms on a natural beach. Apart for the scientific and
engineering values of the study, the project will provide contribute to the
training PhD students and it will expose undergraduate students into field
research. Public outreach will be conducted through the development of short
documentary-style video.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Modeling shoreward transport
requires representation of multiple transport processes that act across a broad
range of scales, from small-scale turbulence, sediment mobilization, and fluid-
sediment feedbacks, to wavelength-scale nonlinear wave processes. In the past,
direct investigation of such processes has only been possible in laboratory
studies, which have uncertain applicability to real nearshore environments due
to scaling effects and simplified dynamics. Full-scale experiments, on the other
hand, represent realistic dynamics but often sacrifice resolution, e.g. by only
measuring average transport over many wave periods, leaving uncertainty as to
what processes are contributing to transport. The key components of this study
are the utilization of a purpose-built, broadband pulse-coherent acoustic
Doppler profiler (MFDop), and detailed process models, which together resolve
the full suite of transport mechanisms that have been hypothesized to occur on
natural beaches. The MFDop system is a profiler, capable of measuring sediment
concentration and velocity fluctuations at high frequency (50 Hz) and with a
vertical resolution of 4 mm capable of resolving the wave boundary layer that
extends a few cm above the seabed. The MFDop system and supporting
instrumentation will be deployed on a natural beach in Oregon to measure the
vertical structure of boundary layer velocities and sediment suspension as a
function of the free-stream velocity and pressure gradient. The data collected
will guide modeling experiments simulating flow and sediment variability at
wavelength and cm-scales (Reynolds-averaged 1-D vertical simulations) and at
sub-cm to sub-mm scales capable to resolve boundary layer eddies and sediment
particles (Large eddy simulation (LES) modelling). A nested approach will be
developed aiming at adding wavelength-effects into LES modelling while avoiding
computational limitation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.