* 1851542
* REU Site: San Diego State University Mathematics Research Experience for Undergraduates
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Vadim Ponomarenko, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Tiziana Giorgi
* 03/31/2024
* USD 345,600.00

This REU site conducts a nationwide recruitment effort to target talented
undergraduates, particularly those with limited opportunity for research at
their home institutions. They are brought for 8 summer weeks to SDSU's campus,
where they are intermixed with undergraduates from other institutions, visiting
faculty, the co-PI, and the PI. In this environment, they are trained in the
experience of being a research mathematician. They read background papers, write
code to formulate conjectures, prove theorems, write papers, collaborate with
peers, and present their results in seminars and at conferences. They also learn
about graduate school and the career as a whole.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU
site will train twelve undergraduates per summer in mathematical research, from
problem genesis to production of submitted papers. For eight weeks, students
will meet daily with faculty project directors, produce conjectures, prove
theorems, and write a manuscript (in LaTeX) with their results. The PI and Co-PI
are experts in nonunique factorization, numerical semigroups, and various
adjacent mathematical disciplines. They have substantial experience in
publishing with student coauthors, and anticipate such publications in peer-
reviewed mathematics journals of international reputation as an outcome of this
program. Experts will join the team (in years 2 and 3) to supplement expertise
and assist in choosing problems and in directing
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.