* 1851920
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: Escaping Secular Stagnation with Unconventional Policy
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2022
* Catherine Eckel, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 04/30/2022
* USD 35,982.00

PI Last Name: Eckel&lt;br/&gt;Title: Doctoral Dissertation Research in
Economics: Escaping Secular Stagnation with Unconventional
Policy&lt;br/&gt;Proposal ID: 1851920 &lt;br/&gt;Institution: Texas A&amp;M
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
project uses laboratory experiments to understand periods of prolonged low
economic growth, as distinct from cyclical low-growth periods. The goal of the
project is to simulate an economy in the laboratory within which we can trigger
a permanent decline in economic activity along with falling prices, and then to
explore various policy interventions that have the potential to repair the
stagnant economy. In particular, the project focuses on what actions policy
makers can take (monetary and fiscal policy) to restore the experimental economy
to full employment. The research explores whether the timing and contextual
communication of policy can influence the efficacy of policy. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The laboratory experiments in this project are designed to explore
secular stagnation in a closed economy. Specifically, the research implements a
recent formalization of secular stagnation that uses an overlapping-generations
structure to break the representative agent assumption and allow for endogenous
bouts of activity at the zero lower bound (ZLB). Exogenous deleveraging shocks
can trigger spending gluts that create deflation, and lead to a secular
stagnation equilibrium, which can be unique. The objective of the research is to
identify whether deflationary and inflationary equilibria emerge when they are
unique, and to explore equilibrium selection when multiple equilibria exist.
Additionally, the project investigates the ability of monetary policy, in the
form of inflation targeting, and fiscal policy, consisting of "helicopter drops"
financed using lump-sum taxes levied on the middle-aged cohort in our
experimental economy, to pull the economy out of a deflationary equilibrium
following a debt-deleveraging shock. Both potential remedies improve economic
conditions through an expectations channel by making households more optimistic
about future economic conditions. Finally, the project studies the effect of
variation in both the timing and contextual communication of
policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.