* 1851392
* Collaborative Research: Assessing the changing symbiotic milieu on Caribbean coral reefs under climate change: magnitude, tradeoffs, interventions, and implications
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Andrew Baker, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 03/31/2024
* USD 494,648.00

Climate change represents an existential threat to coral reef ecosystems
worldwide, with coral bleaching driven by continued ocean warming presenting the
most pressing challenge to the persistence of these ecosystems over the next few
decades. Given the severity and urgency of this threat it is critical to
investigate mechanisms by which some corals might survive warming, assess the
degree to which this is happening on reefs, and apply these discoveries to
inform conservation interventions that might improve survival trajectories
wherever possible. This project aims to fulfill these objectives by testing
whether reef corals in the Caribbean are undergoing shifts in their algal
symbionts in favor of more heat-tolerant types, what the consequences of these
shifts might be for coral reef ecosystems, and the way in which we might use
this information to help conserve them. Scientific objectives will be leveraged
to improve the effectiveness of reef restoration efforts in the Caribbean by
applying findings to ongoing intervention trials which aim to seed outplanted
corals (both adult fragments raised in nurseries, and sexually derived coral
recruits) with heat tolerant algae that are climate-resistant. It also takes
advantage of emerging opportunities at two major public aquariums to highlight
the plight of coral reefs to engaged public audiences primed to receive this
message and learn about the role of science in both understanding and mitigating
the problem. Finally, numerous high school, undergraduate, and graduate students
will receive mentorship during this project, helping to train the next
generation of marine scientists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project tests
whether continued climate warming is causing heat-tolerant algal symbionts (such
as Durusdinium trenchii) to become increasingly common on coral reefs in the
Caribbean. Understanding the changing symbiotic "milieu" in the region, the
processes underlying the spread of D. trenchii, and the consequences of this
spread, are very timely questions that have the potential to help us understand
future reef states. This project will: (1) Manipulate coral symbioses in the
laboratory, including a number of Caribbean coral species never before
attempted, to assess in a standardized way their relative ability to acquire
heat-tolerant symbionts; (2) Outplant corals with manipulated symbiont
communities to reefs to assess real-world ecophysiological tradeoffs to heat
tolerance, such as reduced growth rate; (3) Introduce heat-tolerant symbionts to
coral colonies in the field using tissue implants in order to understand
environmental controls on the persistence or loss of introduced symbionts; (4)
Evaluate transgenerational feedbacks in the symbiotic milieu by investigating
the roles of temperature and D. trenchii availability on the acquisition and
establishment of these symbionts in newly settled coral larvae; and (5) Quantify
changes in the incidence and relative abundance of heat-tolerant symbionts in
the Caribbean over the last ~20 years using unique archived samples dating back
to 1995-2002 from Florida, Bahamas, Belize, and
Bermuda.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.