* 1851328
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Healthcare Austerity and the Mobilization of Social Networks
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2019,09/30/2021
* Taylor Bell, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 09/30/2021
* USD 30,232.00

Reductions in state-sponsored forms of healthcare are an increasingly common
response to economic crisis. When public programs and private financial
resources both recede, what kinds of social resources do chronically ill people,
who need stable access to pharmaceuticals, mobilize in order to survive? Social
scientific accounts of unmet healthcare needs associated with economic crises
have largely focused on the developing world. Less is known about the
relationship between austerity and healthcare resources in contexts such as the
U.S. or Europe. This research addresses pharmaceutical access under austerity in
a context with a previously robust universal healthcare system. Deepening
financial and healthcare inequalities associated with economic crisis have given
way to newly disenfranchised people that must seek pharmaceuticals in a
therapeutic economy characterized by frequent crisis-driven reformulations. This
research, which is centered on training a graduate student in rigorous methods
of scientific data collection and analysis, seeks to understand the kinds of
social resources people mobilize in order to address unmet pharmaceutical needs,
when public healthcare is no longer dependable and financial resources and
pharmaceuticals are unevenly distributed. In addition to providing funding for
the training of a graduate student, the project would improve scientific
understanding through broadly disseminating its findings to governmental and
non-governmental organizations charged with improving public health access, as
they mediate the differential impacts of austerity on healthcare
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Taylor Bell, under the supervision of Dr.
Cristiana Giordano of the University of California at Davis, will explore what
forms of social networks replace public infrastructures under conditions of
austerity in healthcare access. This research takes place in Athens, Greece,
which has instituted the most stringent austerity measures targeting public
healthcare across Europe. Athens has the highest concentration of state-
sponsored healthcare resources in Greece, and so, will best highlight how people
adjust pharmaceutical-seeking practices when public resources disappear. In
order to learn how pharmaceuticals are exchanged and the relationships that
facilitate these exchanges, the co-PI will conduct participant observation in
emergent grassroots solidarity clinics and pharmacies, which many people turned
to after austerity measures eroded the universal healthcare system, cutting its
budget by more than 50%. The co-PI will also track, map, and analyze
pharmaceutical networks and therapeutic economies through a range of
observational and archival methods on extended social networks, as well as
interviews (through both the McGill Illness Narrative Interview, and well as
targeted semi-structured follow-ups) with a representative sample of
pharmaceutical seekers. The findings will contribute to debates in medical,
political, and economic anthropology about inequality, specifically in the
differential distribution of healthcare burdens under conditions of economic
austerity. This research offers insight to policymakers concerned with the kinds
of social resources that disenfranchised, chronically ill people build in order
to establish access to needed pharmaceuticals, as state-funded healthcare
retracts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.