* 1851998
* REU Site: Sensor Science and Engineering
* ENG,EEC
* 03/01/2019,08/31/2023
* John Vetelino, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 08/31/2023
* USD 430,897.00

This renewal Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site at the
University of Maine (UMaine) focuses on sensor science and engineering research
which is of high interest to the consumer, national defense, and homeland
security, and reflects one of the top research strengths at UMaine. UMaine's
sensor science and engineering research ranges from basic theoretical studies to
the design, fabrication, and testing of prototype sensors for chemical and
biological agents related to environmental contamination and terrorism;
biomarkers for cancer detection, diagnosing nerve damage; high temperature
sensors for monitoring and improving the efficiency of jet engines and turbines
for power generation (coal or natural gas); and optical sensors for
environmental monitoring. Other areas of research relate to using artificial
intelligence to combine and analyze large data sets obtained from networked
sensors, and exploring climate change through supercomputer visualizations. The
program will provide state-of-the art, interdisciplinary research and problem
solving opportunities for a diverse cohort of REU participants. Undergraduates
will utilize their new knowledge to solve real-life research problems that
impact society. Society will benefit as undergraduates, as a result of their
research experiences, choose to continue in graduate school to excel in
technologically and scientifically challenging careers that advance such areas
as homeland security, food safety, transportation, communications, and
medicine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The REU program will offer a 10-week intensive
summer research experience, for a total of 30 students, over a three year
period. The program will include: 1) individual research projects with faculty
research mentors utilizing specialized sensor science and engineering research
facilities, 2) ethics training, 3) student meetings, 4) seminars, 5) field
trips, 6) student presentations, and 7) career guidance, networking
opportunities, and mentorship. A special effort will be made to recruit women
and minorities and provide research experiences for students at non-PhD granting
institutions. The REU participants will also interact with middle and high
school teachers who were past REU and GK-12 participants to share their research
experiences with middle and high school students, and provide a further role
model for these students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.