* 1851738
* Collaborative Research: Assessments &amp; Stances Regarding the Uncertainty of (Un)Desired Outcomes
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Paul Windschitl, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Claudia Gonzalez-Vallejo
* 05/31/2024
* USD 309,422.00

Inaccuracies in expectations and predictions about future outcomes can ruin
decision making and optimal planning. One pernicious type of inaccuracy is an
optimism bias, in which preferred outcomes are viewed as more likely than
warranted and/or unpreferred outcomes are viewed as less likely than warranted.
Optimism biases lead to problematic individual behaviors like unwise risk taking
and over-purchasing, human tragedies like deaths from engineering failures and
societally important phenomena like stock market bubbles. Motivational goals are
often assumed to underlie optimism biases but there is an inadequate
understanding of when different goals impact optimism, including goals that have
the potential to reduce optimism and promote accuracy. In fact, major theories
assume that preferences for outcomes and expectations about the outcomes are
independent, which is inconsistent with some empirical findings. The proposed
research addresses this discrepancy. The research is structured by a novel Goal-
Biased Expectations Framework, which posits contextual features that shape the
balance between two orientations that a person can take toward forming
expectations. The balance of orientations ultimately determines whether and how
goals shape expectations. The framework is also useful for developing steps to
debias or reduce overoptimism and promote accuracy among professional
forecasters and the public. Debiasing overoptimism can yield improved
predictions and ultimately better planning, preparation, and outcomes across
many contexts (e.g., financial, health, security). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three
lines of experiments will be conducted. One line will examine the scope of, and
processes responsible for, a crucial difference in how measures of expectations
are affected by outcome desirability or preference. Past research findings have
returned quite different indicators of the extent to which outcome desirability
has a biasing influence, but these differences might align with a distinction
between two ways in which expectations are commonly solicited in studies and in
everyday contexts. A second line will address how types of available information
influence the desirability bias. One surprising possibility is that as
information becomes more clear, people's orientation and goals shift in a manner
that produces more bias rather than less. A third line will test a novel
debiasing intervention for overoptimism. Participants in the studies will
include sports fans, owners of homes in floodplains, and patients?three groups
known to exhibit overoptimism. All of the proposed work will inform the validity
of the Goal-Biased Expectations framework. The studies on this grant will
involve collaboration with graduate and undergraduate students, and therefore
will play important roles in their research
training/education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.