* 1851974
* REU Site: Interdisciplinary Application of Advanced Polymers for Engineering Innovations
* ENG,EEC
* 05/15/2019,04/30/2023
* Jason Bara, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 04/30/2023
* USD 387,575.00

The University of Alabama Tuscaloosa REU Site in Polymers for Engineering
Innovation will be driven by an intellectual focus on advanced polymer materials
and interdisciplinary applications. In the early 21st Century, there has been a
great deal of growth in fundamental polymer research and new
industrial/commercial applications, such as additive manufacturing,
biomedical/biological engineering, fuel cells, nanotechnology, stretchable
electronics, and membrane separations. However, many undergraduate students
still do not become directly acquainted with polymer science/engineering prior
to graduation. An earlier introduction to polymer science research and
applications can help ignite innovations that address some of the emerging
challenges of national interest such as energy efficiency, green chemistry, and
improved healthcare. Due to the interdisciplinary nature required within polymer
science and engineering, the research opportunities within this REU Site will
provide a diverse cohort of students with a broader perspective of techniques
and problem solving approaches, as well as a deeper and more rigorous
appreciation of future careers in research. An interdisciplinary team of faculty
mentors has been assembled to help prepare a rich pipeline of young engineers
that can contribute to current and emerging engineering
challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU program is expected to yield many
tangential outcomes beyond the direct technical impacts to the fields of polymer
chemistry, material science, and engineering. First, acquiring fundamental
knowledge of polymer chemistry will help leverage it to novel discovery of
innovative solutions and will open up a variety of PhD-level research
opportunities to the REU students in the future. Also, hands-on exposure to the
various interdisciplinary projects will improve the students' ability to
communicate to a broader community of researchers and the general public. This
is particularly important training to help nurture them into future leaders and
educators in science and engineering. This program will also educate the
students about technology-transfer issues, entrepreneurship, polymer-based
research applications in the private sector, and the leadership skills needed
for long-term success by direct interaction with experts and young alumni
working in the field. All of these impacts will be magnified with a special
focus to recruit students from HBCUs and Hispanic-serving community colleges
that are traditionally underrepresented or have limited access to
resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This site is supported by the Department of
Defense in partnership with the NSF REU program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.