* 1851857
* Decentralized-Market Design
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2019,12/31/2022
* Marzena Rostek, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 12/31/2022
* USD 276,995.00

This award funds research in economic theory. In today's markets, essentially
all financial assets are traded in multiple trading venues that operate in a
decentralized way. The recent financial crisis raised questions about the
effects of market fragmentation, the impact of new exchanges, and the
possibility of excessive financial innovation, calling for new areas of
investigation and modeling. This project has two broad objectives. First, it
will identify potential sources of efficiency gains associated with
decentralized trading. Second, the project will contribute general principles
for financial market design as well as support for policy evaluation and methods
that would help develop a theory of imperfectly competitive fragmented markets.
The research could help achieve greater efficiency and revenue, while meeting
important societal objectives for equality and incentives. The results could
also be useful for antitrust regulators and for policy makers and others who
seek to evaluate financial regulations. Improvements in the efficiency and
effectiveness of financial markets help to create economic
prosperity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research introduces a flexible framework
for the equilibrium analysis of imperfectly competitive financial markets. To
the growing literature on decentralized trading, which has explored over-the-
counter (bilateral) transactions, this research contributes methods for
equilibrium analysis of general market structures with multiple coexisting
exchanges and flexible contracts. The research team will examine three classes
of instruments that would be redundant if trading were either competitive or
centralized: (1) the creation of new trading venues for existing assets and
exchange design, (2) the introduction of new assets, and (3) innovation in the
types of market clearing that decentralized trading enables. The results will
demonstrate the greater potential of market design to increase efficiency
relative to centralized trading. As classical methods for equilibrium analysis,
which are based on spanning, do not apply in (imperfectly competitive)
decentralized markets, this research will develop an alternative approach. The
techniques developed in this project may be used by others to facilitate
research on complex networks. Broader impacts include the possible effects on
market practice and government policies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.