* 1851945
* Using Remote Sensing and In-situ Observations to Advance Numerical MagnetoHydroDynamic (MHD) Simulations of Coronal Mass Ejection Eruptions
* GEO,AGS
* 05/15/2019,04/30/2022
* Benjamin Lynch, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 04/30/2022
* USD 585,374.00

Eruptive solar flares and Coronal Mass Ejections (or CMEs) are of critical
importance for space weather forecasting. This three-year project encompasses a
number of the emerging research directions outlined in the recent "Roadmap for
Reliable Ensemble Forecasting of the Sun-Earth System" report (Nita et al.,
2018). Additionally, the work will advance discovery, while promoting teaching,
training, and learning. Furthermore, it will enhance the infrastructure for
research and education through networks and partnerships. The project team
envisions that a significant portion of the work will be carried out by a
postdoctoral research scholar at the SSL of the University of California at
Berkeley. The Principal Investigator (PI) and Co-PI have experience mentoring
and supervising student researchers and the location of the research -- the UC-
Berkeley -- presents the opportunity to involve highly-qualified undergraduate
and graduate students in space physics research. Results from the work will be
disseminated broadly as the PI, Co-PI, and postdoctoral scholar will present
their results at national and international scientific meetings (including the
National Science Foundation (NSF)'s SHINE Workshop), in colloquia and seminars,
and publish them in peer-reviewed journals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This three-year
project will combine data analysis, modeling, and magnetohydrodynamic (MHD)
simulations in order to further our numerical capabilities to model the
initiation and evolution of Coronal Mass Ejections (CMEs) on the basis of a
first-principles (FP) description of the eruption processes. The project team
will examine the corona-to-heliosphere connection of CMEs via their magnetic
field and plasma dynamics and the distribution and evolution of plasma heating
in the ejecta material and surrounding corona during the eruption process. The
project builds upon the innovative and proven foundation of the team's prior
work investigating the global structure of enhanced composition within ICMEs,
which revealed an intriguing, yet unexplained statistical relationship with the
geo-effectiveness of ICMEs. The project is ideally suited for the NSF's Solar-
Terrestrial Research (STR) program as it combines the study of FP CME initiation
and evolution with observationally-constrained, empirical coronal heating
parameterizations in order to generate modeling outputs that can be directly
compared to remote and in-situ observations of coronal plasma diagnostics and
CME/ICME field and plasma structures. The research and EPO agenda of this
project supports the Strategic Goals of the AGS Division in discovery, learning,
diversity, and interdisciplinary research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.