* 1851500
* Collaborative Research: Organizational development, operations, and new media among civilian flood-rescue groups
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2023
* Brant Mitchell, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Melanie Hughes
* 03/31/2023
* USD 224,589.00

In this project, the stability or formalization and growth of volunteer groups
and the use of social media in these processes will be investigated.
Specifically, processes of conducting volunteer flood rescues, factors that
affect immediate decision-making during rescues, decisions about volunteer group
development, and use of social media for rescuing and group development will be
researched through intense interviewing and participation with rescuers.
Disasters are unique opportunities to study social processes, and they are also
becoming more frequent social problems. Disasters of recent years have
introduced volunteer organizations supported by social media and new
technologies. Limited scholarly research has studied this volunteer rescue
movement, these volunteers, or these rescue operations. Findings will contribute
to scholarly understanding of group formation and development and how this may
be affected by new technologies. They also will contribute to public welfare by
being integrated in courses such as on emergency management and hazard
mitigation and recovery, and by being directly shared with organizations that do
rescues as well as the broader emergency management and public
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address the research goal, ethnographic
research will be conducted that includes participation with volunteer
organizations that conduct rescues, 20-40 interviews with emergency management
officials, 30-60 interviews with volunteer rescuers, and 20-30 interviews with
persons rescued by civilian volunteers. Over the life of the project, this will
involve training and traveling with volunteer organizations as they respond to
disasters, such as the three to which these organizations responded in 2018,
Hurricanes Florence and Michael and floods in Southeast Texas. Participation
will be in three different roles: boat rescuer, dispatcher, and leadership
coordination. In addition, available social media data and media articles will
be collected and analyzed inductively. GIS technology will be used to analyze
available geospatial data on rescue locations, which will be related to hazard
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.