* 1851510
* Collaborative Research: Dynamic Marine Landscapes: Feedbacks and spatial patterns of corals and their associated fishes
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Adrian Stier, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 05/31/2024
* USD 695,386.00

Nearshore habitats such as coral reefs, seagrass beds, and oyster reefs perform
a number of services including reducing storm protection, nutrient cycling, and
water purification. Many of these habitats have experienced widespread loss and
fragmentation due to human activities. This loss threatens the services these
ecosystems provide to humans as well as the extraordinary biodiversity of fishes
and invertebrates that live within them. However, there is still a lot that is
unknown about these habitats which makes it difficult to understand the likely
impacts of habitat loss or the benefits of habitat restoration. This research
focuses on habitat loss and fragmentation in coral reef ecosystems. The focus of
the research is to understand how habitat loss and fragmentation affect the
biodiversity of fish and crustaceans on coral reefs in the South Pacific.
Because many creatures living within the coral offer important benefits to the
coral such as defense from coral predators and removal of sediment, this
research also seeks to better understand how changes in the biodiversity and
abundance of fish and invertebrates associated with corals, affect the capacity
of corals to withstand future impacts, such as sedimentation and outbreaks of
coral-eating seastars. Understanding whether habitat loss alters the capacity of
corals to withstand stress in an increasingly stressful world is critical to
devise effective strategies to manage and protect coral reefs and the many
services they provide to society. Furthermore, this research facilitates
restoration efforts, enhance the scientific workforce through mentorship of a
diverse group of undergraduates, graduate students and a postdoctoral fellow,
and engage the public in both French Polynesia and the United States in
scientific research and knowledge. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many marine systems are
characterized by habitat-forming foundation species, which harbor a diversity of
occupants, and whose dynamics are thought to drive resilience of entire
ecosystems As a result, there is widespread concern over the ongoing loss and
fragmentation of biogenic habitats such as seagrass beds, oyster reefs, kelp
forests, and coral reefs. Yet, without a more complete understanding of marine
landscape ecology, we struggle to predict how the degradation or restoration of
habitat alters ecosystem dynamics, function, and resilience. Most research in
marine landscape ecology has focused on spatial patterns of occupant abundance
and biodiversity; however, the causes and consequences of these patterns are
rarely explored. An important but understudied consequence of variation in
occupant density is that it may alter how occupants interact with their biogenic
habitat. Because occupants can benefit biogenic habitat or harm biogenic
habitat, changes in occupant density can affect habitat growth and survival.
Consequently, habitat-driven variation in occupant density should feed back to
alter habitat dynamics and the spatial patterning of the habitat. In summary, we
are limited in our understanding of why patterns in landscape ecology exist, how
these patterns alter the population dynamics and spatial patterns of the
occupants as well as their habitat, and the implications of habitat degradation
or restoration. The central objective of this proposal is to examine the causes
and consequences of the nonlinear relationship between occupant abundance and
the amount of biogenic habitat. Specifically, the investigators: (i) examine the
habitat-based mechanisms that produce spatial variation in occupant density;
(ii) quantify how habitat-driven occupant density feeds back to alter habitat
growth and survival; and (iii) apply this knowledge to understand how
bidirectional habitat-occupant interactions affect the long-term dynamics,
create novel spatial patterns, and drive variation in how systems respond to and
recover from disturbances.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.