* 1851412
* Collaborative Research: Comparative feeding by gelatinous grazers on microbial prey
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Anne Thompson, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 08/31/2023
* USD 347,810.00

The oceans are dominated by microscopic plants and animals (microorganisms) that
are at the base of the food web and drive energy and carbon cycles on global
scales. Soft jellylike animals called gelatinous grazers specialize in feeding
on microorganisms using nets made out of mucus. Gelatinous grazers are abundant
in the ocean and have high feeding rates on microorganisms so could have a very
strong influence on the abundance and diversity of microorganisms and could
change how oceanic food webs are currently understood. However, gelatinous
grazers are very fragile and patchy in their distributions so it has been
difficult to determine the magnitude and dynamics of these important predator-
prey relationships on a meaningful scale using traditional approaches, thus they
have typically been disregarded in food web studies. Learning more about the
predator-prey relationship between gelatinous grazers and microorganisms will
improve understanding of the structure, mechanics, and dynamics of the ocean?s
food web, which is a critical economic and ecosystem resource on Earth. This
project is determining grazing rates by gelatinous animals on microbes to inform
food web models. The project also trains students to communicate, disseminate,
and interpret scientific findings. These broader impacts goals will be attained
through partnerships at the University of Oregon (Applied Scientific
Communication) and Portland State University (Advanced Technical Writing),
training of 1 PhD student, 2 undergraduates, and 4 science communication
interns, and development of a week-long workshop and establish student
mentorship relationships towards production of communication
products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project integrates laboratory and
oceanographic approaches to address several specific aspects of the predator-
prey relationship between gelatinous grazers and ocean microorganisms. Five
distinct types of gelatinous grazers, each with different feeding morphologies
and life history, will be studied in an oceanographic setting with an abundant
and diverse natural microbial population. These target organisms include pelagic
tunicates (salps, appendicularians, doliolods and pyrosomes) and thecosome
pteropods. The approach quantifies: 1) grazing rates in the natural ocean
environment, 2) particle selectivity with a focus on size and shape and, 3) the
morphological and hydrodynamic properties of feeding that underlie the measured
grazing rates and particle selection. The project uses a variety of techniques
including sampling via SCUBA diving, laboratory experiments, high speed/high
resolution videography, flow cytometry, and DNA sequencing
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.