* 1851926
* How Does Boosting Workers' Outside Options Affect Job Mobility and Wage Setting? Quasi-Experimental Evidence from Administrative Data
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* Simon Jaeger, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2023
* USD 450,000.00

This award funds research on labor markets. The goal is to identify whether and
how a change in the options available to workers outside their current
employment affects their wages and the chances that they will move to a
different job. The research team will measure the effects of several policy
changes that shifted workers outside options using population level
administrative data. The changes include changes in the vesting of pension
benefits and changes in unemployment compensation. Real wage growth for the
median worker in the United States has stalled in recent decades despite
positive growth in productivity. The research will help us understand how labor
markets determine wages, considering a variety of forces including bargaining
power, unemployment insurance, and competition between employers. Through a
better understanding of these forces, the project will provide insight into
whether specific policies will lead to higher wage growth for American workers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will advance our knowledge of wage
determination using quasi-experimental approaches that illuminate the role of
outside options. While previous work has analyzed shifts in inside values of
matches, this project focuses on outside options. It will help us understand
what constitutes worker outside options and how wages and worker mobility
respond to shifts in different types of outside options. The project will
provide an identified estimate of how clean, measurable shifts in the cost of
switching employers affects job-to-job mobility and wages and thereby provides a
novel test of how employer monopsony power and mobility frictions shape the wage
structure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.