* 1851309
* Collaborative Research: What Happens to Terrestrial Organic Matter in the Ocean? Solving the Mystery Behind an Iconic Question
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2019,01/31/2024
* Valier Galy, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 01/31/2024
* USD 707,495.00

The Amazon River is one of the largest and most important rivers in the world.
It not only carries water through the Amazon rain forests, it also carries mud -
lots of mud. This mud settles when the river joins the ocean, forming the Amazon
delta. Waves and wind re-suspend some of this mud, which forms mud banks that
slowly move from the coast of Brazil, to French Guiana, Suriname, and Guyana.
Not only do these mud banks shape the coastlines of these areas, but they also
serve as a storage for carbon that had been removed from the atmosphere by the
Amazon rainforest, dropped to the forest floor and washed into the river,
ultimately transported on particles of mud into the Amazon delta. Normally, this
represents a transfer of carbon from the atmosphere to the sediment and rock
record, hiding it away for thousands to millions of years and participating in
the natural regulation of atmospheric carbon dioxide concentration. However, the
Amazon's special case of mud banks that travel hundreds of miles along the coast
has long been believed to stir up this carbon and release most of it back to the
atmosphere. This idea has held for decades, but if wrong, may have a large
impact on our understanding of the ocean's carbon cycle. This research will use
new science and technology to change the way we look at river carbon cycling in
the ocean by sampling the mud banks, ocean waters, and Amazon River waters more
thoroughly than has been previously done, with the aim to understand and
quantify the storage of land-derived carbon in marine mudbank sediments offshore
the Amazon River. This research will serve as the core of two Ph.D.
dissertations and will interface with the Woods Hole Partnership Educational
Program (PEP) to provide under-represented minority college students an
opportunity to gain practical experience in marine and environmental sciences.
The project will also be incorporated into the Saint Petersburg Science Fest, an
event that brings several thousand school children to University of South
Florida campus during one weekend every autumn to showcase different research
projects and initiatives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Twenty years ago, John
Hedges posed a seminal question pertaining to the role of the ocean in the
carbon cycle: "what happens to terrestrial organic matter in the oceans?" That
question was set upon a conundrum - because riverine organic matter is highly
degraded, it should be expected to suffer minimal respiration in the ocean, yet
by most accounts continental margins seem to be incinerators of terrestrial
organic matter. However, much of this paradigm was originally built upon
biogeochemical studies of the Amazon sub-aqueous delta and the mobile fluidized
mudbanks along the Guianas coast. However, preliminary state of the art
characterizations of organic carbon in Amazon River and mudbank sediments
suggest that a fraction of terrestrial organic carbon is actually not refractory
and as such is rapidly and efficiently oxidized in the ocean, whereas another
fraction is refractory and is in fact quantitatively preserved in marine
sediments. Overall, the data suggest an underestimation of burial efficiency in
the realm of 50-100%. This proposal focuses on gaining a transformative
mechanistic and quantitative understanding of the fate of terrestrial organic
carbon in the coastal ocean offshore of the Amazon River. This will be done
through i) sampling the marine province offshore of the Guianas coast (the
Guianas mudbanks) as well as the Amazon River delta, using a shallow-draft
research vessel and ii) using novel state of the art geochemical analysis of
organic carbon - in particular ramped oxidation and compound specific
radiocarbon analysis - and elemental composition to demonstrate the selective
nature of terrestrial organic carbon oxidation and provide new estimates of
burial efficiency of this system - with implications for the global inventory of
terrestrial organic carbon in the ocean.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.