* 1851524
* Downsizing Democracy: Why Ordinary People Acquiesce to Authoritarianism
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* Milan Svolik, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Lee Walker
* 07/31/2023
* USD 456,600.00

This project develops a theoretical framework that explains when and why
incumbents succeed in subverting democracy and evaluates this framework using a
combination of cross-country data and a series of survey experiments. The study
thus advances scientific knowledge and research on democratization, electoral
authoritarianism, and public support for democracy. The results of this project
will include cross-national country-level data on the subversion of democracy by
incumbents and survey-experimental data on public support for democracy. This
project will also provide academic training and research experience for a number
of graduate student assistants who will be involved in the design, execution,
analysis, and data management of nationally-representative survey experiments in
several countries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to address
theoretically and empirically a fundamental question about the survival of
democracy: when can we realistically expect the public to serve as a check on
the authoritarian temptations of elected politicians? Theoretically, the project
identifies a general mechanism and structural conditions that account for this
vulnerability: voters' willingness to trade off democratic principles for
partisan interests and the role of polity-wide political polarization in
enabling such trade-offs. The project develops a game-theoretic framework that
clarifies how voters' willingness to make such trade-offs at the micro-level
results in the subversion of democracy by incumbents at the macro level. This
framework is empirically evaluated using a combination of cross-country data and
a series of survey experiments designed to credibly elicit voters' willingness
to trade off democratic principles for competing political goals in a number of
critical cases. The survey-experimental design employs candidate-choice
experiments as an indirect questioning technique while emphasizing cross-country
comparability and structural identification.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.