* 1851684
* Collaborative Research:  Investigating Iron Isotope Fractionation during Partial Melting
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Catherine Macris, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 03/31/2024
* USD 281,667.00

One of the main goals in earth science research is to determine the chemical
composition of the Earth and its primary units. For years, studies have tried to
use isotopic and chemical mass balance calculations to better constrain major
fundamental issues such as the structure of mantle convection and determination
of the light elements in the core. Much work has focused on chemical
partitioning experiments at a large range of both pressures and temperatures but
not on the effect of the stable isotopic fractionation that results from these
processes. With this project, the team aims to create new interdisciplinary
research at the interface of stable isotope geochemistry and experimental
petrology. A graduate and undergraduate student will be engaged and trained in a
range of experimental and analytical techniques. This project is highly
interdisciplinary and will be of use to petrologists, geochemists,
geodynamicists, planetary scientists, cosmochemists and
astronomers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Isotope fractionation will exist between
phases with distinct bonding environments, and separation of elements between
reservoirs manifests this fractionation. Experiments at high pressure and
temperature can reveal equilibrium isotopic fractionation factors that cannot be
directly measured in planetary materials, and, when combined with isotopic
ratios found in natural materials, provide constraints on the formation
conditions of those materials. These researchers will focus on the equilibrium
stable isotopic fractionation of iron due to partial melting of the mantle. They
aim to understand if and how partial melting of the mantle leaves an isotopic
fingerprint on mantle rocks. During the course of this project, a new module
will be developed to be part of the Center for Earth and Environmental Science
curriculum. It will focus on mantle melting and magma production, which are
relevant to volcanic eruptions and environmental
hazards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.