* 1851900
* Evolution of South Pacific Oxygen and Preformed Nutrient Changes over the Deglaciation
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Jean Lynch-Stieglitz, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Carlin
* 03/31/2024
* USD 456,221.00

Oxygen concentrations in the deep ocean, in combination with measurements of
nutrients and seawater temperature, provide a powerful constraint for the
understanding cycling of carbon in the ocean and the amount of atmospheric
carbon dioxide. This research uses deep sea sediment cores as recorders of
changes in these key environmental variables since the peak of the last ice age,
a period encompassing a fundamental shift in the Earth's climate system. Funding
supports training of a graduate student, along with a K-12 teacher and two of
her high school students. The training activities will also include the
participation of members of under-represented groups who have demonstrated
interest in the Ocean Sciences. The data will be made available to the community
and will be of broad interest to those seeking to understand the cycling of
carbon in the ocean.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, this research will
further develop a promising method for the quantitative reconstruction of oxygen
in the deep ocean-- the difference between carbon isotope values of epibenthic
and deep infaunal foraminifera (Dd13C). Using this technique, the research team
will generate records of oxygen concentrations in the South Pacific over the
last 25,000 years. This time period covers a major climatic transition when
atmospheric carbon dioxide concentrations rose from the low levels of glacial
times to the higher values of the pre-industrial present. Estimates bottom water
phosphate (using Cd/Ca in benthic foraminifera) and bottom water temperature
(using Mg/Ca and Li/Ca in benthic foraminifera) will be made using in the same
sediment cores. Combined with the oxygen reconstructions, phosphate and
temperature information will be used to estimate the nutrient content in the
regions where the deep water left the surface (preformed nutrients). The timing
and magnitude of the changes in oxygen and preformed nutrients will help to
understand how changes in ocean biology and circulation contributed to the
lowering in carbon dioxide during the last ice age.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.