* 1851037
* Enabling Discoveries in Multiscale Earth System Dynamics: Seismological Facility for the Advancement of Geoscience (SAGE) - OPP Scope
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2018,03/31/2023
* Robert Detrick, Incorporated Research Institutions for Seismology
* Cooperative Agreement
* Margaret Benoit
* 03/31/2023
* USD 4,308,685.00

The IRIS (Incorporated Research Institutions for Seismology) Consortium will
develop, operate, and maintain a distributed, multi-user facility entitled
Seismological Facilities for the Advancement of Geoscience (SAGE). Expert
professional staff, with guidance provided by the scientific community, will
manage and operate a set of foundational capabilities that are essential for
current research support, as well as frontier activities that will enable future
research. The facility will promote advances in our understanding of Earth
structure and dynamics, earthquakes and volcanic eruptions, and interactions
between the solid Earth, hydrosphere, and atmosphere through management and
operation of: 1) Global and regional continuously operating seismic networks,
including the Global Seismographic Network; 2) Portable geophysical
instrumentation for use in principal investigator driven and community
experiments; 3) data management systems for the collection, quality assurance,
curation, management, and distribution of open access data and data products;
and 4) education, workforce development, and public outreach programs designed
to be inclusive and enhance participation of traditionally underrepresented
groups in the geosciences. The seismological facilities provided through the
SAGE contribute to issues of national/global strategic importance, including
geohazard assessment and disaster resilience; environmental management and
economic development; national security; and STEM (science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics) education and workforce development. Data and data
products from SAGE will be used by state and federal agencies including the
United States Geological Survey, National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration, National Aeronautics and Space Administration, Department of
Energy, and Department of Defense, for mission agency activities, including
earthquake monitoring and characterization, tsunami warning, weather
forecasting, water and environmental management, and nuclear test monitoring.
SAGE programs will also support inquiry-based science education, enhancing
students' abilities to engage directly with science and engineering principles
and practice, and enabling them to pursue STEM careers in academia, industry,
business, and government. The SAGE outreach activities promote public engagement
and science literacy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SAGE facility provides
instrumentation services; data services; and education, workforce development,
and community engagement activities in support of seismology. Researchers use
SAGE to gain valuable insights into fundamental Earth processes, and SAGE also
provides key data for national security needs, including monitoring efforts of
clandestine nuclear tests. The scientific priorities of the new facility would
enable advances in the following areas: (1) Global Earth Structure and Dynamics:
The facility would enhance our ability to resolve the three-dimensional
structure of the Earth's interior and enable investigators to study processes
that drive plate tectonics and natural hazards such as earthquakes, tsunamis,
and volcanic eruptions. (2) Fault Zones and the Earthquake Cycle: Over the last
decade, scientists have discovered a broad array of fault zone slip behaviors
that span a wide variety of temporal and spatial scales. The SAGE facility will
enable a variety of seismic and electromagnetic measurements to elucidate how
these different types of behaviors start and stop, vary along fault zones, and
interact with one another. (3) Magmas and Volatiles in the Crust and Mantle:
Geophysical instrumentation is critical for understanding volcanic systems and
minimizing risks associated with volcanic hazards. The capabilities provided by
SAGE will enable researchers to study melt production, monitor its transport
through the crust, and map out the plumbing systems of volcanoes. (4)
Hydrosphere, Cryosphere, and Atmosphere: An area of increasing community
interest is utilizing geophysical measurements to study processes at the Earth's
surface. The SAGE facility will provide opportunities to study processes in the
near-surface, such as hydrology, cryospheric processes, and glacier dynamics.
(5) Education, Public Outreach, and Workforce Development: SAGE will develop a
variety of educational resources and enable hundreds of undergraduate research
opportunities. A major focus of the SAGE activities will be on broadening
participation of underrepresented students through IRIS' new Urban Geosystems
focus. Additionally, the facility will develop animations, simulations, and
other visualizations of Earth processes to help instructors at all level teach
about Earth Science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.