* 1851208
* Collaborative Research: Hydrothermal Estuaries: What Sets the Hydrothermal Flux of Fe and Mn to the Oceans?
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* John Breier, The University of Texas Rio Grande Valley
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Canuel
* 05/31/2024
* USD 299,820.00

Like volcanoes on land, the mid-ocean ridges that cross the ocean floor are not
continuously erupting; however, the magmatic heat present just beneath the
surface can continue to drive hot springs, just like the ones found within the
crater of the "super volcano" at Yellowstone. In our recent work, we have shown
that the chemicals released into the oceans from seafloor hot-springs can be
dispersed all across the oceans. Now our interest has focused in on one element
in particular, iron. This is one of the most abundant elements in every
planetary body in the Universe yet it is vanishingly rare in Earth's oceans
today. Set against that, it is essential to just about every form of life on
Earth from the simplest and most ancient strains of microbes to the most complex
animals including humans. In Earth's oceans, the lack of this "essential micro-
nutrient" has been found to limit how much life can flourish near both the south
and north poles in the Pacific Ocean in the sunlit surface ocean even though the
supply of sunlight and other major nutrients (phosphorous, nitrogen) should be
more than adequate. Our newest research suggests that iron released from
hydrothermal plumes (where the concentrations coming from vents are more than 1
million times higher than normal ocean water) could play a major role. Despite
undergoing massive dilution as hydrothermal solutions leave the vents and
traverse thousands of kilometers through the oceans, we believe that at least
some of the iron released from deep sea hot springs can survive this journey and
make a significant impact on how much live exists in Earth's polar oceans and
how much CO2 it draws down from the atmosphere. To investigate that idea, this
project will study the fate of iron released from a hydrothermal vent over a
length scale that hasn't been studied before - from the first 1km through the
ocean out to 100km away from the vent-site. This will fill a gap in our
knowledge between what happens right at a vent-site (as studied by research
submarines) and what happens to ocean chemistry all across Earth's entire ocean
basins (as studied by a huge international research project called GEOTRACES).
Our work will use a 3D computational model to predict where the plume of
material from a vent in the Northeast Pacific Ocean should escape to after it is
erupted from some vents at a volcanic system called the Juan de Fuca Ridge. We
will then use an advanced autonomous free-swimming robot to search out in the
predicted plume area, first to test the accuracy of our predicted model and,
second, to collect samples from the hydrothermal plume from where it first forms
to as far out as we can follow it. The samples we collect will include both
filtered seawater and the particulate material (whether mineralogical or
microbiological) that we can extract from the filters. Together, this will allow
us to track the fate of the iron and other key physical and geochemical tracers
down-plume away from the vents, to work out where it ends up (in the water and
in the sediments) and also how fast those processes happen. The work we do will
also help plan how to conduct similar robotics-based exploration on future space
missions beyond Earth where it has been hypothesized that seafloor events also
exist (e.g. Saturn's moon Enceladus) and where, if we are really lucky, we may
find that life is hosted based on the energy from seafloor volcanoes, just as
happens here on Earth. We have a resident artist embedded in our program who has
already begun experimenting with the use of air-flow and sound in her sculptures
to help communicate the complex nature of these plumes. She will join our
cruise, and work with our team post-cruise to design and hopefully build a
sculpture that that could potentially result in a large and long-term outdoor
installation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The international GEOTRACES
program has revealed that iron (Fe) is released ubiquitously from submarine
ridges to the deep ocean. Results from US GEOTRACES section GP16 showed that
both dissolved and particulate (colloidal) Fe may persist so far as to be able
to influence primary productivity in High-Nutrient/Low-Chlorophyll (HNLC)
regions of the Southern Ocean. As a complement to these sectional studies, we
propose a detailed process study to elucidate the mechanisms by which
hydrothermally sourced Fe can persist across the oceans at the scale that
GEOTRACES has revealed. Specifically, while the "persistent" Fe in a
hydrothermal plume appears to behave quasi-conservatively from 100km to 4000km
across the SE Pacific Ocean, it is also known that the majority of the Fe
present at the Southern EPR on that US GEOTRACES GP16 cruise did not persist
over the 100km separation between that station and the next deep ocean station
beyond the ridge crest. To fill that gap, this project will conduct a coupled
modelling and field study to investigate the fate of hydrothermally sourced Fe
at ranges of 0-1, 1-10 and 10-100km down-plume away from a well established
vent-source. To begin, we will use the detailed micro-bathymetry and the long-
term current meter data available from the Main Endeavour Segment of the Juan de
Fuca Ridge to implement a recently developed 3D theoretical plume dispersion
model that can predict both the detailed 3D dispersion trajectory and the rate
of flow within the hydrothermal plume away from two long-studied and well
characterized Main Endeavour Field (MEF) vents. At sea, we will use that
predictive model to guide Sentry autonomous underwater vehicle (AUV) surveys
that will follow the plume "down-wind" and "across-plume" to compile a 3D survey
using in-situ sensors [optical, redox, conductivity, temperature, depth (CTD)]
that will allow us to (1) confirm (and better constrain) the predictive model,
and to (2) map out the shape and trajectory of the plume to provide context for
discrete water column samples that we will collect - both from the AUV and from
a trace metal clean CTD-rosette. Sampling from the AUV will use the latest
generation of SUPR samplers designed for the CLIO trace-metal-clean water
sampler. This will suffice for samples of dissolved, colloidal and particulate
trace metals and collection of filtered material for grain-by-grain
mineralogical and biogeochemical analyses. That sampling program will be backed
up by larger volume sampling down-plume using a CTD-rosette to augment our AUV-
based program with helium isotope analyses (to track extents of physical plume
dilution at increasing distances downwind and across plume) and for
complementary ligand and organic compound analyses to investigate the role that
organic complexation might play in protecting reduced species of Fe [and
manganese (Mn), too] against oxidative precipitation and removal from the
oceanic water column. Post cruise, our combination of biogeochemical
measurements and improved 3D physical modelling will not only be able to provide
new insights into the processes that control the fluxes of Fe and Mn to the
oceans from hydrothermal venting but also the length scales over which those
processes take effect. Finally, because our 3D theoretical model includes
velocities, we also anticipate being able to deduce the rates at which these
processes occur.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.