* 1851695
* NSF Student Travel Grant for Sixteenth Conference on the Foundations of Nanoscience (FNANO 2019)
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2020
* John Reif, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 02/29/2020
* USD 12,000.00

This award supports student travel for between 10 - 20 participants to the
Conference on Foundations of Nanoscience, Snowbird, Utah in April 2019. The 16th
Conference on Foundations of Nanoscience will have a mixture of invited talks by
distinguished speakers as well as contributed posters and open discussion
periods to enhance attendee interaction with the goal of creating vibrant
intellectual community in the area of self-assembly. This project will provide a
substantial multidisciplinary impact to nanoscience, biochemistry and chemistry,
which will profit from the introduction of key methodologies derived from
mainstream computer science, such as mathematical modeling, software
engineering, algorithms and modular design
methodologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Foundations of Nanoscience
meeting (FNANO) was established by the International Society for Nanoscale
Science, Computation, and Engineering in 2004 as a venue for the wide range of
researchers interested in various aspects of self-assembly as it relates to
computer science, nanoscience and nanotechnology. The meeting features multiple
tracks covering recent work in different types of self-assembled architectures
and devices, at scales ranging from nano-scale to meso-scale. Methodologies
include both experimental as well as theoretical approaches. The conference
spans traditional disciplines including chemistry, biochemistry, physics,
computer science, mathematics, and various engineering disciplines. The emphasis
is on basic, rather than applied research. The FNANO 2019 meeting is projected
to attract 150 registered participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.