* 1851093
* Collaborative Research: Piecewise Linear Approximations for DSGE Models With Occasionally-Binding Constraints: Solution, Estimation, Model Evaluation, and Applications
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2022
* Sadik Boragan Aruoba, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 05/31/2022
* USD 214,971.00

Central banks regulators use mathematical models to understand fluctuations in
economic activity and the effects of the bank's policies. Current methods used
to analyze the general effects of policy changes on relationships among large-
scale economic variables, such as total output, inflation, and interest rate are
either not able to capture the effects of some extreme events, such as
decreasing interest to zero, or are too slow and costly to implement. This
research project will develop new, faster, cheaper, and better methods to
analyze the effects of policy changes on large-scale variables in the economy.
The results of this research project will therefore contribute to economic
science, and more important, allow for a better understanding of how policy
changes or external influences are transmitted throughout the larger economy.
This will allow economist to provide more informed advice to police makers and
in so doing, enhance economic growth and improve the living standards of
Americans. The tools developed in this project can also be applied anywhere in
the world, thus establishing the U.S. as the global leader in the development of
economic analytical tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prior to the Great Recession,
models of linear relationship among macro variables used by the Fed and other
regulatory agencies were able to capture the most important features of
aggregate time series and generate accurate predictions. However, during and
after the Great Recession, nonlinearities generated by occasionally-binding
constraints such as an effective lower bound constraint on nominal interest
rates, have become the norm. This research project will develop new techniques
to construct nonlinear solutions to macroeconomic models in which occasionally-
binding constraints play an important role. The goal of the proposed research is
to develop and apply a piecewise-linear solution method that trades off a little
of accuracy against computational speed and is scalable to large models used by
central banks. The project will also develop a class of flexible models that can
be used to assess whether models that impose strong theoretical restrictions are
well specified. The results of this project will provide researchers with new
analytical tools that will improve the quality of policy advice as well as
regulation. This could increase economic growth in the U.S. and improve the
lives of citizens.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.