* 1851915
* Developmental game theory and decision-making
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* Juan Carrillo, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2023
* USD 522,987.00

This project will advance the understanding of the development of strategic
decision-making in children and adolescents by assessing the contribution of
logical and strategic thinking to decision-making abilities. Strategic thinking
is critical to make everyday decisions and such decisions often involve other
players who have different motivations and perspectives. These differences must
be understood at the time of decision to make logical and informed decisions.
Research has shown that adults have innate abilities to coordinate on efficient
market outcomes even with very limited knowledge. At the same time, they have
limited abilities to anticipate what others may do and to strategize in a large
variety of multi-person situations, such as bargaining. This suggests that some
abilities develop while others do not. An important objective of the project is
to study how children develop (or do not develop) these abilities and to better
understand the reasons for irrational choices in adults. Also, the project will
allow to better assess the limitations in the acquisition and transfer of
cognitive skills to decision-making. This will help determine whether cognitive
skills and rational behavior can be enhanced. Last, the study may help explore
new curriculum development strategies and inform interventions around children
and teenagers. Indeed, one essential role of education is to promote critical
thinking. Education is thus expected to impact positively the way we make
decisions. Our study will contribute to the design of an educational environment
capable of promoting success beyond school-related attainment.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study will feature four sets of lab-in-the field
experiments. School-age students from Pre-K to 12th grade will be recruited from
public and private schools in the Los Angeles area. For comparison, adult
controls will also be recruited. Each experiment will evaluate the performance
of each participant on tasks designed to assess cognitive traits and on game
theoretic paradigms that require those underlying cognitive traits. Four game
theoretic paradigms in which adults comply differentially with equilibrium
predictions will be studied. The first experiment will investigate how humans
develop their innate ability to coordinate on efficient solutions in repeated
relationships. The second experiment will explore strategic situations in which
adults are largely heterogeneous in their ability to anticipate what others will
do and to formulate a best response. The third experiment will explore the
underlying causes that make mixed strategy behavior non-intuitive and difficult
to implement. The last experiment will investigate the reasons why the ability
to strategize does not develop naturally in the presence of informational
asymmetries. The study will allow to identify behavioral biases that develop
gradually. Tracking biases to their developmental causes is important to inform
research in Economics and to develop theoretical models with better predictive
power. At the same time, the study will offer clues that may be used to remedy
such biases. The study will help assess whether limitations of strategic
thinking abilities stem from an imperfect acquisition of cognitive skills, which
may be remedied by exposing children to specific problems and teaching them how
to think about them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.