* 1851690
* Statistical Advances for Intensive Categorical Spatiotemporal Data from an Eye-Tracking Technique
* SBE,SES
* 06/15/2019,05/31/2023
* Sarah Brown-Schmidt, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 05/31/2023
* USD 359,988.00

This research project will develop methods for analyzing eye-tracking data that
will provide a more accurate view of the underlying cognitive processes of human
behavior. Eye movements tend to track with attention, and eye-tracking is a
flexible tool for tracking eye movements. Despite the ubiquity and utility of
eye-tracking methodology, current data analytic practices are limited. The
methods to be developed are general and may be used to advance knowledge in
other fields where comparable data are collected. The investigators will apply
the new methods in interdisciplinary collaborative efforts with researchers from
psycholinguistics, education, and computer science. Graduate and undergraduate
students will be trained in these analytic techniques, and the results of this
project will be disseminated to both specialized and multidisciplinary
communities through journal articles, conferences, workshops, and a webinar. All
findings, data, code, and software from this project will be made publicly
available. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will develop statistical
models for intensive categorical time series data with the complex temporal,
spatial, and dependence structures exhibited by eye-tracking data. The
investigators will develop a general class of models called dynamic generalized
linear mixed effect models or dynamic GLMM. These models will capture both
temporal effects (serial dependence and trend effects) and spatial effects
(spatial dependence and distance effects) while accounting for multiple forms of
variation across data modes including trials, items, persons, item groups (or
clusters), and person groups. The investigators will present a dynamic GLMM
specification for binary data, which will indicate whether the participant is or
is not fixating on a critical interest area at each moment in time. The
investigators also will present a dynamic GLMM specification for ordered-
category or partially ordered category data using an IRTree approach. This
approach allows the researcher to examine cognitive processes which drive the
choice among multiple stimuli for the eye to fixate on. To improve data analytic
practices, methods using the dynamic GLMM will be developed following the
sequence of the data analytic procedures: data description, model specification,
model estimation, model selection, and model
evaluation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.