* 1851169
* Enabling Discoveries in Multiscale Earth System Dynamics: Geodetic Facility for the Advancement of Geoscience (GAGE)-NASA Scope
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2018,02/28/2023
* Charles Meertens, Incorporated Research Institutions for Seismology
* Cooperative Agreement
* Margaret Benoit
* 02/28/2023
* USD 5,237,302.00

UNAVCO will develop, operate, and maintain a distributed, multi-user Geodetic
Facility for the Advancement of GEoscience (GAGE). Geodesy characterizes the
Earth's time varying shape, orientation in space, mass distribution, and gravity
field. It has revolutionized the geosciences, by measuring Earth changes with
unprecedented spatial and temporal resolution. The GAGE facility employs expert
professional staff, with guidance provided by the scientific community, to
manage and operate a set of foundational geodetic capabilities that are
essential for current research support, as well as frontier geodetic activities
that will enable future research. The facility will promote advances in our
understanding of continental deformation; tectonic plate boundary processes; the
processes that drive earthquakes, volcanic eruptions and landslide hazards;
continental water storage, atmospheric, ice sheet and glacier dynamics; and
interactions among these components of the Earth system. The geodetic
capabilities provided through the GAGE facility contribute to issues of
national/global strategic importance, including geohazard assessment and
disaster resilience; environmental management and economic development; and STEM
(science, technology, engineering, and mathematics) education and workforce
development. Data products from GAGE will be used by federal agencies including
the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, the United States Geological
Survey and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, for missions
including spacecraft positioning, satellite orbit, and timing corrections;
earthquake, tsunami, and volcano early warning; weather forecasting; water
resources; and environmental management. State departments of transportation
will use GAGE data to help support traffic monitoring and control and
increasingly GAGE data will support commercial sector positioning needs
including for agriculture, construction and surveying, transportation (including
air, rail, and maritime), mining and resource exploration, and fleet vehicle
tracking. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The GAGE facility will manage and operate: 1)
global and regional continuously operating Global Navigational Satellite Systems
(GNSS) and complementary geodetic technology networks; 2) portable geophysical
instrumentation for use in principal investigator driven and community
experiments; 3) geodetic instrumentation testing and support service; 3) data
management systems for the collection, quality assurance, curation, management,
and distribution of open access data and data products; and 4) education,
workforce development, and public outreach programs that foster the development
of the next generation geosciences workforce, are designed to be inclusive and
enhance participation of traditionally underrepresented groups in the
geosciences, and engage the public by highlighting advances in geophysical
sciences and their societal relevance. Innovative and transformative research
that will benefit from GAGE examines both the dynamics of individual processes
and the nonlinear interactions within and among larger Earth systems. The study
of active processes from geocenter motion to the studies of the lithosphere,
cryosphere, hydrosphere, and atmosphere requires understanding of the coupling
and feedbacks across a range of length and time scales, and between the solid
Earth and its fluid envelopes, in both physical and biological environments.
Under NSF, and NASA partner agency support for GAGE, UNAVCO will integrate and
federate a set of currently operated but at present independently managed GNSS
stations to form the Network of the Americas (NOTA). UNAVCO will modernize NOTA
stations with state-of-the-art, multi-sensor, multi-GNSS, receivers with real-
time streaming data and analysis. These enhancements will enable higher
precision positioning than currently possible and new application of GNSS data
that can be used for geohazards warning systems, study of ocean and atmosphere
dynamical behavior, and observation of key environmental parameters such as
water storage, soil moisture, and sea and lake-level
changes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.