* 1851170
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Return Migration and Linguistic Interaction
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2019,08/31/2021
* Anthony Webster, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 08/31/2021
* USD 25,135.00

The research supported by this award uses a linguistic anthropological approach
to investigate the integration of voluntary return migrants as a lens through
which to better understand the contemporary nation state. Return migrants are
members of the diaspora who migrate back to their homeland. There they are not
always easily assimilated, even though they share a language and cultural
history with local residents. Thus, return migrants challenge common sense ideas
of borders, nation, and citizenship. Given the increased global mobility of the
world's populations today, it is important to understand why and how return
migrants remain apart from the society they have returned to and whether or not
this situation can be remedied.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will be
conducted by University of Texas at Austin anthropology doctoral student Hannah
Foster, with guidance from Dr. Anthony Webster. The researcher has chosen to
study the situation of return Kazakh migrants in Qaraghandy, Kazakhstan, a city
that has received large waves of return migrants in recent years. Because the
returnees may come from countries with which the Kazakhstan government has
uneasy relationships, these return Kazakhs have been the object of governmental
attention and special programs. This makes this a productive research site for
studying return immigrant integration. The researcher will focus her data
collection on a special integration center where the migrants learn Russian and
get access to services. Prior research has demonstrated that these interactions
may be mediated by the use of multiple languages and shaped by connections back
to the diasporic community they left, creating complex communication networks.
The researcher will collect data with a combination of linguistic and
ethnographic methods including participant observation, recording naturally
occurring discourse, matched-guise experiments, feedback interviews, and
narrative analysis. Findings from this research will produce new understandings
of the return migration processes in relation to maintaining the stability of
the nation state. The findings will also be shared with policy makers concerned
to improve the lives of the immigrants as well as their social, political, and
cultural integration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.