* 1851470
* NSFGEO-NERC: Collaborative Research: Energy transfer between submesoscale vortices and resonantly-forced inertial motions in the northern Gulf of Mexico
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2024
* Robert Hetland, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Sean Kennan
* 04/30/2024
* USD 478,972.00

This project will use field observations from ship and numerical modeling to
study circulation variability in the Mississippi-Atchafalaya River plume in the
northern Gulf of Mexico. The region is characterized by a strong sea breeze
which leads to the flow and wave variations on relatively small spatial scales
of less than 1 km. The observations will take place during two field campaigns
including ship, moored, and autonomous platforms. The modeling will include both
realistic and idealized models for testing the hypotheses. Two graduate students
and two postdocs will participate in the research. In addition, summer research
experiences in the field will be provided to 2-3 undergraduates through the TAMU
Summer Research Program for Undergraduates, for which applications from
underrepresented groups and from local community colleges will be encouraged.
The PIs will visit local, minority-serving undergraduate institutions to give
presentations on the research and engage students in the summer research
program. The project is a collaboration between the US and the United Kingdom
(UK) with the UK component being supported by the UK National Environmental
Research Council (NERC) through an agreement with
NSF.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recently theories for ocean dynamics posit that
submesoscale flows interacting with near-inertial motions are important for
understanding the dynamics of both phenomena. This project will test theories of
energy exchange at the submesoscale by studying circulation patterns in the
Mississippi-Atchafalaya river plume in the northern Gulf of Mexico using a pair
of field campaigns and idealistic and realistic numerical models. Observations
from ship, moorings, and autonomous platforms will be made during two field
campaigns. The modeling will include a hydrostatic ROMS model and idealized,
non-hydrostatic Large Eddy Simulations (LES). The objective will be to
characterize, quantify, and understand the energy exchanges between balanced and
unbalanced motions and the turbulent cascade that can result from the
interaction. Wave-mean flow interactions in the Mississippi-Atchafalaya river
plume system could enhance mixing and vertical exchange, which are important for
understanding coastal hypoxia and the dispersal of pollutants in the northern
Gulf of Mexico.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.