* 1851729
* Collaborative Research: Sequentially Optimal Mechanism Design
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Vasiliki Skreta, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2023
* USD 305,239.00

This award funds research in the economic theory of mechanism design. This area
of economics focuses on understanding how incentives affect economic outcomes,
with the goal of designing effective and efficient payment and reward plans. The
project aims to expand mechanism design theory by providing a new tool to study
the problems caused when long-term commitment to a contract is unrealistic. For
example, online retailers, insurance companies, and banks interact with their
customers over time. As these firms learn about their customers, they may want
to change contract terms by making personalized offers to some customers. In the
same way, governments may sign agreements about sovereign debt, but bailouts and
renegotiation may change the terms of the original agreement. The new method has
promise for new applications of this important area of economic theory,
including a range of applications from debt and mortgage contracts, monetary
policy, the design of online platforms, online privacy, and auctions for
advertising sales. As a result, the research could result in more effective
management methods for businesses and government policy
makers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Progress on optimal mechanism design under limited
commitment has been hindered by a lack of a tractable methodology. The team will
develop a new methodology based on the idea that a mechanism should encode not
only the rules to determine the allocation, but also the information the
designer obtains from the interaction. This means that how much the designer
learns becomes an explicit part of the design. The project has three key parts.
First, the team will develop this new tool, which will be akin to the use of the
revelation principle in classical mechanism design. Second, the team will use
the method to characterize optimal trading mechanisms in infinite horizon
settings. The characterization provides a solid foundation to Coase?s conjecture
and the solution method can serve as a prototype to characterize optimal fiscal
policy or social insurance when governments have limited commitment ability in
infinite horizon settings. Third, the team will examine the optimal design of
information collection policies (for example, the use of cookies) and the
resulting issues of transparency and privacy that arise when firms collect
information about consumers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.