* 1851230
* Trace element cycling in upwelling filaments in the California Current System
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Katherine Barbeau, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 02/29/2024
* USD 277,507.00

Trace element micronutrients such as manganese, iron, nickel, cobalt, copper and
zinc play important roles in biological processes in the ocean. In surface
waters where phytoplankton grow and support the base of the marine food web,
trace elements are often present at vanishingly small concentrations. This
presents great challenges to marine life, and trace elements can be limiting
factors for phytoplankton productivity. Biological processes in marine systems
like phytoplankton growth, grazing, dissolved organic matter production, and
sedimentation can in turn have important impacts on how trace elements cycle
through the ocean. These inter-relationships are complex and not very well
understood, but they have important ramifications for ecosystem productivity and
global nutrient cycling. The research proposed here seeks to study the
relationships between trace element distributions and chemistry and biological
processes in a dynamic and ecologically significant environment - upwelling
filaments in the coastal California Current System. Field studies will take
advantage of the ongoing California Current Ecosystem Long Term Ecological
Research (CCE-LTER) site, which already has funded cruises planned for 2019 and
2021. This project will support the education and training of graduate students,
and the participation of both the PI and graduate students in education and
outreach activities carried out through the CCE-LTER project, including
mentoring undergraduates in research projects and contributing to public
education and outreach through the Birch Aquarium at
Scripps.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The availability of trace element
micronutrients is increasingly recognized as an important influence on the
productivity and structure of marine phytoplankton communities. Trace elements
themselves are strongly influenced by biological processes in terms of their
residence time, chemical speciation, and cycling in marine systems. Field
process studies which fully characterize the biological and physical dynamics of
upper ocean systems with simultaneous determination of multiple trace elements
in situ have the potential to greatly inform our understanding of the coupled
interactions between trace elements and biota, but such studies are
comparatively rare due to their interdisciplinary complexity and expense. This
proposal seeks support to perform such a study by leveraging the ongoing
California Current Ecosystem Long Term Ecological Research program (CCE-LTER).
Two upcoming funded LTER process cruises in 2019 and 2021 will characterize the
biogeochemical and ecological evolution of upwelling filaments as they move
offshore via a combination of survey mapping, detailed sampling and Lagrangian
process measurements. This project funds the acquisition and setup of a seaFAST
pico preconcentration system and ICP-MS analytical time which will enable the
study of multiple trace elements in the context of these cruises. This type of
mesoscale feature has rarely been characterized from the standpoint of trace
element biogeochemistry, and we anticipate that our findings will be of broad
interest to the oceanographic community. A number of hypotheses regarding the
sources, sinks and cycling of trace elements in an upwelling filament will be
examined in the proposed work. This project will also take advantage of ongoing
research collaborations within CCE-LTER to couple multi-elemental trace element
data sets with molecular-level information on community structure and function
and dissolved organic matter composition. This will facilitate exploration of
the response of biological communities to multi-factorial co-limitation, the
role of organic molecules in mediating trace metal cycles, and the coupling of
trace metal cycles with the cycles of carbon, nitrogen, and
silica.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.