* 1851418
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Effects of Water Contamination on Water Valuation in a Post-Disaster Context
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2019,02/29/2020
* Scott Stonington, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 02/29/2020
* USD 24,405.00

The fact that all life depends on water makes it one of the most vital
substances on our planet, with populations across the world organizing ways to
access the water they need to survive. At the same time, flood, drought, and
contamination mark several ways that water can also pose a threat to life. Human
activity -- such as mismanagement, travel, pollution, conflict, and widening
social disparities -- can also contribute to water's potential danger, including
the spread of deadly waterborne diseases. Sudden or otherwise dramatic
disruptions in drinking-water quality expose important ways that humans value
such an invaluable resource. To develop programs, policies, and infrastructure
that ensure all Americans access to safe water, it is critical to understand not
only the interacting human and environmental factors that lead to drinking-water
contamination, but also the ways that individuals and societies adjust to water
crises.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new presence of cholera in Haiti provides an
exemplary case through which to study the dynamic relationship between humans
and water. Cholera is a waterborne disease that causes profuse diarrhea and
possible death from rapid fluid loss. The investigators, who started traveling
to Haiti in 2008, have been researching the cholera epidemic there since it
began in 2010, nine months after the earthquake. The investigators' extensive
understanding of the local context, robust network of contacts, and previous
data with which to make comparisons will foster the successful implementation
and impact of forthcoming research. The research will be conducted in the
coastal city and surrounding rural areas of Saint-Marc, Haiti, near the mouth of
the Artibonite River, which was contaminated with cholera bacteria in October
2010, sparking one of the largest cholera epidemics in recent history. Though
preventable by drinking clean water and treatable with timely rehydration, and
despite significant national and international investment in relief efforts,
many Haitians remain vulnerable to infection. With the disease now endemic, the
presence of cholera has likely prompted substantial changes in the political
economy, management, and consumption of water in Haiti. Investigators will
assess the extent to which drinking-water for many Haitians has gone from a
trusted common resource to a market commodity, industrialized product, or
privately administered good. They will also evaluate whether these changes,
driven by local and international actors, are resulting in improved access to
safe water, particularly among the poor. Based in Saint-Marc, investigators will
conduct interviews, archival, and participant-based research, observe and
participate in everyday life, shadow clinicians, water engineers, and water
entrepreneurs, and collect quantitative data about water quality and household
water use. Research findings about the ways disease, the environment, and human
society influence one another will illuminate factors that promote, perpetuate,
or protect against water insecurity, poverty, and
illness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.