* 1851776
* REU Site: Cross Disciplinary Training in Sustainable Chemistry and Chemical Processes
* MPS,CHE
* 03/15/2019,09/30/2022
* Greg Swain, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 09/30/2022
* USD 288,058.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates site award to Michigan State
University, located in East Lansing, MI, supports the training of 8 students for
10 weeks. This program, funded by the Division of Chemistry in the Mathematical
and Physical Science Directorate, engages participants in independent research
in sustainable chemistry and chemical processes. This program trains
participants to be stewards of the environment, leading toward safer
laboratories and laboratory practices and reduced volume and toxicity of
chemical waste. Participants take part in a variety of professional development
opportunities, including journal readings, faculty research presentations and
networking dinners, and training in research ethics, basic statistics,
laboratory and chemical safety, strategies for applying to graduate school, and
communication skills. Incorporation of green chemistry principles can equip and
inspire the next generation of chemists to solve the greatest sustainability
challenges facing our planet.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research projects
available to participants encompass the theme of sustainable chemistry,
including green synthesis, water purification, solar energy conversion and
energy storage, environmentally-friendly coating technologies for corrosion
control, computational methods for energy-related materials, advanced imaging
and spectroscopy, and biocatalysis. This program generally recruits
underrepresented students in their junior and senior years. Alongside developing
a 'research toolbox', the participants learn how chemistry can be constructed in
a sustainable and responsible manner through workshops, lectures, and
webinars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.