* 1851501
* Black Elites and the Racial Politics of Immigration
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Beth Reingold, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Lee Walker
* 07/31/2024
* USD 100,000.00

This project address the following questions: How do Black leaders respond to
immigration? Do they view immigrants as labor-market competitors or as potential
allies for their primary constituents? Do they tend to support restrictive or
more liberal immigration policies? The principal investigators answer these
questions in two ways. First, using new and comprehensive data on state
immigration laws and legislative behavior from 2005 to 2020, they analyze
whether and under what conditions Black legislators oppose or support particular
kinds of immigration bills, and compare their stance to that of their white and
Latino colleagues. Second, they apply big data statistical methods to over
80,000 immigration-related articles in the Black, Spanish-language, and general-
audience press to examine whether the themes and sentiments expressed in Black
media coverage differ substantially from those in other outlets. These two kinds
of analysis are linked to examine whether policy development and media coverage
reinforce each other. They argue that the Black political and media elite does
not view immigration as presenting an either/or choice; instead, they combine
concerns about inter-group competition with perceptions of common interests
across groups. This study advances scholarship by providing extensive new data
on Black responses to immigration, by offering new insights into the dynamics of
those reponses, and by connecting immigration-related developments in two
important institutional sectors. More generally, this research sheds light on
how "race matters" in American politics as democratic institutions respond to
rapid demographic change. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study addresses the issue
of how does race influences the politics of immigration; specifically the
sociopolitical dilemma that Black elites can support restrictive immigration and
decrease labor market competition from immigrants, or they can oppose
restrictive immigration and strengthen political alliances with Latinos. It
investigates the influence of race on immigration politics by looking at two
institutional arenas: state legislative policymaking and the media. For the
analyses of Black elite participation in immigration policymaking, the PIs
construct a dataset on votes and sponsorship of state immigration legislation
between 2005-2020. With these data, they estimate hierarchical models comparing
Black legislative behavior with the legislative behavior of white and Latino
representatives. They investigate how the race of the legislator and the racial
composition of their constituency influence not only support for immigration
policy, but also leadership roles in the initiation of new immigration policy
proposals. For the analyses of whether and how race is related to media
discourse on immigration policy, they create a database of immigration articles
from 2005-2020 published in the Black press, the general audience press, and the
Spanish language press. The comparison of the frames and themes that emerge from
these sources is analyzed using big data procedures (topic modeling and
sentiment analysis); these data and measures are used to assess the relationship
between legislative behavior and media discourse on immigration. This research
provides a new theoretical and empirical model to capture the dynamic
relationship between race, legislative behavior, and media discourse across
space and over time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.