* 1851582
* Collaborative Research: Illuminating microbes and their viruses within the dark ocean crust through strain-level approaches
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Michael Rappe, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 07/31/2023
* USD 624,091.00

Our planet's seafloor consists primarily of sediment layered over a basement of
basalt rock. Every 50,000 to 100,000 years, a volume of seawater equivalent to
the entire global ocean circulates through cracks and fissures of this basement
beneath the seafloor, forming one of the largest reservoirs for microscopic life
on Earth. While high temperature fluids discharging at iconic hydrothermal vents
at mid-ocean ridges are visually striking, the fluid flowing in and out of the
flanks of these ridges is around three orders of magnitude greater and rivals
the discharge of all rivers to the ocean. As it travels through the deep
subseafloor, this fluid is significantly altered by water and rock interaction
and the metabolic activity of microorganisms that are thought to ultimately help
shape nutrient and energy budgets of the global ocean. However, our knowledge
and understanding of this system suffer greatly from logistical difficulties in
accessing it for scientific inquiry. Initial evidence suggests uncharacterized
microbes that possess ancient homologs of enzymes involved in key metabolic
pathways thought to be important to Earth's early microbial inhabitants populate
this biome and are infected by novel viruses. In this study, the investigators
are performing an integrated set of observations, experiments, and analyses
aimed to advance our understanding of deep subseafloor microbes and their
viruses by providing new, fundamental insights into which organisms and
metabolisms are active in this environment, their evolutionary history and
genetic characteristics, and their interactions. This project contributes to the
development of a diverse STEM-educated workforce, and incorporate the training
of one postdoctoral scientist, two graduate students, and ~29 undergraduate
students in field-based research, wet-lab experimentation, and bioinformatics.
This project also fosters a unique collaboration between scientists and the
University of Hawaii Academy for Creative Media that supports undergraduate
interns from the Academy to work with project personnel and produce creative
videos and graphics to communicate aspects of our research to diverse audiences.
Finally, this project supports two early career female scientists who started
faculty positions in 2017.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project leverages existing
sampling infrastructure, DNA sequencing by the Department of Energy Joint Genome
Institute, and a research expedition to the Juan de Fuca Ridge (JdFR) flank off
the coast of Washington, USA, that is already supported by NSF. Here,
subseafloor observatories have been previously installed to aid in exploring
actively flowing subseafloor crustal fluids. These fluids will be collected from
different sampling depths for an integrated set of geochemical, genomic, and
cultivation studies. The project's specific objectives are to (i) use genomics
to characterize microbial and viral populations inhabiting crustal fluids of the
JdFR flank, (ii) use transcriptomics to identify the active metabolic pathways
that are performing transformations relevant to elemental cycling within
microorganisms of the JdFR flank, as well as identify active viral infections in
these microbes, and (iii) generate microbial and viral pure cultures or limited
diversity enrichments from crustal fluids of the JdFR flank. It combines
bioinformatic analyses, controlled laboratory experiments, and field sampling to
pursue both hypothesis-driven and discovery-based cultivation experiments, viral
assays, and strain-level ecogenomic and metatranscriptomic analyses.
Importantly, the investigators intend to generate new cultivated microbes and
viruses to serve as model systems for investigating the characteristics of life
in the deep ocean crust.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.