* 1851033
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Governance and Networks of Coordination in Community Diversion Programs
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2020
* Tali Ziv, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 01/31/2020
* USD 10,252.00

Major American cities have responded to rising incarceration rates with creative
alternatives, such as Drug Courts and Mental Health Courts. These alternatives
often depend on complex networks that connect municipal governments, not-for-
profit organizations, and private service providers. The research supported by
this award will examine the functioning and effectiveness of these coordinated
collaborations. In addition, the researchers ask what effects decentralizing
government has on outcomes, both for communities and for system clients. This is
critical information for all stakeholders seeking to lower incarceration rates.

The research will be undertaken in the city of Philadelphia by University of
Pennsylvania anthropology doctoral candidate Tali Ziv, who is supervised by Dr.
John L. Jackson, Jr. Philadelphia has been federally mandated to undertake
efforts to reduce its large prison population. One response has been the
Forensic Intensive Recovery (FIR) Program, a sentence reduction and community
alternative program for substance abuse and minor mental illness. FIR engages
two large nonprofit subcontracts and coordinates the jails, probation and
parole, the courts, and nonprofit community based services; this makes it an
ideal site for research on decentralized sentencing alternatives. The researcher
will carry out ethnographic observations in the court room and in the community,
document the daily work of FIR social workers, and interview judges, attorneys,
counselors, clients, and criminal justice system representatives. In addition,
she will collect data from archives to track the emergence of these novel
institutional formations. Taken together, these data will allow her to
understand the micro-processes through which coordination works, how the
different layers of the criminal justice system and its community referrals
build knowledge about one another, and what this means for understanding not
only sentencing alternatives but also the nature of contemporary urban
governance.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.