* 1851402
* Constraining Global Coastal Ocean Methane Emissions to the Atmosphere
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2019,10/31/2024
* John Kessler, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 10/31/2024
* USD 567,588.00

This project will determine global methane emissions from coastal marine
environments, one of the most uncertain natural sources of methane to the
atmosphere. Methane is a greenhouse gas whose impact on future climate warming
will depend on emissions from both human sources and the changing natural
environment. It is therefore critical to understand the baseline emission rates
of natural methane sources to the atmosphere as well as their sensitivity to
change. While the open ocean environment is thought to emit only minor amounts
of methane to the atmosphere, concentrations and emission rates of methane
increase substantially approaching coastlines. Coastal ocean methane emissions
are potentially significant at the global scale but remain highly uncertain due
to a lack of observations that accurately capture coastal distributions.
Furthermore, the source of methane emitted from coastal surface waters is not
well known, limiting our ability to predict how emissions will change in the
future. This project will determine the source and global emission rate of
methane from the coastal ocean to the atmosphere, and establish a framework to
predict future emission rates in a warming climate. In addition to these
scientific and societal impacts, this project will have strong educational
impacts as it will provide undergraduate students the opportunity to experience
the entire scientific process from idea conception to publication of the final
results. A sequence of classes has been established by the PI at the University
of Rochester to guide students through this process from an ocean science
perspective. This project will serve as the focus for the next iteration of the
class sequence, and participating students will be vital contributors to the
research. When conducted previously, this educational outreach has empowered
undergraduates to pursue their own scientific interests and has led to
significant numbers of students pursuing graduate careers in the ocean sciences.
This project will also support a Ph.D. student in a truly unique experience
whereby she/he will have the opportunity to conduct meaningful research in both
sea-going measurement as well as modeling laboratories, and thus integrate into
two often disparate communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will be
accomplished through a unique and equal combination of observational and
statistical modeling work, leveraging methodologies that are well established in
the PI and co-PI's laboratories to make rapid progress over the 2.5-year
duration of the project. In total, surface methane concentrations in four
coastal regions "spanning three different ocean basins and subtropical to
subpolar latitude ranges" will be measured using an ultra-fast vacuum extraction
method, yielding coastal data coverage that is unparalleled in previous
datasets. Additionally, the radiocarbon content of surface methane will be
measured to fingerprint its provenance between fossil and microbial sources, and
biogeochemical data including chlorophyll, nutrient, and dissolved oxygen
concentrations will be collected. Initial cruise data (year 1) will be used to
train Artificial Neural Network models to predict surface methane
supersaturation as a function of biogeochemical variables, and later cruises
(year 2) will allow for independent model validation in regions that were not
used for training. Having established the fidelity with which this model can
generalize between coastal environments, it will be applied to extrapolate maps
of methane supersaturation and estimate regional and global scale coastal
methane emissions while quantifying their uncertainty. Overall, this work will
close these gaps in our knowledge of the natural methane budget, yielding the
most robust estimates to date of coastal ocean emissions and a new understanding
of the mechanisms that sustain them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.