* 1851679
* Wage Insurance for Displaced Workers
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2023
* Brian Kovak, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 04/30/2023
* USD 292,000.00

PI Last Name: Kovak&lt;br/&gt;Title: Wage Insurance for Displaced
Workers&lt;br/&gt;Proposal ID: 1851679&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Trade and
automation have contributed to substantial job losses in the United States in
recent decades. Such rapid changes to the labor market underscore the importance
of considering innovative programs that provide financial protection to
displaced workers. Wage insurance is one approach that provides both
compensation for job loss and incentives to return to work. As part of the Re-
Employment Trade Adjustment Assistance program, displaced workers receive up to
half of the difference in wages between their old job and their new job for up
to two years. The project examines how this policy influences labor market
outcomes. The research specifically focuses on the amount of time people remain
unemployed and their wages upon returning to work. The research, thus, is useful
in exploring wage insurance as a potential alternative to standard unemployment
insurance systems.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Under Re-Employment Trade
Adjustment Assistance (RTAA), workers over age 50 who lose their job to import
competition can receive up to half of the difference in their pre-displacement
and post-displacement earnings ("wage insurance"). The research uses a
regression-discontinuity (RD) design based on eligibility age to estimate the
causal effect of this program on labor market outcomes. Merging administrative
data on trade-displaced workers with nationally representative employer-employee
linked data, the project looks at the long-run effects of wage insurance on re-
employment wages, unemployment durations, wage growth, and occupational quality
over time at the national level. The RD estimates are used in connection with a
sufficient-statistics framework to evaluate welfare effects. Workers receiving
wage insurance payments may smooth consumption while accumulating human capital
in a new industry or occupation. The program may, however, generate moral hazard
by incentivizing workers to take lower-paying, less demanding jobs, because part
of their lost wages are covered by insurance. The model quantifies the magnitude
of these two effects. The project advances our understanding of wage insurance
as an alternative to unemployment insurance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.