* 1851697
* REU Site: Functional Genomics Research for Undergraduates
* BIO,DBI
* 03/15/2019,02/29/2024
* Charles Wray, Jackson Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/29/2024
* USD 459,292.00

This REU Site award to the Jackson Laboratory (JAX), located in Bar Harbor, ME,
will support the training of 12 students for 10 weeks during the summers of
2019-2021. Undergraduates will conduct original research in mammalian functional
genomics with a faculty mentor at JAX. Student research will expand their basic
understanding of how an organism's genome determines its development and
biological function. To prepare for genomics research, students will have access
to online modules prior to and during their fellowship, will complete workshops
in computational methods and bioinformatics, and will attend seminars to prepare
them for graduate education and a career in genomics. Students will increase
their self-confidence and build their network within a learning community that
is part of the long-standing JAX Summer Student Program, including a shared on-
campus residential program. The REU Site recruits undergraduate students at all
levels. The goal is to develop a diverse community of learners including
individuals from groups underrepresented in science, such as racial and ethnic
minorities, people with disabilities, and people with a significant
socioeconomic or educational disadvantage, including first-generation college
students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is anticipated that a total of 12 students,
primarily from schools with limited research opportunities, will be trained in
the program. Students will learn how research is conducted, and many will
present the results of their work at scientific conferences. Students trained in
genomics will become more versatile, be able to work in teams with the potential
for higher impact research. REU students at JAX will become better communicators
and more aware of the ethical, legal, and social responsibilities of genomics
scientists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A common web-based assessment tool used by all
REU Site programs funded by the Division of Biological Infrastructure will be
used to determine the effectiveness of the training program. Students will be
tracked after the program in order to determine their career paths. Students
will be asked to respond to an automatic email sent via the NSF reporting
system. More information about the JAX program is available by visiting
https://www.jax.org/ssp, or by contacting the PI (Dr. Linda Hicke,
linda.hicke@jax.org) or the Program Director (Michael McKernan,
michael.mckernan@jax.org).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.