* 1851827
* New Scientific Partnerships Enabled by the Fifth World Congress on Risk; Cape Town, South Africa; May 6-8, 2019
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2019,04/30/2021
* James Lambert, Society For Risk Analysis
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 04/30/2021
* USD 50,000.00

Where developing regions lack the physical and social infrastructure capacity to
respond and adapt to disruptions, they are vulnerable to both predicted and
unpredicted threats. Resilience and development are interconnected concepts,
benefiting from multidisciplinary research. There is opportunity for
international collaborations to share concepts, models, data, metrics, best
practices, and lessons learned. This effort enables representatives of a next
generation of young scholars based in the US to partner and build research
collaborations with researchers who are based in developing countries. The
effort bridges the gaps of disciplines and national boundaries, where US-based
researchers partner with international researchers with whom they would not
otherwise meet. The effort disseminates lessons of development and resilience
from across Africa and elsewhere through both established and new channels,
enhancing the international community of scholars. The effort is a key step in
furthering the science of resilience and risk across multiple disciplines.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Society for Risk Analysis (SRA) Fifth World Congress
on Risk convenes on the theme of Development and Resilience at the Cape Town
International Convention Centre, May 6-8, 2019. The NSF support is enabling
thirty-five US-based early-career scientists to contribute to the World Congress
on Risk and collaborate on topics of risk, resilience, and development with
coauthors from developing nations. The effort partially defrays the travel costs
for these scientists, who have submitted an abstract with at least one scientist
or practitioner coauthor from Africa or another developing region as a coauthor.
The US-based scientists and their partners from developing regions are thus
building new relationships with international research partners. The
collaborators will show evidence of additional collaboration within 6 months
after the World Congress, for example through jointly-published papers,
presentations, courses, webinars, etc. The aggregated outcomes of the funded
collaborations will be reported to the scientific
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.