* 1851303
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Worker Organizations in Newly Expanding Economic Sectors
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2019,08/31/2021
* Brandon Hunter, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 08/31/2021
* USD 9,866.00

The global expansion of investment in international tourism, including by
governments in the developing world, has meant that increasing numbers of
workers are employed in this sector of the economy. Interestingly, at a time
when worker organizations generally are on the decline, this sector has seen an
increase. However, preliminary research suggests these new organizations are
unlike those of the past. They appear to be focused on broad array of social
programs for their membership while simultaneously loosening, or even severing,
their ties to formal political parties. The research supported by this award
will undertake an ethnographic and archival analysis of this new phenomenon.
Findings from this research are important for rethinking the relationship
between worker wellbeing and formal worker organizations. Findings will
contribute to new theoretical understandings of the contemporary global economy
and provide information useful for policy makers and other
stakeholders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will take place on the coast of
Mexico, a tourism dependent region that has witnessed tremendous growth in
worker organizations over the past two decades. The researcher will conduct a
comparative institutional and archival analysis of two organizations, tracing
political, economic, and social factors that produce their structures;
relationships between the organizations and other social actors in the region;
and their historical development. Data will be collected with a mix of
ethnographic methods including participant observation in organizational
headquarters and organization sponsored social programs; interviews with workers
and leadership; discourse analysis; archival research; and focus groups.
Findings from this research will provide insight into the social factors that
promote and sustain worker organizations, the social and political effects this
has on regions that rely on international tourism, and the significance of such
organizations for workers lives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.