* 1851217
* Fast Raman Imaging Microscopy
* TIP,TI
* 11/15/2018,04/30/2020
* James Chan, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Shearman
* 04/30/2020
* USD 50,000.00

Raman microscopy is a powerful tool for nondestructive, label-free chemical
imaging that has found numerous applications in the pharmaceutical, forensic,
semiconductor, materials science, and biological fields. The PI has developed a
faster and lower cost Raman micro-spectrometer, a tool that allows mapping of
chemical composition and other material properties at microscopic scales.
Broader and easier access to Raman mapping could in turn prompt innovation in
how the tool is used for a vast range of applications, from biomedical research,
to food and pharma, to engineering materials. This project provides an
opportunity for market research that will result in a thorough and deep
understanding of the customer needs when it comes to chemical mapping and how
their technology could potentially alleviate the customer's pain points and
capture new customers. The scientist involved will learn fundamental
entrepreneurial skills that will not only help in the commercialization efforts
of this technology but could also be applied towards their future research
endeavors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI's technology is a novel confocal Raman
microscope capable of imaging at speeds up to 100 times faster than conventional
point-scan Raman microscopy. This project involves market research where a range
of potential customers are involved in assessing the current chemical imaging
market and the requirements for future products in this field. The result will
help guide a decision on whether this product (or a similar product) has market
value, the most valuable product features that can be incorporated or developed,
and the market(s) where these products should initially be marketed. With this
investigation, it is expected that a proper decision on the future of this
technology can be made along with a decision on future developments that
increase the likelihood of commercial success.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.