* 1851948
* REU SITE: Exploration and Professional Excellence in the Mathematical Sciences
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Christopher Sadowski, Ursinus College
* Standard Grant
* Tiziana Giorgi
* 07/31/2024
* USD 225,469.00

One goal drives everything we do at Ursinus College--to change lives and foster
growth in a way that our students never thought possible. To accomplish this
goal for our REU scholars, the Ursinus REU site features three key components:
i) important and accessible math and computer science research problems, ii) an
Individual Development Plan (IDP), and iii) our commitment to serving
underrepresented students. Participants will be a member of one of three
research teams each consisting of three members and each led by a senior
faculty. Each team works on an original research project, chosen both for its
importance and for its accessibility to undergraduate students. Some projects
continue for two years, while others are done in a single year to allow for more
diverse topics and to expose REU scholars to new faculty. In addition to working
on projects, we are intentional about fostering students' growth in their
mathematical maturity and in their professionalism. We will track student
progress though the IDP. This plan assesses over the eight-week REU both the
hard and soft skills needed for success in careers in the mathematical sciences.
From "ability to work in a team" to "mathematical knowledge," the IDP will help
students to improve in their weak areas and challenge students to develop their
strengths further. The IDP sets measurable goals and monitors progress before,
during, and after the eight-week program on campus. Finally, we commit in the
REU program to including and giving opportunities to underrepresented students.
The PI team will advertise to and recruit from schools local to the area, such
as Community College of Philadelphia, with large populations of underrepresented
students. We will also advertise through professional organizations, such as NAM
and Math Alliance. All Senior Personnel have a history of working with and
mentoring underrepresented students, and they desire to continue to do so during
the REU.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The REU research projects cover a diverse range of
topics reflecting the expertise of the Senior Personnel. The REU will feature
topology projects in both discrete Morse theory and computational topology with
applications to music analysis, video analysis, and computer graphics. Our
algebra projects explore partition identities, tame filling functions, and
rainbow colorings. Another set of projects involves machine learning, with a
focus on incremental language processing. Students of linear algebra have the
opportunity to study everywhere surjective functions. In addition to their core
research projects, students will be trained in mathematical writing and in
presentation techniques through a series of weekly workshops designed to foster
these essential communication skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.