* 1851969
* Laying the Groundwork for Dual-degree Pathways for Educating STEM Teachers Bound for Success
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2021
* Anton Wallner, Webster University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Lewis
* 03/31/2021
* USD 124,454.00

With support from the NSF Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program, this
Capacity Building project aims to serve the national interest in high-quality
STEM teaching by preparing more STEM-certified teachers to serve in high-need
school districts. The project intends to build this capacity by reviewing and
updating curricula to produce highly-qualified graduates in four years with dual
degrees in a STEM field and in education. It intends to create smooth pathways
for transfer students to enter and succeed in these dual-degree programs. The
project will develop or strengthen partnerships between Webster University and
St. Louis Community College, Ritenour School District, and nonprofit
organizations, including the Academy of Science of St. Louis and the Urban
League of Metropolitan St. Louis. These partnerships will contribute to
advancing capacity for submission of a collaborative Noyce Track 1 proposal. The
project will investigate factors that affect undergraduate STEM majors' interest
in teaching as a career. As a result, it can contribute new knowledge about
pathways to teaching for STEM undergraduates and the challenges faced by high-
need school districts in attracting and retaining outstanding STEM teachers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project activities involve reviewing and updating
pathways to dual degrees in education and one or more STEM fields (chemistry,
biology, mathematics, or computer science), and revising formal articulation
agreements between the University and Community College to incorporate these new
pathways. It is expected that the updated curricula will provide high quality
mentoring, relevant field experiences, and meaningful research opportunities for
STEM majors interested in teaching careers. The project intends to use surveys
and interviews with multiple stakeholder groups to understand 1) specific
difficulties faced by local high-need schools in hiring and retaining highly
qualified STEM teachers and 2) factors that inhibit students from dual majors in
STEM and education. The project expects to develop new recruiting strategies to
inform prospective and current students about the new dual degree pathways. The
Noyce program supports talented STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to
become effective K-12 mathematics and science teachers in high-need school
districts and experienced, exemplary K-12 STEM teachers to become STEM master
teachers. It also supports research on the persistence, retention, and
effectiveness of K-12 teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.