* 1851724
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Financial Ethics in the Context of Institutions and Legislation
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2019,07/31/2020
* Paul Kockelman, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 07/31/2020
* USD 24,026.00

The financial crisis of 2008 resulted in significant financial realignments
globally. These have included both thoroughgoing legislative reforms and
specific banking sector reorganizations. Now, a decade later, the research
supported by this award asks an important question: how have these changes
affected the day-to-day practices and values of those working in finance? Unlike
most research on finance, this ethnographic project is focused on the local and
the micro-processes through which global change must occur. This is a critically
important and often missing perspective. In some locales the banking crisis has
persisted. Understanding the motivations and activities of those who actually
practice finance is a key part of identifying the underpinnings of financial
resilience and avoiding future crises.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will be
conducted by Yale University anthropology doctoral student, Theodore Park, with
the guidance of Dr. Paul Kockelman. The researcher has chosen to conduct the
research in northern Italy because it is one site where the financial crisis has
continued, despite targeted legislation, and because Italian reforms are
sometimes identified as potential models for reforms in the United States. The
researcher will collect data with a comparative research design, focusing on two
wealth management firms, one of which has chosen to adopt the reforms and become
publicly traded, and one of which has chosen to sustain its earlier identity as
a local, private institution. The researcher will focus on the effects of
variable institutional structures; the impacts of legislation, particularly the
European Union's Markets in Financial Instruments Directive; and variation in
ethical discourse and practices. Study populations will include wealth managers,
fund managers, support staff, clients, and family members. Data will be
collected through a mix of ethnographic methods including participant
observations, semi-structured interviews, life history mappings, surveys, and
focus groups. These data will be supplemented with archival research;
compilations of relevant legislation; and analyses of media, including manager
training materials and social media. Findings from this research will be shared
with policy makers, the institutions studied, and the general public. The
research also will contribute to improved theory of the social science of
financial institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.