* 1851795
* REU Site: Research Experience for Undergraduates in Chemistry and Biochemistry at Miami University
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2023
* Dominik Konkolewicz, Miami University
* Standard Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 03/31/2023
* USD 340,733.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates site award to Miami University,
located in Oxford, OH, supports the training of 10 students for 10 weeks during
the summers of 2019-2021. This program, funded by the Division of Chemistry in
the Mathematical and Physical Science Directorate, provides participants with
wide-ranging, independent research experiences involving close student/faculty
and student/student interactions. Participants choose from research projects in
analytical, biological, inorganic, organic, physical chemistry, or chemistry
education research, with most projects being interdisciplinary. These research
experiences are designed to develop and refine participants' experimental skills
and enhance their ability to work as part of a research team. Participants
engage in professional development by developing research proposals and
scientific presentations, learning about ethics in science, and exploring
careers in chemistry and biochemistry. The combination of intense research,
professional development, cohort building, and community involvement provides
participants with a strong foundation for careers in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The participants take part in research projects
encompassing broad and interdisciplinary areas of chemistry, including the
investigation of metalloenzymes, protein transport systems, liquid
chromatography and electrophoresis, and molecular self-assembly. This program
targets students from institutions with few research opportunities and those who
are underrepresented in the physical sciences. To promote the chemistry and
biochemistry workforce, this program exposes participants to new careers paths
and gives them an opportunity to apply critical thinking skills to open-ended
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.