* 1851615
* Collaborative Research: The Influences of Market Power, Mergers, and Provider Incentives on the Cost and Quality of Healthcare: The Case of Dialysis
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Paul Eliason, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 08/31/2023
* USD 155,966.00

This award funds research in how competition between firms affects both the
price and quality of a key health care service. The PIs will investigate how
changes in the dialysis industry affects firm strategies, Medicare costs, and
patient outcomes. The project will use a very large data set to test hypothesis
drawn from the economic theory of firm competition. The research has three
distinct components. The first part focuses on how mergers and acquisitions
affect firm strategy in this industry and the consequences for patient outcomes.
The second component evaluates how regulations that affect the construction of
new facilities influence market structure as well as patient outcomes. The third
part analyzes a payment reform instituted by Medicare that reduced the
incentives to over-prescribe injectable drugs, which again may have affected
both Medicare's costs and patient's outcomes. Understanding the market for
dialysis services is important for several reasons. Dialysis is an important
component of health insurance costs; Medicare's annual total reimbursements for
dialysis amount to about 1% of the entire federal budget. High quality dialysis
care improves patients' lives. Finally, understanding how changes in competition
and in Medicare policies have affected the dialysis market will give us new
knowledge about how robust competition and sensible regulation and Medicare
reimbursement policies may be able to reduce costs and improve patient outcomes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will use claims data from the entire
universe of U.S. dialysis patients between 1998 and 2014; during this time
period the industry became more concentrated. The projects funded by this award
look at three different aspects of consolidation in the dialysis industry. The
first studies how large dialysis chains have transferred their corporate
strategies to the numerous independent facilities they acquired, which
ultimately can affect the cost and quality of their treatments. The second
develops a structural model of dialysis firms' entry, exit, and acquisition
decisions to (i) understand how market structure and regulation affect dialysis
care and (ii) estimate the impact of counterfactual policies, such as blocking
mergers or relaxing Certificate of Need laws. The third examines how Medicare's
reimbursement policies shape dialysis facilities' behavior, focusing
specifically on a reform in 2011 that changed Medicare's reimbursement scheme
for injectable drugs from a per-dose payment to a bundled payment. The team will
use a novel instrumental variable strategy to provide the first causal evidence
in the literature about whether the bundled payment policy resulted in lower
drug doses, reduced costs and improved outcomes. The project advances the
economics literature on market power, merger analysis, and provider incentives
in health care.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.