* 1851640
* REU Site: Novel Techniques and Applications in Catalysis Research Development and Molecular Dynamics
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Gary Molander, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 08/31/2023
* USD 360,000.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site award to the University
of Pennsylvania, located in Philadelphia, PA, supports the training of 10
undergraduate students for 10 weeks during the summers of 2020-2022. In this
program, funded by the Division of Chemistry, undergraduate participants develop
diverse approaches to improving chemical reactions under the mentorship of
faculty and graduate students or postdoctoral associates. An aspect unique to
this site is that participants also gain exposure to high throughput
experimentation (HTE) methods, training that is often limited to industry.
Exposure to HTE provides a distinct experience for participants, one with long-
term leverage into both academic and industrial career pathways. Participants
take part in regular professional development activities where they hone their
communication skills, explore career paths, and learn about responsible research
conduct, preparing them for advanced degrees in STEM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research projects available for participants span a significant space across
catalysis: method development, catalyst development, and synthetic applications,
as well as extension into molecular dynamics and beyond. This program recruits
students nationwide, with an emphasis on underrepresented student groups. A wide
raging network of industrial and academic collaborations expose participants to
a variety of viable career pathways with the goal of sustaining a diverse and
competitive chemical science workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.