* 1851097
* Collaborative Research: Enhancing our Understanding of North Atlantic Deep Water Pathways using Nonlinear Dynamics Techniques
* GEO,OCE
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2023
* Francisco Beron-Vera, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 06/30/2023
* USD 399,576.00

For most of the last century, the equatorward spread of cold water masses from
high latitudes in the Labrador and Nordic Seas was expected to be largely
contained along the Deep Western Boundary Current in the subpolar and
subtropical North Atlantic. Since the turn of this century, observational floats
launched within these water masses have defied this expectation. Instead, myriad
interior pathways have been revealed across the North Atlantic.
Contemporaneously, an inventory of anthropogenic carbon dioxide has shown the
subpolar North Atlantic to be the most intense (per unit area) sink of all ocean
basins, a characteristic attributable to the deep penetration of newly-formed
water masses in that basin. While the deep limb of the Atlantic Meridional
Overturning Circulation has long been appreciated as a heat and freshwater
reservoir, its role as a carbon reservoir is now apparent. Thus, at a time when
the conventional understanding of these deep water mass pathways has been
upended, there is a stronger reason than ever to understand the spread and fate
of these water masses. Over the past decade, simulated float trajectories have
augmented the relatively small number of observational floats in the North
Atlantic in order to gain a broader understanding of water mass pathways.
However, analyses of the observed and modeled trajectories have largely used
conventional methods to ascertain a limited number of flow characteristics. This
study will capitalize on recent advances in nonlinear dynamics in order to
provide a more comprehensive description and understanding of these water masses
and flows limited observations. Thus, by using these tools to unravel deep water
pathways, this project will aid our understanding of the North Atlantic as a
deep carbon reservoir, and thereby have a significant societal impact. Broader
impacts with this proposed work also include the training of a postdoctoral
researcher to facilitate an independent research career and the training of a
physical oceanography student in the use of nonlinear dynamical tools.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will address a fundamental question in modern
physical oceanography through the use of two complementary tools emerging at the
interface of nonlinear dynamics and fluid &lt;br/&gt;dynamics. Probabilistic
tools will be used to cast new light on the transformation and fate of the deep
waters through the construction of Lagrangian geographies that constrain
connectivity, residence times within water mass provinces, preferred circulation
pathways, transit times along these pathways, and transport across province
boundaries. Deterministic tools that have recently proven efficient at
extracting persistent transport pathways will also be used to delineate
preferred transport pathways, and thus will be used to frame deep water routes.
This offers a promising fertilization of nonlinear dynamical tools into a
traditional physical oceanographic area of study. Specifically, this work will
apply dynamical systems tools to: 1) determine the long-term fate and elucidate
the preferred pathways of the deep water masses; 2) ascertain the extent to
which potential vorticity conservation or other dynamics constrains these
pathways; and 3) identify spatial provinces (domains) that define water mass
residence and evaluate exchanges among them. The small, but growing number of
observational floats, including those recently recovered from the Overturning in
the Subpolar North Atlantic Program (OSNAP), as well as Argo data and simulated
float trajectories from ocean general circulation models, will be used in this
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.