* 1851843
* REU Site: Georgia Institute of Technology Mathematics Research Experiences for Undergraduates
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Michael Lacey, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Tiziana Giorgi
* 03/31/2024
* USD 380,386.00

The primary aims of this REU program in mathematics are to: (i) provide high-
quality research experiences, together with professional development activities,
for diverse cohorts of undergraduates; (ii) motivate talented undergraduates to
pursue, and succeed in, graduate study; (iii) recruit a diverse cohort of
undergraduates; (iv) attract students from institutions that have limited
research activities; and (v) continue engagement of the participants beyond the
summer program when they return to their home institutions. Participants will
work individually or in teams with individual faculty members who guide them
through a research experience. Weekly team-building and professional development
activities take place, including an extensive guide to graduate school, and
culminating in a poster session for all participants. The participants leave the
program prepared to present their work at conferences nationwide and with a firm
grasp of the benefits of graduate school as well as a timeline for applications
to graduate school.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Undergraduates will participate in a
diverse array of projects in mathematics, ranging from explorations in mapping
class groups to topics in modern data science. All topics reflect important
current trends in mathematics research. Many are strongly motivated by
applications, ranging from architecture, to mixing of fluids, to modern signal
analysis. For example, mapping class groups are built from the collection of all
deformations of a surface. The object itself has additional structure, inherited
from the surface, but expressed in an entirely different language. Those
properties in turn yield insights into, for instance, how to most efficiently
mix two types of very stiff fluids. Other examples come from data science, a
very broad subject with an ever-increasing set of applications, including
automatic detection of patterns, from hand written digits to community
structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.