* 1851349
* Public Sector Precarity?: The Joint Role of Institutional and Organizational Processes
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2019,12/31/2021
* Donald Tomaskovic-Devey, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Melanie Hughes
* 12/31/2021
* USD 245,269.00

Public sector employment accounts for nearly one fifth of the U. S. labor force
and is an important site of employment for women, racial minorities, and middle-
class jobs. Traditionally public sector jobs have been viewed as stable, in
contrast to private sector jobs that may be lost during economic downturns, as
well as due to changes in demand for goods and services. Recent events, however,
suggest public sector employment may also be precarious, and we know very little
about how such precarity unfolds. This project uses administrative data to
systematically analyze changes to public sector work from 1974 to 2017. This
project investigates: 1) the quality of public sector jobs, including pay,
turnover, and full time employment; and 2) differences in employment and pay by
race and gender. The project will also chart state-level variation in these
employment dynamics. Project findings will inform policy regarding workforce
supports for employees in the public sector, including the need for retraining
and transition support when public sector jobs are lost. State-level variation
in such dynamics will enable policy makers at the state level to craft social
supports most appropriate to their jurisdictions. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using over 7 million observations of workplace level data
collected by the US Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC), this project
is the first to conduct a systematic organizational level analysis of trends in
public sector job quality. The project will evaluate the role of both
organizational and state-level determinants of public sector employment. It
considers state level institutional forces, such as union strength, political
composition, and local economies, as well as organizational level factors, such
as managerial composition and preexisting racial and gender segregation by
workplace. The project will examine these dynamics descriptively for all US
states from 1974 to the present and then statistically model dynamic change at
the workplace level using error correction modeling, followed by fixed effects
analyses. The project will contribute to the Relational Inequality Theory
framework, thus enriching knowledge through in-depth study of how public sector
organizations influence employment dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.