* 1851523
* Heterogenous Porous Media Simulations
* TIP,TI
* 11/01/2018,04/30/2019
* Marcus Herrmann, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Vipin Chaudhary
* 04/30/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project supports a
faster design cycle of industrial filters to meet an ever-growing demand. This
demand stems from an accelerated industrial development in the world, leading to
an increased need for clean air and water through the use of filtration systems.
Industrial emissions have led to the release of significant amounts of
pollutants and particles into the atmosphere which can lead to potential health
problems in human societies. Additionally, water resources are becoming scarce
at an alarming rate which calls for more effective ways of providing clean water
from non-traditional sources including sea water and recycled water. The
technology to be commercialized uses a mathematical technique called
computational fluid dynamics (CFD) that allows engineers to analyze the
efficiency of filters with a computational model before production.
Additionally, using this technology allows for more design iterations within the
product development cycle leading to a better final product. Successful
commercialization of this technology will lead to significant improvements in
filter design, a reduction in production costs and cleaner air and water.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project aims at exploring the potential
market for implementing a CFD software package targeted at the filtration
industry. Significant formal training, the need for having a deep understanding
of the CFD concepts, cumbersome setup procedures, and lengthy computational
runtime are among the burdens of implementing a CFD technique within the
industry. These complexities limit the use of this critical component in the
product development cycle. The technology being considered for commercialization
is a novel algorithm which facilitates the implementation of a CFD study. The
proposed technique will lead to shorter, easier setup of the computational model
and faster computational runtime to obtain results. After receiving the initial
design data, the software automatically analyzes the desired performance
criteria. The output data are then used by the engineering team to improve the
product and achieve higher performances. The technology is a result of extensive
R&amp;D work including algorithm and initial software development, and extensive
laboratory experimentation for validation purposes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.