* 1851879
* Collaborative Research: An Interdisciplinary Approach to Predicting Unequal Treatment
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Adrianna Jenkins, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Claudia Gonzalez-Vallejo
* 08/31/2023
* USD 416,718.00

Disparities in outcomes across social groups are found in nearly every domain of
modern human society, including education, the labor market, and healthcare.
Whether on the basis of gender, ethnicity, age or other markers, group-based
differences in how people treat others are known to arise even when social group
information is irrelevant and even when people explicitly reject social
stereotypes. Despite progress in documenting these disparities, much remains
unknown about their origins. The current research focuses on the role of
individual human decision-making in producing societal-level outcomes.
Specifically, the investigators aim to leverage complementary strengths of
behavioral economics, social psychology, and cognitive neuroscience to uncover
systematic patterns of individual human decision-making that, in aggregate,
contribute to societal treatment disparities. The primary goal is to
characterize the origins of unequal treatment with sufficient precision to
support accurate, context-specific predictions of how people will treat members
of different social groups. Support for this collaborative effort broadens
access to training opportunities for aspiring scientists, provides opportunities
for scientific outreach to local communities, and ultimately contributes
scientific understanding of societal disparities, with implications for efforts
to measure and address discrimination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Substantial progress
has been made in documenting the existence of treatment disparities in the
world. Separately, substantial progress has been made in in understanding how
people think about different social groups in the laboratory. However, given the
multitude of ways in which people can be categorized, and the complexity of
factors influencing people's social behavior, it has been challenging to
construct models of social thought and behavior that are capable of linking
laboratory insights to field observations. The current research aims to connect
these efforts to produce accurate predictions about when and how members of
particular groups will be (dis)advantaged. Specifically, building upon evidence
from cognitive neuroscience that valuation and social cognition engage separable
but interacting systems, the research uses computational modeling to formally
integrate psychological frameworks of how people see others (social perception)
with behavioral economic accounts of how people value others' outcomes (social
valuation). It then uses those models to predict how people will treat members
of different social groups in laboratory and field
settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.