* 1851571
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Factors Influencing Risk Perception and Movement Decisions in Coastal Louisiana
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2019,04/30/2020
* Charlotte Till, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 04/30/2020
* USD 22,290.00

Short-term environmental disturbances and long-term environmental change have
displaced millions worldwide. The US Gulf Coast region is especially vulnerable
to the impacts of hurricanes, sea level rise, land subsidence, and flooding.
Some parishes in Louisiana have lost over 90% of their land, largely due to
environmental changes. What socioeconomic and cultural factors influence
perceptions of environment risk and migration? This project investigates factors
not traditionally associated with the environment, including ties to place,
strong social relationships, and counter perceptions of environmental risk, that
might keep people in place, despite environmental risk. Migration theory
suggests that behavior is largely linked to economic factors, such as income
opportunities or life ambitions. This research, which trains a graduate student
in methods of rigorous, scientific data collection and analysis, will
investigate whether, and to what extent, environmental perceptions impact
movement decisions. Improved understanding of movement decisions can inform
local and state decision makers, yielding more precise composite descriptions of
their constituents and likely behavioral outcomes, enabling better prediction of
migration patterns and strategic planning. Environmental perceptions are also of
value to the emergency and first-response communities when they confront new
environmental dangers. The ability to better communicate environmental risk or
danger can ultimately help to save lives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Charlotte Till,
under the supervision of Dr. Shauna BurnSilver of Arizona State University, will
explore the relationship between risk perceptions and migration decisions. This
research will be conducted in Terrebonne Parish, Louisiana, an ideal setting for
studying risk where there are both acute and chronic stressors on movement
behavior. Hurricanes pose a severe seasonal threat to this area, but sea level
rise and land subsidence represent cumulative risks and a new everyday reality
for coastal people. During pilot study work in the area in 2016 the researchers
found that relative to younger residents, older residents had less intention to
leave despite known risks, and factors such as home, family, or community were
important features of the environment. Based on survey and interview
methodologies this research will first identify how the environment is
perceived, and then investigate the influence of these perceptions on movement
decisions. Survey responses will form the baseline data representing local
perceptions, and then a subset of respondents will be invited to interviews
allowing the investigator to explore movement logic(s) and the significance of
identified influence factors for their decision making. Text analysis tools will
be used to analyze interview data. Examples of the insights possible through the
findings of this work include: how movement decisions are made, what factors
result in place attachment outweighing risk, and how environmental factors
interact with movement decisions. By actively incorporating individuals who do
not move, this project is targeting an understudied but critical group for
analyzing human movement patterns. By drawing participants directly from the
parish this research may spur greater public engagement with science,
contributing toward greater public scientific literacy. This research
contributes to development of the migration literature on the role of the
environment in movement decisions and factors impacting those decisions. This
project will also facilitate improved understanding and engagement among
communities, emergency managers, and municipal
respresentatives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.