* 1851112
* NSF Student Travel Grant for 2018 IEEE Vehicular Networking Conference (VNC)
* CSE,CNS
* 11/01/2018,10/31/2020
* Ashwin Ashok, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Sprintson
* 10/31/2020
* USD 25,000.00

The Vehicular Networking Conference (VNC), sponsored by the Institute of
Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE), is a flagship international
conference in the vehicular networking, applications, and systems area. VNC 2018
continues the tradition of the past nine annual meetings starting in 2009 in
presenting and publishing high quality research dealing with all aspects of
vehicular networking, applications and systems. IEEE VNC highlights research
potentials, stimulates novel and breakthrough ideas, and identifies their short
and medium term exploitation goals. The conference features an open call for
papers, poster and demo sessions, an app contest, a keynote talk and panel
discussions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will support approximately 20
students in the United States to attend IEEE VNC 2018, which will be held in
Taipei, Taiwan on December 5-7, 2018. Attending a high-caliber technical event
such as this is extremely valuable for future researchers. The conference will
offer a unique educational experience. Students attending will be exposed to the
start-of-the-art in the field of vehicular networking, applications and systems;
students will also have the opportunity to interact with both distinguished
researchers and fellow graduate students from other institutions. The informal
opportunities for discussion have the potential to shape the future careers of
the students. The goal of the student travel support is to encourage research
interest and involvement of students who are not well funded, under-represented,
or otherwise not likely to be able to attend high-profile conferences on
vehicular networking, applications and systems. Priority will be given to non-
authors who are unlikely to attend due to the unavailability of travel funding,
and to under-represented minority groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.