* 1851164
* Collaborative Research: The Interactions Between Internal Waves, Mesoscale eddies, and Submesoscale Currents in the California Current System
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Brian Arbic, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 05/31/2024
* USD 346,946.00

This study will examine the role of the interactions and energy exchanges
between mesoscale eddies, submesoscale currents, and near-inertial and tidal
internal waves (IWs) in determining global dissipation and mixing patterns in
the ocean. The focus of the research is on the fundamental physics that governs
the interactions, with specific applications to the California Current System.
The California Current System is an eddy-rich eastern boundary upwelling region
where energetic near inertial waves (NIWs) and tidal IWs (internal tides) have
been previously observed and that will likely be used for NASA's Surface Water
&amp; Ocean Topography (SWOT) calibration and validation experiment. The
approach will be to conduct a hierarchy of idealized and realistic state of the
art numerical simulations in conjecture with in situ mooring observations for
testing the realism of the models. The analysis will be based on numerical
experiments of variable resolutions that systematically include and exclude
tides and wind-forced NIWs. The PIs will engage in standard avenues for
scientific communication, namely papers, seminars and presentations at society
meetings. In addition, the proposed work will promote the career development of
an early career scientist and support one postdoc, one PhD student and one MS
student. The project will also support two summers of undergraduate research and
the travel to the Coastal Ocean Environment Summer School in Ghana
(coessing.org). This school, founded by one of the project team members,
provides an opportunity for students from African countries to learn about
oceanography.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The general circulation of the ocean is
strongly constrained by the pathways that kinetic and available potential energy
take from the basin-scale forces that inject them to centimeter scales, where
they are depleted. To determine the ocean's response to future climate
scenarios, these energetic pathways, from forcing to dissipation, must be
understood and quantified. Previous studies have established the importance of
mesoscale and submesoscale circulations to the kinetic energy route to
dissipation, and of near-inertial and tidal IWs to the available-potential
energy route to mixing, but a comprehensive study of the coupling between the
two routes and the role of the eddy-wave interactions has not been carried out.
Here the realistic simulations together with idealized simulations that will
methodically investigate the interactions under variable stratification,
rotation, and forcing magnitudes, will greatly advance the understanding of
present and future oceanic energy distributions. The work will advance current
understanding of ocean energetics, and will guide the development of diffusive
parameterizations that take into account the combined spatiotermporal
contributions of the different phenomena to energy mixing and dissipation. These
parameterizations can be implemented in climate models and improve climate
projections. In addition, this work will greatly ameliorate the interpretability
of present and future satellite sea-surface height observations, whose analysis
will be complicated by incoherent internal wave
signals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.