* 1851851
* REU Site: Application of Microscopy and Microanalysis in Multidisciplinary Research
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Erik Sanchez, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 09/30/2023
* USD 339,690.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
site continues its operation to enable undergraduate students to gain
multidisciplinary research experience. This site has been successfully operating
for the past eighteen years and has achieved a high level of participation from
women, minorities, and student veterans of the US Armed Forces. This REU site
unites undergraduates from different disciplines, ethnic backgrounds, and
institutions, and provides hands-on research experiences to assist them in
pursuing careers in science and engineering. This renewal project broadens
impact by including nontraditional students (who have a delay after high school
graduation before starting their college education).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: The REU site ties diverse research
projects together under the overarching theme of electron microscopy for
multidisciplinary applications. Through a concentrated summer program, the
participants obtain technical training, conduct independent research, visit
local high-tech industries, and present their research at an REU symposium. The
activities begin with a training week including workshops on laboratory safety,
library database searches, and graduate school applications. Students are
offered an intensive short course in using scanning electron microscope or
focused ion beam microscope for material and device characterization. Students
use these newly-acquired skills in research projects mentored by faculty from
the departments of Mechanical and Materials Engineering, Electrical and Computer
Engineering, Physics, Chemistry, Biology, and Geology. It is highly anticipated
that REU participants leave the summer program with a quintessential skill
(electron and ion microscopy) applicable to all disciplines and a broader
perspective of the impact of research on their higher education and career
choices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.