* 1851332
* A National Data Program for the Social Sciences: The General Social Survey and International Survey Programme
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* Tom Smith, National Opinion Research Center
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 07/31/2023
* USD 9,059,791.00

The National Data Program for the Social Sciences: General Social Survey (NDPSS)
is a social indicators, infrastructure, and data-diffusion program. It has four
aims. It gathers data on American society to monitor and explain trends in
attitudes, behaviors and attributes at both the aggregate and individual levels.
It examines the structure and functioning of society in general and the role of
various sub-groups. It provides comparisons between the United States and other
nations in order to view American society in comparative perspective and to
develop generalizable, cross-national models of human society. It makes high-
quality data easily accessible to scholars, students, and others expeditiously
and without charge. These aims are accomplished by the regular collection and
distribution of the General Social Survey (GSS) and its allied surveys in the
International Social Survey Program (ISSP). Since 1972, the GSS and ISSP have
been efficiently collected, widely distributed, and extensively analyzed by
social scientists and others around the world. Over 30,000 research publications
have utilized the GSS/ISSP and they have contributed to every field in the
social sciences. For example, they have advanced understanding of cohort effects
by examining intergenerational transfers and social mobility and studying
intergenerational changes in education and knowledge. They have monitored
changes in intergroup relations, gender roles, family structure and values,
civil liberties and the impact of globalization on national identity. GSS/ISSP
data are used in other science fields, such as environmental science,
nanotechnology, polar science, computer/information science, and medical science
and health. The GSS/ISSP data are also used extensively by government, non-
profit organizations, and the mass media. In education, over 2,000 textbooks and
teaching manuals utilize the GSS/ISSP and it is used annually by hundreds of
thousands students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 2020 GSS and associated ISSP
rounds (2019-2021) will continue the basic NDPSS mission, balancing replication
to measure societal change with both methodological and substantive innovation
in both the international and topical modules and follow-up studies. Extensions
from past surveys and innovations are planned. They are: 1) a user "module"
competition to solicit new survey items that tap emerging social science topics
and NSF priorities; 2) an expansion of the multi-level, multi-source (MLMS) data
to expand data in the NDPSS through data linkage; 3) using adaptive design
during survey fielding to enhance sample representativeness; and 4) working with
the American National Election Studies (ANES) team to engage in additional data
production surrounding the 2020 Presidential Election.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.