* 1851822
* REU Site: Solar Physics Program at Montana State University
* GEO,AGS
* 05/15/2019,04/30/2024
* Dana Longcope, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Manda S. Adams
* 04/30/2024
* USD 321,666.00

Montana State University (MSU) will offer a Research Experiences for
Undergraduates (REU) Program in solar and space physics. Students will conduct
cutting-edge research in solar and space physics, to investigate how magnetic
fields evolve on the Sun and release a large amount of energy into heliosphere,
which may impact the space weather. Student research frequently results in joint
professional publications and conference presentations with their MSU mentors.
Students will also take introductory courses in solar physics, and tutorials in
computer programming, ethics in research, and preparation and application for
graduate schools. These experiences will help students develop independence,
creativity, and interest in Science, Technology, Engineering and Math (STEM)
fields, strengthen practical research skills and communication skills, and make
educated decisions on whether to attend the graduate school and to pursue
research as a profession. The program provides an important service to the solar
astrophysics discipline. With its strong space science component, the program
also offers benefits to society by providing citizens and future researchers
with an understanding of space weather impacts on Earth's space environment. The
program is dedicated to education and training of a diverse work force in STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main objectives of this REU program are: 1)
provide a high-quality state-of-the-art research experience, 2) develop
independence, creativity, and interest in physics and astronomy graduate school,
3) demonstrate how academic knowledge acquired in classes relates to real-world
research problems, 4) develop and strengthen practical research skills and 5)
encourage participation by women and underrepresented minorities in scientific
research. Students will carry out individual research projects for ten weeks
during the summer, under the supervision of the faculty and research staff and
in collaboration with the graduate students at MSU. The research projects will
involve the analysis of the state-of-the-art observations from space missions
and ground-based observatories, magneto-hydrodynamic modeling, as well as space
hardware instrumentation. The target group of the program includes
undergraduates majoring in Physics, Astronomy, Mathematics, Engineering, and
Computer Sciences. The program strongly encourages participation by
underrepresented groups in STEM fields and students with little access to
research opportunities. This project is jointly funded by the AGS REU program
(Educational Linkages), the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research (EPSCoR), and the Solar Terrestrial program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.