* 1851436
* Travel Support for Early Career Scientists to attend the Global Lake Ecological Observatory Network 20 meeting
* BIO,DEB
* 11/15/2018,04/30/2020
* Catherine O'Reilly, Board of Trustees of Illinois State University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 04/30/2020
* USD 26,075.00

The Global Lake Ecological Observatory Network (GLEON) conducts innovative
science to understand, predict and communicate the role and response of lakes in
a changing global environment. Each year GLEON holds an annual meeting to foster
global science understanding about lakes. At the meeting scientists collaborate
and share in training and mentoring among graduate students, early career
scientists, and senior scientific leaders. They discuss the application of the
science to citizens, lake managers, and regulators. Funding is provided for
early career US scientists to participate in the annual meeting to be held in
Perth, Australia in December 2018. The early career scientists will participate
in building networks of collaborators, engage in science exchange, and design
collaborative research projects. Training in collaboration, cutting-edge science
methods, and teaching tools and approaches will occur. New scientific
collaborations, syntheses, and publications will emerge for the early career
scientists from the meeting. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This annual GLEON meeting
will provide early career scientists a unique opportunity to participate in a in
leading-edge team-oriented global science, networking, mentoring, and training.
GLEON has developed a highly productive meeting format to foster collaboration,
creativity, and provide for intensive in-person meeting time to work on existing
projects, assisting progress towards completion and strengthening ties among
existing collaborators that lead to new projects and new collaborators. The
early career scientists will benefit from networking and team building and
scientific exchange and presentations. They will be trained in key
collaboration, technical, and scientific skills such as collaboration and team
science; data processing, modeling, and teaching using R software and
distributed modeling approaches with undergraduate students. The scientists will
gain experience in synthesis activities and publication preparation and
designing new collaborative research projects. The early career scientists will
gain key experience in working with international collaborative teams on large-
scale synthesis projects, developing leadership skills and developing projects
across cultural boundaries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.