* 1851457
* Collaborative Research: Women as Leaders, Policy-Makers, and Symbols
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2020,11/30/2022
* Diana O'Brien, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Lee Walker
* 11/30/2022
* USD 170,811.00

Women have long been denied access to the most powerful political posts,
particularly prestigious cabinet positions within the executive branch. This
project examines the causes and consequences of women’s exclusion from, and
appointment to, three of the most powerful cabinet posts: defense, interior/home
affairs, and foreign affairs. These prominent positions policy influence and it
is thus vital to explain when, why, and how women access these portfolios, as
well as to understand how women’s inclusion shapes policies that are central to
the functioning of the state.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central claim of this
project is that women’s presence in political office shapes, and is shaped by,
beliefs about the policy responsibilities of the position. Though each of the
portfolios studied has distinct responsibilities, they share a focus on security
(i.e., protecting the state from domestic and international threats). The first
set of hypotheses posits that women access the inner cabinet when the
portfolios’ focus expands beyond traditionally masculine policy arenas (such as
terrorism and war) to emphasize issues like peacekeeping and human rights. The
second set of hypotheses suggests that male and female ministers’ policy
priorities are largely explained by the conditions that bring women into (or
keep them out of) office, rather than innate gender differences. The third set
of hypotheses posits that the appointment of female ministers affects citizens’
beliefs about the aims and prestige of these positions and informs their levels
of trust and confidence in the minister, the ministry, and the state. This
project thus advances the scientific study of women’s political representation
by collecting original data to test these hypotheses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project offers the first worldwide study of women in the inner cabinet and a
framework for assessing the causes and consequences of women’s access to male-
dominated posts in other realms. In doing so, the project develops a new
framework for explaining when women access traditionally masculine domains and
how their pathways to power affect policy outcomes and citizens’ relationship to
the state, we well as compiles a global database on women’s cabinet appointments
and policy outputs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.