* 1851919
* REU Site: Summer Research in Physics at the University of Arkansas
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2023
* Reeta Vyas, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 03/31/2023
* USD 358,949.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: The Physics research experience for undergraduates
(REU) Site at the University of Arkansas continues to provide exciting research
opportunities to students, mostly from, but not limited to, undergraduate
institutions in the Ozark region and surrounding states with limited or no
infrastructure to support undergraduate research. Each year, a diverse group of
students including women and underrepresented minorities are targeted for
recruiting. The success with this aspect is assured by a network of faculty and
alumni contacts at Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCU) and
institutions with significant Native American and Hispanic populations, and the
University's infrastructure for minority recruiting. Additionally, a few
students who may have not performed well in courses, but show indication of
originality and creativity, are included. The selected students participate in
experimental and theoretical research projects in nanoscale materials, condensed
matter, soft matter, biophysics, photonics, lasers, and quantum optics. They
acquire skills and practices essential to scientific problem solving and for
working in a collaborative environment through mentoring from faculty, post-
doctoral scholars, and senior graduate students. They visit high-tech
industries, participate in professional development activities that include
weekly seminars, workshops on laboratory safety, library database searches,
graduate school applications, oral and written communications skills, a
participatory scientific ethics course, and social/cultural activities with
other REU groups. The evaluation process incorporates both direct measures of
student success and indirect measures (student, mentor, alumni survey) of
learning and achievements to provide guidance to continually upgrade the REU
program and broaden its impact. Many participants in the REU site continue with
graduate studies or find employment directly after graduation in a science,
technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM)
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: The REU participants work on
carefully chosen research projects on topics of current interest such as
properties of nanoscale materials, thermal motion of free standing grapheme
using scanning tunneling microscopy (STM), atomically thin material quantum
devices, solid-state nanopore fabrication for detection of DNA, phase transition
in two dimensional atomic materials beyond graphene, light-quantum dot
interaction, lasers, structured light beams, quantum correlations in light,
super-resolution fluorescence microscopy, and statistical and nonlinear physics
of extremophiles and the brain. Through engagement with their research projects
for ten weeks, the participants receive technical training in using the state of
the art instruments, and computational and analytical research techniques. They
experience the creative process involved in scientific research starting from
the formulation of a problem to its solution, the ups and downs, and the
eventual thrill of a new discovery. At the end of the summer, students present
their research at a REU symposium. Many go on to present the results of their
research at national/international scientific conferences and publish papers
based on their work in scientific research journals. Each REU participant leaves
having acquired technical skills in the use of advanced scientific instruments
and softer skills to be a productive member of the nation's scientific and
technical workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.