* 1851866
* Collaborative Research: Understanding the impact of warming on the structure and function of marine communities
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2023
* Andrew Pershing, Gulf of Maine Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 03/31/2023
* USD 789,659.00

Rising temperatures are impacting marine ecosystems around the world, and the
rate of warming is expected to accelerate. The ecosystems in the northwest
Atlantic Shelf, including in the Gulf of Maine and Mid-Atlantic Bight, have
experienced some of the fastest decadal and 30 year warming rates in the
historical record, and these strong warming trends were punctuated by marine
heatwaves in 2012, 2016, and 2018. Most studies of climate impacts in the ocean
have focused on how rising temperatures affect individual species. This project
focuses on the impact of warming, both short-term events and long-term trends,
on the entire ecosystem. It leverages the region's recent warming and history of
consistent sampling to contrast the properties of the plankton and fish
communities in the colder Gulf of Maine with the warmer Mid-Atlantic Bight.
Through statistical analyses, size-based modeling, and food web modeling, this
project evaluates direct and indirect influences of temperature on biological
processes, community characteristics, and emergent ecosystem properties. This
study characterizes composition and features of the plankton and fish
communities and compares ecosystem changes across space and through time. It
also isolates the direct influence of temperature on metabolism and growth from
the indirect influence of temperature through changes in the oceanography. An
understanding how marine ecosystems respond to warming is essential to
successfully manage these ecosystems in a changing climate. The project team is
actively engaged in translating knowledge into fisheries management at a
regional and national level. This project also educates the next generation of
citizens and scientists by expanding the ecosystem modeling activity in the Gulf
of Maine Research Institute's LabVenture program, which serves ~10,000 Maine
middle school students each year. An online curriculum on modeling, a topic area
in the Next Generation Science Standards that many teachers find challenging is
under development. The project also supports a postdoctoral researcher and a
graduate student and contributes to Stony Brook University's program to
encourage participation of women in the
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Temperature affects metabolism and growth, with
most species growing faster but maturing earlier and at a smaller size in warmer
conditions. This project characterizes the direct influence of temperature on
fish growth patterns and incorporates this knowledge into a trait-based, size-
spectrum model of a fish community. This model quantifies how changes in
temperature and zooplankton composition translate into changes in size structure
of the fish community. Warming causes poleward movement of species such that
traditionally cooler ecosystems come to resemble warmer ecosystems of the past.
This project uses a dynamic food-web model to synthesize how changes in species
composition have altered the flow of energy in Gulf of Maine and Mid-Atlantic
Bight ecosystems. It also quantifies the stability of these communities and
their resilience to perturbations like marine heatwaves, with the expectation
that gradual warming causes communities to become more diverse and thus more
stable, while abrupt warming may have the opposite effect. Both components
contrast the ecosystem properties in the warmer mid Atlantic with those in the
cooler Gulf of Maine as well as those properties in the past with those under
the recent very warm conditions. The comparative approach also untangles the
direct impact of warming on organisms from the indirect effects from vertical
stratification. In particular, comparing the recent thermally stratified period
with the 1990s, when reduced salinity led to an abrupt, multi trophic-level
community shift, make it possible to isolate the direct effects of temperature
from its influence through hydrography.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.