* 1851961
* Morton Arboretum REU site:  Integrated tree science in the Anthropocene
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2019,12/31/2023
* Charles Cannon, Morton Arboretum
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 12/31/2023
* USD 409,018.00

This REU Site award to the Morton Arboretum, located in Lisle, IL, will support
the training of 8 students for 10 weeks during the summers of 2019- 2021.
Research focuses on the use of trees as model systems to gain a broad
understanding of evolution, ecology, conservation, and management in natural and
built environments. The Center for Tree Science (CTS) researchers will guide
students through the scientific process using an integrative approach, where
different scientific fields are combined on a focal topic (trees, in this case)
to conduct solution-based science. This REU will foster intellectual
development, critical thinking, independence, self-confidence, and perseverance
that will benefit students as they pursue a career in any field. Field trips,
science communication training, and networking events with regional REU sites
are highlights of the program. Students present their results at a research
symposium. Applications are recruited nationally, through listservs and job
boards. Applications are encouraged from NSF-recognized under-represented
minority (URM) students both locally and nationally, students from colleges
where research opportunities are limited, and outstanding beginning students
(first and second year).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is anticipated that a total of
24 students, primarily URM students, students from limited-research
institutions, and beginning students, will be trained in the program. Students
will learn how research is conducted, and many will go on to present their work
at national scientific conferences. Successful projects can be continued the
following year through fellowships offered by the Center for Tree
Science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A common web-based assessment tool used by all REU
Site programs funded by the Division of Biological Infrastructure will be used
to determine the effectiveness of the training program. Students will be tracked
after the program in order to determine their career paths. Students will be
asked to respond to an automatic email sent via the NSF reporting system. More
information about the program is available by visiting
http://www.mortonarb.org/reu, or by contacting the PI (Dr. Chuck Cannon at
ccannon@mortonarb.org) or the co-PI (Dr. Silvia Alvarez-Clare at
salvarezclare@mortonarb.org).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.