* 1851834
* Collaborative Research: Technological Shocks and Institutional Effectiveness under Heterogeneous Risk
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2023
* Benjamin Farrer, Knox College
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 04/30/2023
* USD 95,249.00

How effective are existing regulations are at managing the risks from high
volume hydraulic fracturing (HVHF), also known as ?fracking?? HVHF is a
technique for producing oil and gas from shale formations that has
revolutionized the domestic energy landscape. In the U.S., states are the
primary regulators of oil and gas production, so there is variation in the types
of and effectiveness of regulations in-use. Many of these regulations were
enacted in the early-to-mid 1900s and were designed to manage conventional oil
and gas production. Given the rapid expansion of HVHF across the country, this
project asks whether these regulations are still appropriate, given the
differences between conventional and HVHF production techniques. To answer this,
the project first develops a cross-state database of regulations in-use to
manage oil and gas production, which will be available online for the public,
state regulators, journalists, and academics to explore how different states
manage oil and gas production and how effective those regulations are. Second,
the project engages landowners in focus groups to better understand the
perspectives of people impacted, both positively and negatively, by the HVHF
boom. Third, the project uses a series of laboratory economic experiments to
advance scholarly understanding, in a controlled setting, of how different
regulations incentivize individuals? decisions on whether to lease their oil and
gas rights for production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scholars have long been
interested in the linkages between governance institutions and the
sustainability of common-pool resources (CPR), of which oil and gas are
canonical examples. Institutions that facilitate efficient collective action are
often seen as the best hope for a solution to the tragedy of the commons, and
the long-endurance of institutions is often viewed as a best-case scenario.
However, long-enduring institutions also lock participants in to a particular
path that may or may not be efficient when exogenous changes occur. This project
expands on the intellectual tradition of CPR scholars, by examining how a
solution to a CPR dilemma today can exacerbate a different CPR dilemma tomorrow.
The problem with such institutions is not necessarily the possibility of
resource collapse (i.e. a tragedy of the commons), but rather of continued
action in the face of substantially changed circumstances. CPR governance
institutions can continue to be used to facilitate collective action, long after
collective action ceases to be efficient or equitable for the group. Previously
stable and efficient institutions may now have the effect of redistributing
rents from those who are least vulnerable to the new risks introduced by an
exogenous shock to those who are most vulnerable. This insight is a significant
contribution to literature on institutions and decision-
making.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.