* 1851142
* Workshop: International Linguistics Olympiad (ILO) July 2019; Yongin, South Korea
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2019,11/30/2021
* Lori Levin, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Tyler Kendall
* 11/30/2021
* USD 38,787.00

Linguistics is the science of language. Linguists conduct formal studies of the
structure of the world's over 6,000 languages, investigate the acquisition and
use of language in typical and atypical populations, seek to understand the
neural structures that enable humans to learn and use language, and create the
language models used in computational contexts, such as artificial intelligence
and machine translation. The breadth of the field's applications makes it vital
to technological and medical advancements, economic competitiveness in a global
economy, as well as U.S. national security. Given the multi-faceted importance
of the field for the country, it is crucial to devote resources to the
introduction of this field to high school students, and to recruit the brightest
minds in the country to pursue careers in linguistics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project supports the North American Computational Linguistics Olympiad (NACLO)
organization in its mission to introduce linguistics to high school students, to
provide training to interested students and support to their teachers, to select
and coach the team of U.S. students that represent the country at the
International Linguistics Olympiad (IOL), and to support the current work of the
Linguistic Society of America (LSA) focused on creating and promoting the
teaching of an Advanced Placement course in linguistics for high school
students. Specifically, the grant supports the costs associated with training a
team of 8 high school linguists from across the United States and escorting them
to the 2019 IOL in Yongin, Korea. In addition, two members of the LSA Committee
on AP Linguistics will join the coaches and team members to conduct research to
inform the committee's efforts to promote linguistics in high school
contexts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.