* 1851757
* NBER Summer Institute, 2019-2021
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* James Poterba, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 08/31/2023
* USD 525,000.00

This grant provides renewed funding for the participation of junior faculty in
the National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER) Summer Institute. For more than
thirty years, NBER's Summer Institute has offered an ideal environment for
developing new ideas and forging collaborative work relationships. Summer
Institute brings together economists and scholars in other fields from
universities, government, and international organizations for a few days or a
few weeks of seminars, workshops, conferences, and cooperative research. The
NBER Summer Institutes generate timely and influential research on important
economic policy questions related to such topics as international financial
stability, economic productivity and technology, environmental regulations,
social security policy, and educational policies. The workshops are an
invaluable part of the research infrastructure in economics and assist the
research of many economists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Summer
Institute is four weeks long and includes at least 50 sessions organized and co-
organized by over 100 individuals. There are more than 2,800 attendees each
summer from over 425 universities and non-academic institutions. About two-
thirds of all attendees are not NBER affiliates. While there are many
presentations of work nearing completion, emphasis is placed on the workshop
aspects of the program where new ideas are raised, preliminary research ideas
are developed, and plans for joint or coordinated research efforts are
established. Efforts are made to include a wide variety of new participants, and
to reach out to women and minorities. Calls for papers are circulated widely and
are available on the NBER website.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.