* 1851318
* Collaborative Research: Characterization of Reactive Nitrogen in The North Pacific Atmosphere
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2023
* Hayley Schiebel, Suffolk University
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 04/30/2023
* USD 127,765.00

Nitrogen is an essential element for life, and its availability can limit the
growth of phytoplankton in the surface waters of the oceans. One source of
nitrogen to surface waters is deposition from the atmosphere, which is the
result of reactive nitrogen emissions from both human (anthropogenic) activities
and natural processes. Anthropogenic nitrogen emissions to the atmosphere and
nitrogen deposition to the oceans have increased exponentially since
preindustrial times. In fact, global modeling studies have suggested that as
much as 80% of total nitrogen deposition to the oceans is anthropogenic in
origin, and that the magnitude of input to the global oceans rivals estimates of
biological nitrogen fixation. The impacts associated with this increased
nitrogen deposition are clear in both terrestrial and coastal systems, but the
implications for open ocean biogeochemistry are less well studied. Recent work
in the North Pacific Ocean (NPO) has suggested that increased nitrogen due to
anthropogenic atmospheric deposition is detectable even in the open ocean, while
other work can explain nutrient dynamics based upon natural biological and
physical processes. The investigators propose to study the influence of both
anthropogenic and natural sources on the deposition of nitrogen (as nitrate,
ammonium, and organic nitrogen) in the NPO. This will be based on collection of
aerosol and rainwater samples year-round at two sites: (1) Chang-Dao Island,
China where they expect high anthropogenic nitrogen inputs; and (2) Oahu, Hawaii
where they expect marine sources to dominate. They will also collect ship-based
samples in the marine boundary layer via already planned short-term research
cruises in each season. In addition to the scientific outcomes, this project
will provide for human resources and professional development of the team
members (faculty members, a graduate student, undergraduate student, and
technicians), advance international collaborations, and contribute to education
and public outreach. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Identifying the sources of nitrogen
deposition to the open ocean is crucial for understanding anthropogenic impacts
on biogeochemical cycles. A primary question is, is nitrogen deposition the
result of external, anthropogenic processes or does it represent recycled
nitrogen from the ocean's point of view? The specific objectives of this project
are to: characterize the atmospheric composition and sources of inorganic
(ammonium and nitrate) and organic nitrogen with an emphasis on seasonality;
diagnose the influence of air-sea exchange versus anthropogenic sources of
nitrogen on atmospheric deposition; and determine the isotopic composition of
gaseous and particulate inorganic nitrogen in the marine boundary layer via
ship-based sample collections in the NPO. Using concentration and isotopic
measurements of reactive nitrogen species, in addition to transport and chemical
box modeling, the study aims to characterize nitrogen deposition in two
locations with very different source influences. This study will provide the
first comprehensive, seasonal analysis of the isotopic values of reactive
nitrogen species in the NPO atmosphere where nitrogen deposition is considered
intense. Ultimately this project will lead to a better understanding of how
anthropogenic changes in the atmospheric nitrogen cycle may influence the
biogeochemistry of the surface ocean as well as the composition of the marine
atmosphere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.