* 1851844
* REU Site: Experimental and Computational Research in Chemistry and Biochemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 03/15/2019,02/29/2024
* Shouquan Huo, East Carolina University
* Continuing Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 02/29/2024
* USD 352,390.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site award to East Carolina
University, located in Greenville, NC, supports the training of 10 undergraduate
students for 10 weeks during the summers of 2019-2021. This program, funded by
the Division of Chemistry, engages participants in research in the fields of
chemistry and biochemistry, ranging from experimental research to computational
studies. All students work with experienced faculty mentors. In addition to
research, the undergraduate students take part in professional development
activities, which are structured to foster knowledge of research ethics and
intellectual property, enhance communication skills, and increase chances for
success in higher education and STEM careers. The REU experience motivates the
participants to consider graduate studies and a research career in chemistry-
related fields, enhancing the academic and technical
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In collaboration with their peers and faculty
mentors, undergraduate participants contribute to research projects in the
fields of metal catalysis, bio-catalysis, synthetic methodology, metal ion-
protein interactions, protein-ligand interactions, and protein-protein
interactions. This site emphasizes recruitment of students that are
underrepresented in the chemical sciences and students with limited
opportunities for research. Participants gain skills in using modern scientific
research tools, develop a strong ability to critically analyze scientific
literature, and design and execute experiments, along with substantial skills in
written and oral communication for various audiences. The site promotes the next
generation of a diverse and well-trained STEM
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.