* 1851378
* Collaborative Research:  Defying Dissolution:  Unraveling the Enigma of North Pacific Deep-Sea Scleractinian Reefs in Undersaturated Water
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2024
* Brendan Roark, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 08/31/2024
* USD 853,391.00

Like their shallow-water counterparts, deep-sea corals provide structure and
habitat that support a diverse community of invertebrates and commercially
important fish species. However, as ocean acidification impacts the water
chemistry of the surface and deep ocean, the future of deep-sea reefs is highly
uncertain because ocean acidification makes it more difficult for corals to
build the three-dimensional structure that these ecosystems depend on. The
naturally harsh water chemistry conditions of the North Pacific are being
exacerbated by ocean acidification therefore it was previously thought that
deep-sea coral reef development could not occur in the region. Despite these
expectations, reefs were recently discovered in the Northwestern Hawaiian
Islands (NWHI) and the Emperor Seamount Chain (ESC), with 4 of 7 sites in waters
that are corrosive to, or likely to dissolve, the coral skeletons that make up
deep-sea reefs. With the discovery of these reefs, we have an unprecedented
opportunity to investigate the potential impact of ocean acidification on these
important ecosystems because, in contrast to previous studies, there is a
gradient of water chemistry across our study sites, all at the same depth. This
study will address basic questions regarding reef development in the deep sea,
including: Can deep-sea coral reefs develop in water that is corrosive to coral
skeletons? What is the fate of reefs that developed under supportive water
chemistry conditions once they experience corrosive water? How long can reefs
persist in corrosive water? Through addressing these questions, this study will
provide critical insights into deep-sea reef formation, persistence,
distribution, and the effects of ocean acidification on deep-sea coral
communities. The investigators have a track record of partnerships with NOAA?s
Deep-Sea Coral Research and Technology Program, and with the agencies actively
making management decisions in this region for seamount deep-sea coral
communities including the North Pacific Fisheries Commission and the
International Seabed Authority. Results will be broadly circulated to the
scientific community through publications, coral collections contributed to
museums, and public databases. This project will contribute to developing a
diverse and competitive STEM workforce through training of an underrepresented
postdoctoral scientist, three graduate students, and undergraduate researchers.
A partnership with WhaleTimes, Inc. will include ROV telepresence for the Creep
into the Deep Program, K-12 School Visits, and e-books.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite expectations that deep-sea scleractinian reefs
could not exist under the harsh carbonate chemistry conditions of the North
Pacific, reefs were recently discovered in the Northwestern Hawaiian Islands
(NWHI) and the Emperor Seamount Chain (ESC), with 4 of 7 sites in waters
undersaturated with respect to aragonite. The discovery of these reefs, with
more than half the sites in undersaturated water, provides an unprecedented
opportunity to investigate the potential impact of ocean acidification on these
important ecosystems. It is becoming critical to gain a better understanding of
the role of aragonite saturation in the distribution of deep-sea scleractinian
reefs because it has been documented that the aragonite saturation horizon (ASH)
is shoaling throughout the world oceans due to ocean acidification. More deep-
sea reefs will experience undersaturation in the near future as aragonite
saturation declines and the ASH shoals, making the future of deep-sea reefs and
the ecologically and economically valuable ecosystems they support highly
uncertain. Building on the discovery of deep-sea coral reefs in the NWHI and
ESC, the overarching question of this project is: How is it that deep-sea
scleractinian coral reefs can occur in undersaturated water, well below the
hypothesized reef development limit Although individual corals may be capable of
calcifying in undersaturated water, it is unlikely that a three-dimensional reef
structure could develop since deep-sea calcification rates are slow and most of
the reef matrix is dead skeleton susceptible to dissolution. Therefore the
hypotheses to be tested are: 1) These deep-sea reefs developed in saturated
water and are now in undersaturated water because the ASH has shoaled; 2) The
reefs in undersaturated water are now net dissolving; and 3) Environmental
parameters other than aragonite saturation are driving reef distribution. To
test these three hypotheses, we plan two research cruises to characterize the
reefs and environmental parameters of nine seamounts across an aragonite
saturation gradient where reefs exist above and below the ASH. Coral and water
samples will be collected, an ROV will conduct video transect surveys, and
experimental dissolution blocks and in situ instrumentation will be deployed at
the reef sites to investigate: carbonate chemistry variability on diel (in situ
instruments) to centennial (skeletal boron isotopes as a pH proxy) scales,
calcification and dissolution rates, and reef ecology. Further, species
distribution modeling will be used to examine the environmental factors that
determine the distribution of these deep-sea reefs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.