* 1851647
* Semiparametric methods of policy analysis with social and economic network data
* SBE,SES
* 06/15/2019,05/31/2022
* James Powell, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 05/31/2022
* USD 272,464.00

Relationships between economic agents are everywhere; firms source inputs from
and provide outputs to other firms; nations negotiate and ratify treaties with
each other; individuals depend upon networks of friends and acquaintances for
fun, emotional support, information and advice. Despite this, rigorous methods
for analyzing network data are not widely available. Existing methods are either
geared toward descriptive analysis or make restrictive assumptions and are
difficult to implement. The proposed research will develop: (i) new methods for
policy analysis with two-way interaction outcome data and (ii) models of network
formation with many and different agents. Frequently analyzed two-way
interaction include trade and migration flows across countries, the value of
input flows across firms, and friendships. The proposed methods could lead to
efficient analyses and inference about several policy questions such as whether
preferential trade agreements increase trade or whether democracy reduces inter-
state warfare. The research will therefore aid in formulating efficient policies
to govern interactions among individuals, groups, and nations. This will
increase trade and exchange and thus improve economic efficiency in the US and
around the world. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will develop: (i)
nonparametric methods for policy analysis with dyadic outcome data and (ii)
semiparametric models of network formation with heterogenous agents. The
research will develop a uniform consistency results for a nonparametric dyadic
regression estimator, formulate assumptions supporting causal inference using
dyadic data (including estimation methods for proposed parameters of interest
and their semiparametric efficiency bound analysis), and introduce methods of
(efficient) semi- and non-parametric estimation. These methods are vast
improvements over and generalizations of existing methods of network estimation.
The research will also develop computation methods and provide ways to implement
these new analytical methods. The PIs will make available software
implementation of the proposed estimation and inference procedures in the form
of a Python 3.6 package free of charge on PyPi and Github. In addition, all
replication data, computer codes and supplemental research materials will also
be made available online to support additional basic research, and to increase
take-up of the proposed methods by policy analysts and empirical researchers.
The development of these methods will improve analytical methods for dealing
with network data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.