* 1851674
* Manufacturing of Platinum Nanocrystal-Embedded Nanoporous Metal Oxide Electrodes for High Performance Metal-Air Batteries
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2024
* Yang Yang, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Linkan Bian
* 04/30/2024
* USD 300,000.00

Metal-air batteries with bifunctional catalysts as cathodes are emerging
technologies for renewable energy storage owing to their very competitive energy
densities compared to fossil fuels. Nanoporous metal oxide electrodes embedded
with platinum nanocrystals are believed to deliver high performance for metal-
air batteries. Current methods for manufacturing platinum-metal oxide electrodes
are impeded by inhomogeneous material distribution and composition, high energy
consumption and low yield, which limit their scalable manufacturing. This award
supports fundamental research to provide needed knowledge for the development of
a scalable, room temperature electrochemical process for manufacturing of metal-
air battery electrodes. The new process enables manufacturing of electrodes with
homogeneous composition and seamless interface. Such materials result in high-
performance metal-air batteries with high energy efficiencies and long
cyclability. Nanoporous electrodes made from a wide variety of bifunctional
catalysts are increasingly preferred for applications in energy, healthcare,
biomedical, aerospace, chemical or automotive industries. Therefore, results
from this research benefit the U.S. economy and society. This research involves
several disciplines including manufacturing, electrochemistry, and materials
science. The multi-disciplinary approach helps broaden participation of
underrepresented groups in research and positively impacts engineering
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The pulse electrochemical manufacturing process
overcomes several limitations of current electrochemical manufacturing
techniques, which are lack of morphology and composition control and difficulty
in the control of selective growth and etching kinetics. However, some
scientific barriers are yet to be overcome to realize the full application
potential of pulse electrochemical deposition and anodization for scalable
manufacturing. This research is to fill the knowledge gap on the mechanisms of
platinum nanocrystal (Pt-NC) facet selective growth and nanoporous framework
formation during electrochemical deposition and anodization. The objectives are
(1) to explore the nucleation and bottom-up growth kinetics of Pt-NCs in complex
electrochemical systems containing multiple cations by using pulse
electrochemical deposition, (2) to understand the roles of dynamic O2 bubbles in
selective metal oxidation, etching, and nanopore top-down growth processes by
pulse anodization, and (3) to uncover the processing-microstructure-property
relationships in designing, manufacturing, and applying Pt-embedded metal oxide
electrodes for metal-air batteries. The research team plans to perform advanced
electrochemical analyses and materials characterizations to understand the
mechanism of nanopore formation in electrochemical deposition and anodization,
test the hypothesis that pulse voltage and frequency are the determining factors
for nanopores and selective facets of Pt-NCs in electrochemical manufacturing,
and establish relationships between process parameters and porosity in
electrochemical deposition and anodization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.