* 1851290
* Collaborative Research: Megaripples as biocatalytical filters
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Markus Huettel, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 03/31/2024
* USD 320,599.00

This project focuses on the role of large underwater sand formations,
particularly at the mouths of estuaries, in the cycling of nutrients and organic
materials. "Megaripples" are common features on marine sediments where bottom
currents are rapid. In the northeastern Gulf of Mexico, these sand dune-like
features are up to half a meter in height, with wavelengths reaching 20 meters.
The investigators propose that megaripples act as large filter systems that
rapidly convert dissolved and solid organic matter into inorganic carbon and
nutrients, and thus influence the biological productivity of coastal waters.
They propose to use a one-kilometer long megaripple field in the inlet of
Chotawhatchee Bay, in the northeastern Gulf of Mexico, as a natural laboratory
for studying these processes. In addition, they will conduct laboratory
experiments to investigate the filter processes at a smaller scale. By producing
data on the functioning of megaripples, the project addresses a knowledge gap
that has implications on our understanding of the cycles of matter in coastal
waters. The project offers opportunities for both graduate and undergraduate
students in learning state-of-the-art techniques. The students will gain
experience in working on high frequency data acquisition and analysis of 'big
data'. To enhance outreach, the researchers will develop and teach two courses
on Permeable Sediment Biogeochemistry and Aquatic Eddy Covariance Studies for
the Saturday at the Sea program offered by Florida State University. Results
will be disseminated via scientific journals, conference presentations and
public lectures, and directly to the Apalachicola-National Estuarine Research
Reserve (NERR), which will make the results available to the other 28 NERR
sites. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The two main project objectives are: 1) demonstrate
the general function of megaripples as biocatalytical filters, and 2)
demonstrate that common inlet megaripples contribute to nutrient retention in
coastal bays. A 1 km long megaripple field in the inlet of Chotawhatchee Bay
(wavelengths: ~20 m, amplitudes: 20 to 40 cm) in the northeastern Gulf of Mexico
will be used as an in-situ laboratory. Measurements will characterize megaripple
topography and the water flowing over them. Salinity and suspended particles are
utilized as natural tracers to quantify solute and particle entrainment into the
megaripples. This project will deploy non-invasive aquatic eddy covariance
instruments equipped with newly developed robust sensors to quantify sedimentary
remineralization in the flushed megaripple bed. This technique integrates the
benthic oxygen flux over a large section of the megaripple field, while
including the natural dynamics of currents and light. Real-time water column
measurements with a boat-mounted flow-through analyzer permit rapid
quantification of large horizontal gradients of key water column parameters. The
in-situ measurements will be combined with laboratory column reactor experiments
that quantify nutrient re-mobilization through organic carbon mineralization in
flushed megaripple sand. The megaripple field in the inlet of Chotawhatchee Bay
is easily accessible from shore and by small boat, expediting instrument
deployments and in-situ measurements while reducing project costs. Synthesis of
all data will produce a conceptual and quantitative understanding of megaripples
as natural biocatalytical filters. Because transport and reaction in megaripples
are governed by basic physical and biogeochemical processes, these results will
reveal information on the general biogeochemical functioning of megaripples that
so far is not available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.