* 1851957
* Collaborative Proposal: REU Site: North Carolina A&amp;T State University and Elon University Joint Summer REU in Mathematical Biology
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Nicholas Luke, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Tiziana Giorgi
* 08/31/2023
* USD 263,527.00

The North Carolina A&amp;T State University and Elon University Joint REU in
Mathematical Biology is a 10-week residential summer program in which 10
undergraduate participants will conduct research on a variety of topics within
the field of mathematical biology in small groups of two to three students. A
team of faculty members from both host institutions will be involved with the
planning and execution of the REU program and the location of the program will
alternate between the host institutions. The primary objective of the program is
to provide students an opportunity to conduct and present research with a
diverse group of peers. Students will be recruited from a variety of
institutions, including those with similar demographics to the host
institutions. A heavy emphasis will be placed on recruiting students from
underrepresented minorities, women, and individuals whose home institution have
limited research opportunities in STEM (including community colleges and
advanced high schools). At the conclusion of the summer program, each
participant will have produced an oral presentation, a poster, and a manuscript.
Participants will be encouraged to present their research at regional and
national conferences, and to submit their manuscripts for publication in
appropriate peer-reviewed journals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Each year,
participants in this REU program will conduct research at the interface of
mathematics and biology under the guidance of a group of dedicated faculty
mentors. Research topics are drawn from a variety of fields, including
pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics, epidemiological and ecological modeling, and
biostatistics. A variety of modeling techniques will be employed, including
differential equations modeling, agent-based modeling, stochastic equations, and
regression analysis. Through participation in the REU program, participants will
improve their oral and written communication skills, gain exposure to higher
level proof-based mathematical topics, learn how to use software that is
commonly used in mathematical research (such as MATLAB, LaTeX, and R), and
participate in a variety of workshops aimed at career preparation and
professional development. Through participation in the REU, students will have
regular meetings with a faculty research mentor and a graduate assistant mentor.
Students will give a weekly "work in progress" presentation, and twice a week,
they will attend a mathematical proof course. Participation in the REU program
will help students to be better prepared for graduate school or a career in the
mathematical sciences. Results from the research conducted as a part of the
program, and experiences from the planning and execution of the program will be
disseminated through conference presentations and peer-reviewed
publications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.