* 1851363
* Workshop on Electronics, Photonics and Magnetics (EPM) - Network for Computational Nanotechnology (NCN), To Be Held October 11-12, 2018, Alexandria,VA
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2019
* Enrico Bellotti, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 09/30/2019
* USD 46,179.00

The Workshop on Electronics, Photonics and Magnetics (EPM) - Network for
Computational Nanotechnology (NCN) will be held on October 11-12 at the Holiday
Inn, Alexandria, VA. It will allow to discuss issues related to development of
computational tools to support the field of electronics, photonics and
magnetics. The Workshop will host leading researchers in the field that will
discuss the current state of the art, outline the pathways that allow efficient
computation of nano/quantum devices, and propose, prioritize realistic research
and development approaches that can lead to Computational Nanotechnology team
efforts on Electronics, Photonics and Magnetics. There will be opportunities for
information exchange and discussions on the development of computational tools
to support the field as well as representing the community of users of these
tools. Of major importance will be to determine possible ways a Node on
Electronics, Photonics and Magnetics will allow efficient development of new
tools and content dissemination worldwide via NSF's NCN Cyber Platform.
Computation and simulation tools of this type will then be possible to be
employed for turning nanoscale science and engineering into applications and
impact future circuit and systems responding to grand challenges. There will be
several plenary talks the will outline the state of the art in each area.
Moreover, the plenary session will set the stage for the presentations and
discussions in the breakout sessions that will be centered on the above
mentioned four main themes. Each breakout session will feature several
additional speakers that will focus on the details of specific topics related to
the four different themes. A white paper will be prepared that outlines the
current state of research, the opportunities and challenges, and the priority
research and development directions. The Workshop is expected to play a key role
in identifying new directions for research on novel electronic, photonic and
magnetic devices for future systems. The white paper to be prepared will be made
available to all interested parties and will allow better understanding of the
modeling and computation field and its applications to a broader
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.