* 1851347
* Collaborative Research: Mesoscale variability in nitrogen sources and food-web dynamics supporting larval southern bluefin tuna in the eastern Indian Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Sven Kranz, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 08/31/2024
* USD 617,694.00

The small area between NW Australia and Indonesia in the eastern Indian Ocean
(IO) is the only known spawning ground of Southern Bluefin Tuna (SBT), a
critically endangered top marine predator. Adult SBT migrate thousands of miles
each year from high latitude feeding areas to lay their eggs in these tropical
waters, where food concentrations on average are below levels that can support
optimal feeding and growth of their larvae. Many critical aspects of this
habitat are poorly known, such as the main source of nitrogen nutrient that
sustains system productivity, how the planktonic food web operates to produce
the unusual types of zooplankton prey that tuna larvae prefer, and how
environmental differences in habitat quality associated with ocean fronts and
eddies might be utilized by adult spawning tuna to give their larvae a greater
chance for rapid growth and survival success. This project investigates these
questions on a 38-day expedition in early 2021, during the peak time of SBT
spawning. This project is a US contribution to the 2nd International Indian
Ocean Expedition (IIOE-2) that advances understanding of biogeochemical and
ecological dynamics in the poorly studied eastern IO. This is the first detailed
study of nitrogen and carbon cycling in the region linking Pacific and IO
waters. The shared dietary preferences of SBT larvae with those of other large
tuna and billfish species may also make the insights gained broadly applicable
to understanding larval recruitment issues for top consumers in other marine
ecosystems. New information from the study will enhance international management
efforts for SBT. The shared larval dietary preferences of large tuna and
billfish species may also extend the insights gained broadly to many other
marine top consumers, including Atlantic bluefin tuna that spawn in US waters of
the Gulf of Mexico. The end-to-end study approach, highlights connections among
physical environmental variability, biogeochemistry, and plankton food webs
leading to charismatic and economically valuable fish production, is the theme
for developing educational tools and modules through the ?scientists-in-the-
schools? program of the Center for Ocean-Atmospheric Prediction Studies at
Florida State University, through a program for enhancing STEM learning pathways
for underrepresented students in Hawaii, and through public outreach products
for display at the Birch Aquarium in San Diego. The study also aims to support
an immersive field experience to introduce talented high school students to
marine research, with the goal of developing a sustainable marine-related
educational program for underrepresented students in rural northwestern
Florida.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Southern Bluefin Tuna (SBT) migrate long distances
from high-latitude feeding grounds to spawn exclusively in a small oligotrophic
area of the tropical eastern Indian Ocean (IO) that is rich in mesoscale
structures, driven by complex currents and seasonally reversing monsoonal winds.
To survive, SBT larvae must feed and grow rapidly under environmental conditions
that challenge conventional understanding of food-web structure and functional
relationships in poor open-ocean systems. The preferred prey of SBT larvae,
cladocerans and Corycaeidae copepods, are poorly studied and have widely
different implications for trophic transfer efficiencies to larvae. Differences
in nitrogen sources - N fixation vs deep nitrate of Pacific origin - to sustain
new production in the region also has implications for conditions that may
select for prey types (notably cladocerans) that enhance transfer efficiency and
growth rates of SBT larvae. The relative importance of these N sources for the
IO ecosystem may affect SBT resiliency to projected increased ocean
stratification. This research expedition investigates how mesoscale variability
in new production, food-web structure and trophic fluxes affects feeding and
growth conditions for SBT larvae. Sampling across mesoscale features tests
hypothesized relationships linking variability in SBT larval feeding and prey
preferences (gut contents), growth rates (otolith analyses) and trophic
positions (TP) to the environmental conditions of waters selected by adult
spawners. Trophic Positions of larvae and their prey are determined using
Compound-Specific Isotope Analyses of Amino Acids (CSIA-AA). Lagrangian
experiments investigate underlying process rates and relationships through
measurements of water-column 14C productivity, N2 fixation, 15NO3- uptake and
nitrification; community biomass and composition (flow cytometry, pigments,
microscopy, in situ imaging, genetic analyses); and trophic fluxes through
micro- and mesozooplankton grazing, remineralization and export. Biogeochemical
and food web elements of the study are linked by CSIA-AA (N source, TP),
15N-constrained budgets and modeling. The project elements comprise an end-to-
end coupled biogeochemistry-trophic study as has not been done previously for
any pelagic ecosystem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.