* 1851489
* Eco-Evolutionary Response to the Scale of Temporal Environmental Fluctuation
* GEO,OCE
* 05/15/2019,04/30/2023
* John Wootton, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 04/30/2023
* USD 532,558.00

Cyclical variations in environmental conditions, like tides or seasons, comprise
a common theme in nature. Living organisms must cope with repetitive arrivals of
unfavorable conditions for survival. Therefore species around the world are
under evolutionary pressure to schedule their "life cycles" or "life histories"
to fit the environmental cycle regimes within which they reside. Recent climate
change has shifted historical cyclical patterns in many ecosystems, such as
season length, resulting in mismatches between life histories and the ideal
environmental conditions of plants and animals, to the detriment of population
persistence and ecological stability. Adaptive evolution offers a mechanism that
may buffer these mismatches. Accumulating evidence of shifts in life history
schedules from around the world shows us that much remains to be done to
understand how life histories are "fit" to environmental cycles, and to changes
in cycles, despite their everyday familiarity. Testing theoretical ideas with
data and experiments is essential. Marine coastal habitats are subject to
conspicuous cycles occurring at multiple time scales, such as diel, tidal,
lunar, seasonal, and multi-annual fluctuations. Populations of the intertidal
crustacean Tigriopus californicus occupy rocky shore across the entire eastern
Pacific coastline in upper tidepools that are periodically wave-swept at high
tide at varying intervals. This project develops mathematical models to uncover
fundamental rules of life history variation and adaptation in regularly varying
environments, and tests hypotheses across Tigriopus californicus populations
experiencing varying tidal disturbances using efficient and highly replicated
field collections and manipulative experiments in the lab. Beyond producing
broadly applicable theory and abundant open-access data, the investigators
engage with local Makah Tribe students near field sites for sampling and natural
history studies to enhance STEM education in an underserved rural community.
Furthermore, the project expands the nation?s scientific capacity by training
undergraduate and graduate students in experimental design, theoretical
modelling in population ecology and life history evolution, and data
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;How natural populations persist in variable
environments has been a long-standing question in ecology and evolution. In
particular, cyclical variability is common in nature, and many species show
predictable life history strategies that follow cycles in nature (e.g.
phenology). However, a general conceptual framework is lacking for how
adaptation to cycles occurs and how the scaling of life histories to
fluctuations buffers changes in the environment. Marine environments fluctuate
predictably across a range of temporal scales, such as tidal and seasonal, and
provide unique opportunities to study population persistence and evolution in
cyclical environments. A general mathematical framework is developed that
explores life history optimization in the context of cyclically varying
environments. The marine intertidal copepod Tigriopus californcus is ideal for
testing model predictions and motivating extensions. Many isolated populations
can be sampled entirely in the field, and the short timescale of tide cycles,
short generation times, and ease of frequent sampling will provide a dense
dataset of eco-evolutionary patterns in response to natural disturbance regimes.
Pilot studies have established experimental populations in the laboratory, and
have proven that Tigriopus californcus is amenable to careful manipulations of
simulated disturbance frequency (both cyclical and stochastic) that seamlessly
translate to the model framework. The combination of modelling, field
parameterization, and experimental investigation of life histories in cyclical
and stochastic environments is a novel and holistic approach to the question of
life history diversity within an environment. Finally, a general understanding
of evolutionary mechanisms in cyclical environments can improve predictions of
the fate of populations when natural cycles are perturbed, which is expected
across many ecosystems due to climate change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.