* 1851403
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Restoration Science and Coastal Ecologies in Southern Louisiana
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2019,10/31/2019
* Hannah Burnett, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 10/31/2019
* USD 18,410.00

Many cities and industrial hubs in the United States are seeking to restore
their relationship with coastlines that are rapidly changing as wetlands erode,
sea levels rise, and storms increase in intensity. This project asks what
coastal citizens value about the American shore in the near future, and how
their investments intersect with the long-term goals of ecological restoration
science. On the one hand, how do the promises of restoration science affect the
way people whose livelihoods depend upon the coast approach their own
environmental management practices in the present? On the other hand, what kinds
of local histories and epistemological orientations inform the far-future goals
of ecological restoration? Situated in southern Louisiana, where state-funded,
large-scale infrastructural projects aim to recover lost wetlands and rejuvenate
the state's coastal communities, this research will investigate the concept of
ecological restoration in Louisiana, asking how the possibility of restoring the
Louisiana coast is affecting local expectations of the future environment.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hannah Burnett, under the supervision of Dr. Joseph Masco
of the University of Chicago, will explore whether the unprecedented rates of
wetland erosion along the Louisiana coast have shaped expectations and behaviors
along different temporal scales. In the wake of several largescale disasters
such as Hurricane Katrina in 2005 and the 2010 BP oil spill, Louisiana has
proposed to install several river diversions that will re-route sections of the
lower Mississippi River, releasing sediment-rich water across eroding wetlands
in order to build new land. These infrastructural projects aim to rebuild
Louisiana's rapidly eroding coast by mimicking the natural flood events that
slowly accumulate into the state's wetlands. The project described here will
take place in the coastal communities in southeastern Louisiana that will be
most directly affected by these river diversions. By interviewing local
fisherpeople and accompanying them in their daily practices, the researchers
propose to shed light on the different cycles that fisherpeople rely upon,
examining the moments when these cycles are affected by the longer-term goals of
wetland restoration. In addition, the researchers will conduct interviews with
restoration scientists, along with archival research, to better understand the
history of ecological restoration in Louisiana, the metrics that determine
progress towards restoration, and the timescales at which scientists project
restoration will be achieved. The project will contribute to debates in
anthropology, STS, and disaster science more broadly about environmental change,
temporality, human behavior, and coastal ecologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.