* 1851993
* Belmont Forum Collaborative Research: Balancing biodiversity conservation with development in Amazon wetlands
* GEO,RISE
* 03/15/2019,06/30/2023
* Laura Hess, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 06/30/2023
* USD 89,997.00

Innovative research on the complex interaction of socio-economic and global
environmental trends of biodiversity and ecosystem services is needed to help
develop more informative scenarios for addressing environmental and human
development challenges. To overcome these challenges coupled natural-human
systems approaches and analyses are needed. These provide improved scenarios of
biodiversity and ecosystem services that couple the outputs of direct and
indirect drivers such as land use, invasive species, overexploitation,
biodiversity, environmental change, and pollution. The resulting models provide
a methodological state-of-the art that results in more accurate quantitative
assessments, better land use, and more effective ecosystem services. This
international collaborative research project uses this methodology to develop
scenarios of biodiversity and ecosystem services for selected floodplains of
muddy (i.e., whitewater) rivers in the central Amazon region and their adjacent
uplands. Amazon floodplains were selected because they are typical of tropical
river floodplains that support high levels of biodiversity and provide
fundamental services, such as water purification, fish habitat, and flood
mitigation. Like other tropical river systems, the Amazon sustains the
livelihoods of many indigenous and poverty-stricken human populations and its
flood plains are being increasingly threatened by development such as dams,
agriculture, ranching, the expansion of road and rail networks, and climate
change. For example, in the lower Amazon over half of the floodplain forest
cover has been lost since the late 1970s. This project studies the floodplains
of two contrasting major whitewater rivers: The Amazon River (Brazil and
Colombia) and its tributary the Jurua River (Brazil). The research begins with
working with stakeholders in a collaborative planning process that reflects
local concerns and priorities and builds off local knowledge of the area. Work
involves mapping targeted floodplains and adjacent upland habitats using remote
sensing and field data. Goals are to predict changes in flooding patterns under
climate change scenarios and model the interactions among biodiversity, habitat
type, hydrology, and management regimes, with results being disseminated to
stakeholders and the broader scientific community. Broader impacts of the work
include international collaboration with scientists in Brazil, Columbia, France,
Norway, Germany and the United Kingdom and improved understanding of how human
activities along the floodplains of tropical rivers impact fisheries, food
security, water quality, and biodiversity. Other broader impacts include
development of a template for habitat and biodiversity assessment and for
participatory planning that can be applied and adapted to similar types of river
floodplains across tropical landscapes. The project also supports an
investigator whose gender is underrepresented in the
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports US researchers participating
in a project competitively selected by a coalition of 26 funding agencies from
23 countries through the Belmont Forum call for proposals on "Scenarios of
Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services". The call was a multilateral initiative
designed to support research projects that contribute to the development of
scenarios, models, and decision-support tools for understanding and solving
critical issues facing our planet. The goal of the competition was to improve
and apply participatory scenario methods to enhance research relevance and its
acceptance and to address gaps in methods for modelling impact drivers and
policy interventions. It was also to develop and communicate levels of
uncertainty associated with the models to improve data accessibility and fill
gaps in knowledge. Funds support US participants in a large, seven-country,
international consortium of scientists studying aquatic-terrestrial interfaces
in the Amazon Basin. These areas support high levels of biodiversity and also
supply fundamental services to human populations such as water purification,
fish habitat, and flood mitigation as well as sustain the livelihoods and food
security of subsistence-level human populations. Over the past several decades,
development, cultivation, ranching, and commercial fisheries have disrupted
traditional patterns of Amazon river floodplain resource use. The goals of this
research are to use the floodplains of two major and contrasting whitewater
rivers: the mainstream Amazon river (Brazil and Colombia) and its tributary the
Jurua (Brazil) to contrast the impacts of human development on their physical
character and biodiversity. The project engages key stakeholders, including
local indigenous peoples, in a research co-design effort. Work will involve
mapping floodplain and adjacent upland habitats using remote sensing and field
data; predicting changes in flooding patterns under climate change scenarios;
and modeling the interactions among biodiversity, habitat type, hydrology, and
management regimes. The project will test new methods in remote sensing using
satellite-based mapping of phytoplankton diversity and will estimate forest
biomass using newly available spaceborne LIDAR data. It will evaluate freshwater
ecology using environmental DNA metabar-coding and model fish movement based on
hydrologic connectivity and foraging patterns. Participatory prospective
analysis will enable collective definition of scenarios with the support of
species distribution models to analyze possible impacts on biodiversity. Results
of this work, combined with local knowledge and stakeholder feedback, will allow
a deep analysis of public policy efficiency in relation to wetland conservation
and sustainable development goal targets. The work will also result in the
development of a template for habitat and biodiversity assessment and for
participatory modeling of multi-scale scenarios that can be applied and adapted
to analogous floodplain systems in South America, Africa, and Southeast
Asia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.