* 1851625
* Extracting the Backbone of Bipartite Projections
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2019,04/30/2021
* Zachary Neal, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 04/30/2021
* USD 119,904.00

This project will investigate a new way to collect network data that would make
answering social scientific questions involving social networks faster and more
cost-effective. Networks are widely recognized across multiple disciplines as
critically important for understanding how information spreads (communications),
how illnesses spread (public health), how legislation is passed (political
science), how norms and customs form (sociology), how companies and governments
coordinate economic activities (economics & geography), how people form and
maintain relationships (developmental psychology), and how threats to national
security can be disrupted (intelligence). Collecting data on these types of
networks is often costly and impractical, which has limited progress in
answering these questions. Rather than attempt to measure directly the
interactions between people (or companies, or cells, etc.), the new methods
developed in this project will measure interactions indirectly by looking at
patterns of similar behavior. For example, it would be impractical to ask
everyone in a large city who they talk with, but we may be able to infer that
two people talk with one another if they routinely attend the same events. This
project will compare several different methods for making these inferences to
determine which method (if any) is the most accurate. Identifying accurate
methods for indirectly measuring networks is important because it will reduce
the time and economic cost of answering research questions, such as those noted
above, that have scientific and societal benefits.

The inferential methods investigated in this project are known as methods of
backbone extraction. Given a bipartite projection network in which two agents
(e.g., people) share some artifacts in common (e.g., they attend the same
events), these methods determine whether they share enough artifacts in common
to warrant the inference that they are linked (e.g., they interact with each
other). Methods for making such inferences differ primarily by whether they
control for nothing (e.g., an unconditional threshold), for the number of
artifacts each agent has (e.g., a hypergeometric threshold), or for both the
number of artifacts each agent has and the number of agents each artifact has
(e.g., the fixed and stochastic degree sequence models). After implementation of
several existing methods in a publicly available package for the R software and
evaluation of their computational complexity, their ability to accurately
recover known (i.e., ground truth) networks with varying structural properties
from synthetic bipartite data that contain varying amounts of noise will be
compared. In addition, the performance of these methods using two publicly
available benchmark empirical bipartite datasets that have known ground truths
will be tested.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.