* 1851702
* Autonomy and Behavioral Risk Preferences
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Gretchen Chapman, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 08/31/2022
* USD 284,187.00

Many situations require confronting risky situations: for example, personal
choices about retirement, investment in risky portfolios, business decisions
about selling new products with uncertain customer demand, or foreign policy
strategies with unclear international consequences. This project tests the idea
that decision makers are more accepting of risk when they perceive that they
have control over the level of risk they experience. The role of autonomy may
explain why decision makers choose a small likelihood of a large outcome over a
small certain alternative even though the small certain outcome is more
motivating than the uncertain amount as a reward for performing an effortful
task. The research findings have implications for understanding when decision
makers are most willing to take on risk and for how best to incentivize
performance tasks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Decisions under risk are ubiquitous in
everyday life. In some risky situations decision makers have autonomy over the
risk level they experience while in others decision makers respond to an
assigned risk present in the environment. This research project tests the
hypothesis that autonomy increases risk tolerance such that decision makers will
exhibit more risk-seeking preferences when they can choose an option than when
they respond to an assigned risk. One set of studies tests the prediction that
autonomy, or even just the perception of control, increases risk tolerance. That
is, decision makers are predicted to have a stronger preference for risky
alternatives if they perceive that they have control over the risk level they
experience, even when the objective risk level is held constant between decision
makers who do and do not have autonomy. A second set of studies applies the
effects of autonomy to why decision makers tend to choose low probability
lotteries over matched certain outcomes whereas similar lotteries do not serve
as effective incentives for effort tasks relative to certain incentives. The
researchers compare risk preferences revealed in choice tasks to those revealed
in effort tasks with real incentives, they seek to isolate the task features
responsible for the difference in risk preference, and they test whether
differences in perceived autonomy can explain why decision makers will choose
risky options but not work for them. Ten laboratory experiments and two field
studies test the predictions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.