* 1851433
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Linguistic and Cultural Dimensions of First-Generation Language Shift
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2019,12/31/2021
* Anna Bax, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 12/31/2021
* USD 15,096.00

The phenomenon of language shift, in which a community ceases to speak their
heritage language in favor of another (typically more socially and economically
prestigious) language, has long been of interest to linguists and
anthropologists. For immigrants to the United States and other countries, it is
an often-repeated "rule" that language shift typically occurs by the third
generation (i.e., the grandchildren of the original immigrants). This project,
which trains a student in rigorous, empirically-grounded methods of data
collection and analysis in cultural and linguistic anthropology, asks what
factors might contribute to influence language shift among an earlier
generational cohort. Additionally, the researcher explores whether there are
grammatical, phonological or other patterns that can be identified in first-
generation language shift, and how speakers navigate overlapping identities in
the new cultural context. In addition to providing funding for the training of a
graduate student in linguistics and anthropology, the project would improve
scientific understanding by broadly disseminating its findings to improve public
understanding of indigeneity, language shift, and multilingualism. The project
also broadens the participation of groups historically underrepresented in
science, and contributes to the education of underrepresented groups.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under the supervision of Dr. Mary Bucholtz at the
University of California, Santa Barbara, Anna Bax will work with a selected
cohort of Mixtec women who grew up in Ventura County, California to understand
how they variably use Spanish, English, and Mixtec for identity construction
purposes. In Ventura County, the majority of the indigenous immigrant community
is of Mixtec heritage and speak Mixtec languages, which are native to southern
Mexico and differ radically from Spanish. This linguistic and anthropological
project explores the question of how young women in this diasporic community,
who may face gendered expectations to maintain their heritage language and
culture, navigate the accelerated process of first-generation language shift. It
seeks to address the following research questions: (1) How is Mixtec identity
linguistically constructed, even as many community members are losing the
ability to speak Mixtec entirely? How can Spanish and English linguistic
resources come to symbolize Mixtec identity in the wake of this loss? (2) What
strategies do individual participants use to navigate community language shift,
and how do they balance their overlapping identities as indigenous Mexicans and
as new members of American society? The researcher will take a case-study
approach, using linguistic-anthropological and sociophonetic methods to explore
how these young women maintain strong links to their indigenous identity, even
as some of them have lost the ability to speak their heritage language.
Participant-observation and ethnographic interviews will be conducted with this
focal set of youth, as well as with key members of their social networks. In
order to collect rich, detailed data about the participants' varying linguistic
repertoires, they will also audio-record their own speech practices in
naturalistic interaction in different social settings, so as to document shifts
in their use of the focal linguistic variables and their performances of
indigenous identity. The researcher will conduct a quantitative sociophonetic
analysis of one Spanish and one English linguistic variable, with a focus on the
connections of these variables to indigenous identity and how the use of the
variables differs across social contexts. The participants' speech will also be
compared to a corpus of local Chicanas' speech to understand the social
construction of linguistic difference and/or similarity. Qualitative discourse-
analytic methods will be used to understand the social meanings attached to
these variables, as well as the meaning of participants' Mixtec code-switching
practices. The results of this research will benefit local community centers who
are invested in the maintenance of indigenous languages, and will be used to
inform local public and educational policymaking about linguistic diversity. In
addition, the project directly benefits the young indigenous participants, most
of whom are current college students, by centrally involving them in STEM
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.