* 1851842
* REU Site: MathILy Early Scholarly Training (MathILy-EST)
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2023
* Sarah-Marie Belcastro, Mathematical Staircase, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Tiziana Giorgi
* 03/31/2023
* USD 173,000.00

This award will provide three years of support for the REU Site program managed
by Mathematical Staircase, Inc. to increase the depth of the mathematical
workforce by offering a seven- to eight-week summer research program for
students early in their mathematical careers. Students belonging to groups
underrepresented in mathematics are especially encouraged to apply. This program
will serve 6 early undergraduates each year and be run on the same campus as
MathILy (serious Mathematics Infused with Levity), a 5-week very selective
program of inquiry-based educational experiences for highly talented high-school
students. MathILy-EST (MathILy Early Scholarly Training, pronounced "mathily-
est") focuses on students who do not have other research opportunities, and will
(a) train students in the mathematical thinking needed to conduct research, (b)
increase participant persistence in the educational pipeline, (c) provide
mentoring for students and early faculty research supervisors, and (d) provide
cross-pollination with MathILy by proximity and by holding regular joint
activities. This REU Site program will give MathILy-EST participants early
experience in active acquisition and creation of mathematical knowledge, which
will in turn enable them to succeed in traditional mathematics classes. Training
in software use, CV construction, presentation skills, and writing will give
participants the informal knowledge and career skills needed to be competitive
in the STEM workforce. Cross-fertilization between MathILy-EST participants and
MathILy students and instructors will be significant: High-school participants
in MathILy will see REU participants as mathematical role models and short-term
future selves. They will see the processes of research happening around them and
gain perspective on the mathematical enterprise. MathILy students and MathILy-
EST participants alike will expand their networks beyond usual class cohorts to
students of different ages. The creation of peer networks along with mentoring
of participants will increase their persistence in acquiring further
mathematical education and research experience. The existence of the MathILy-EST
REU will prompt faculty discussion with first-year college students of summer
opportunities that use their technical expertise, and thereby catalyze more
fruitful advising for first-year college students within their home
departments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MathILy-EST participants will produce,
present, and publish original research. The program targets exceptional first-
year college students, with second-year and entering college students also
considered for participation. The mathematical focus of MathILy-EST will change
each year. The projects will be drawn from the following topics according to
mentor availability: combinatorics of paperfolding, word length in the integers
(additive number theory), free boundary problems (discrete PDEs), continuous-
time game theory, and combinatorial representation theory. MathILy-EST REU
students will present their research progress to each other on a regular basis,
with feedback provided on their research methods and presentation skills.
Students will be asked to record work in writing (in LaTeX) weekly, to provide
practice in writing formally and fodder for paper drafts once research has
progressed to the point of publication. At the end of the MathILy-EST REU
program, the director will make plans with students, including sub-goals and
timelines, for dissemination of their research results. This will include
discussing potential local (MAA) and national (JMM) conference presentations and
paper submissions. More details are available at
http://www.mathily.org/mathilyest/index.html&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.