* 1851383
* Collaborative Research: dispersal depth and the transport of deep-sea, methane-seep larvae around a biogeographic barrier
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2019,12/31/2023
* Craig Young, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 12/31/2023
* USD 755,482.00

Ever since hydrothermal vents and methane seeps were first discovered in the
deep ocean more than 40 years ago, scientists have wondered how these isolated
communities, fully dependent on underwater "islands" of toxic chemicals, are
first colonized by organisms, and how the populations of these specialized
animals are exchanged and maintained. These fundamental processes depend on the
transport of babies (larvae) by the ocean currents, yet because the larvae are
microscopic and diluted in the vastness of the ocean, it is very difficult to
determine where and how they drift. This project uses an autonomous underwater
vehicle to collect larvae from precise regions of the water column. Larval traps
on the bottom and chemical analyses of larval shells will also be used to
determine the depths where larvae swim. These findings will provide realistic
estimates for mathematical models that show how biology interacts with ocean
currents to predict which methane seeps will be colonized by larvae originating
at different depths. A detailed knowledge of larval dispersal is needed for
conservation and management of the deep sea. Without such information, we cannot
know the best placement of marine protected areas, nor can we facilitate the
reestablishment of communities impacted by deep-sea mining, drilling, or other
human activities. This project will provide hands-on at-sea training for college
students to learn the rapidly vanishing skills needed for studies of larvae and
embryos in their natural habitats. Learning opportunities will also be available
to individuals of all ages through new, interactive exhibits on deep-sea biology
and larval ecology produced for small museums and aquaria on the coasts of
Oregon, Washington and North Carolina. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Reliable estimates
of connectivity among metapopulations are increasingly important in marine
conservation biology, ecology and phylogeography, yet biological parameters for
biophysical models in the deep sea remain largely unavailable. The movements of
deep-sea vent and seep larvae among islands of habitat suitable for
chemosynthesis have been inferred from current patterns using numerical
modeling, but virtually all such models have used untested assumptions about
biological parameters that should have large impacts on the predictions. This
project seeks to fill in the missing biological parameters while developing
better models for predicting the dispersal patterns of methane seep animals
living in the Gulf of Mexico and on the Western Atlantic Margin. Despite the
existence of similar seeps at similar depths on two sides of the Florida
peninsula, the Western Atlantic seeps support only a subset of the species found
in the Gulf of Mexico. It is hypothesized that the ability of larvae to disperse
through the relatively shallow waters of the Florida Straits depends on an
interaction between the adult spawning depth and the dispersal depth of the
larvae. Dispersal depth, in turn, will be influenced by larval flotation rates,
swimming behaviors, feeding requirements, and ontogenetic migration patterns
during the planktonic period. The recently developed SyPRID sampler deployed on
AUV Sentry will be used to collect larvae from precise depth strata in the water
column, including layers very near the ocean floor. Larval traps deployed on the
bottom at three depths in each region will be used in conjunction with the
plankton collections to determine what proportion of larvae are demersal.
Comparisons of stable oxygen isotopes between larval and juvenile mollusk shells
will provide information on the temperatures (and therefore depths) that larvae
develop, and geochemical analyses of larval and juvenile shells will determine
whether larval cohorts mix among depth strata. Ocean circulation and particle
transport modeling incorporating realistic biological parameters will be used to
predict the movements of larvae around the Florida Peninsula for various
spawning depths and seasons.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.