* 1851727
* REU Site:   Botany and Conservation Biology Research at the Missouri Botanical Garden
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Wendy Applequist, Missouri Botanical Garden
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/29/2024
* USD 307,608.00

This REU Site award to the Missouri Botanical Garden, located in St. Louis, MO,
will support the training of 10 students for 10 weeks during the summers of
2019- 2021. The REU research program emphasizes fields that contribute directly
or indirectly to conservation, such as taxonomy, restoration ecology,
ethnobotany, and population genetics. Each student will work with a mentor to
develop a project that can be completed in 10 weeks. At the end of the program,
students will prepare posters and 15-minute public presentations. Educational
sessions, lectures, and field trips will introduce many aspects of botany and
provide guidance on skills needed to succeed in a scientific career, including
scientific ethics and responsible conduct of research. Student experiences will
be assessed by a post-program survey, and student career track will be monitored
for at least five years after the program. Sophomores, juniors, and non-
graduating seniors may apply online. Candidates will be selected by a committee
including the PI, co-PI, and mentors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is anticipated
that a total of 30 students, primarily from schools with limited research
opportunities, will be trained in the program. Students will be exposed to a
wide variety of botanical and conservation research activities, learn to conduct
independent research and publicly present results, and receive education and
advice on graduate school and scientific employment. Emphasis on recruitment of
students from underrepresented groups and from schools with limited research
opportunities will enhance future diversity in botanical science. Students will
learn how research is conducted, and many will present the results of their work
at scientific conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A common web-based assessment
tool used by all REU Site programs funded by the Division of Biological
Infrastructure will be used to determine the effectiveness of the training
program. Students will be tracked after the program in order to determine their
career paths. Students will be asked to respond to an automatic email sent via
the NSF reporting system. More information about the program is available by
visiting http://www.mobot.org/reu, or by contacting the PI (Dr. Wendy Applequist
at wendy.applequist@mobot.org) or the co-PI (Dr. Monica Carlsen at
monica.carlsen@mobot.org).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.