* 1851304
* Social Norms, Social Boundaries and Inequality
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2022
* Andrea Voyer, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 01/31/2022
* USD 216,722.00

Social norms, those informal understandings that guide our behavior in everyday
life, are difficult to study scientifically because they are both challenging to
define and to measure. Yet they regulate a large body of social behavior and
also help to pattern social inequality. This project will advance our scientific
understanding of inequality by developing a new approach that identifies social
norms in written texts describing correct behaviors. The project will
inductively derive the relationships between behaviors prescribed and proscribed
in the texts and more measurable dimensions of inequality, such as social class.
The project will also uncover the connections between those written norms and
the social boundaries and exclusions that create inequality. The project will
inform understanding regarding the pervasiveness of social inequality that has
previously been resistant to scientific study and will provide evidence
regarding how social norms change over time.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project
will study social norms through analysis of an original digital corpus
consisting of texts describing correct behaviors. The corpus includes more than
7 million words and 90,000 pages of text produced during the last 95 years. The
research uses multiple methods including corpus linguistics analytic techniques
of topic modeling, word embedding, word network mapping, named entity
recognition, and sentiment analysis. These strategies will identify social
norms, symbolic boundaries, techniques for the enforcement of norm compliance,
and narratives of justification attaching moral values to social norms. Machine
learning will be guided by and supplement traditional by-hand content analysis
of texts from the same corpus. The project will also use archival research to
place the research findings in their social and historical contexts. Through
these methods, the research will produce a new approach to studying social norms
and inequality. The results will fuel discussion of the cultural foundations of
social inequality as well as shed light on how social norms generally both
operate and evolve historically.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.