* 1851886
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in DRMS: Protocol Driven Resilience: Modifiable Systems Architecture as a Resilient Strategy for Critical Infrastructure
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2019,09/30/2020
* Royce Francis, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 09/30/2020
* USD 7,634.00

The ability of infrastructure to sustain performance despite age, natural
disasters, and human threats is critical to societal functioning. As a result,
infrastructure resilience has received renewed emphasis, especially on the
development of the means to cope with unforeseen or unanticipated problems or
circumstances. This research investigates the ways commercially navigable inland
waterway systems temporarily reconfigure after a disruptive incident.
Specifically, how does the system balance prioritization of recovery objectives
and development and implementation of appropriate solutions? This balancing is a
function of the system?s ability to self re-organize with respect to the
relationships among asset owners, operators, and stakeholders. The effectiveness
of this reorganization is largely dependent upon the cultural and physical
characteristics present in the system. Therefore, this research provides
insights that will enhance the response processes involved, and potentially lead
to quicker and more effective recovery efforts. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;To
investigate and elucidate these patterns of self reorganization, the graduate
student completes case studies of the ports of Baltimore, New Orleans, and
Rotterdam. He collects three types of data: semi-structured interviews of
private and public stakeholders, documents such as published procedures or laws,
and publicly available data such as corporate/agency communications and media
outlets. All qualitative data are coded and analyzed with the intent of
developing visual models of collaborate process with accompanying descriptions.
The coding process extracts generalizable knowledge from rich descriptions that
may not be captured in more formal system documentation. The semi-structured
interviews are designed to extract tacit knowledge from stakeholders who have
experience with disruption response and who engage in inter-organizational
collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.