* 1851291
* Terahertz Absorption Spectroscopy for Quantitative Detection of Combustion Intermediates and Pollutant Emissions
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2021
* Ingrid Wilke, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* John Daily
* 12/31/2021
* USD 396,743.00

Advanced combustion systems, including gas turbines, internal combustion
engines, and furnaces, often require continuous monitoring of exhaust gas
composition for control and optimization, to achieve high efficiency and low
emissions. In this project, a sensor will be developed for the detection of
emissions and intermediate species important in combustion processes. The sensor
is based on the absorption of terahertz (THz) wave radiation by the gaseous
combustion molecules, known as THz wave absorption spectroscopy. A sensor will
be engineered using silicon microelectronics, the THz spectroscopy of target
compounds will be discovered and characterized. The sensor will be demonstrated
in a combustion environment. The outcome of this project will impact a broad
range of sectors where gas sensing is important, e.g., energy, transportation,
manufacturing, oil and gas, and air quality control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research team will develop the scientific foundation and technology necessary
for quantitative speciation measurements in combustion environments via THz wave
absorption. For many species of interest in combustion, the resonant frequencies
associated with molecular rotations are in the THz frequency band, and the
absorption strength of these transition is often larger than those found in
either the microwave or infrared regions. Additionally, THz wave absorption is
effectively immune to scattering from particles and aerosols that hinder
infrared absorption in combustion environments. The project addresses three
research tasks. First, the THz wave spectroscopy of volatile organic compounds
and three nitrogen-containing species will be experimentally investigated and
characterized in the 180-360 GHz frequency range. Second, a THz radiation source
for spectroscopy, consisting of single microchip fabricated using standard
silicon technology, will be designed, fabricated, and tested in the same
frequency range. Finally, the sensor will be demonstrated by measuring emissions
in a burner exhaust stack. The science and technology developed as part of this
project has a strong potential for commercialization due to the industrial need
for gas sensing in combustion and the low cost of electronic THz technologies
relative to competing infrared-based sensor
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.