* 1851149
* Linking ventilation changes in the thermocline with surface outcrop variations
* GEO,OCE
* 04/15/2019,03/31/2023
* Sabine Mecking, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 03/31/2023
* USD 386,936.00

Understanding the response of the ocean to global warming, including changes in
the renewal of ocean waters from the surface (ventilation), is important for
future climate predictions. Oxygen distributions in the ocean thermocline are an
effective way to infer changes in ventilation because physical processes
(ventilation and circulation) that supply oxygen are primarily responsible for
changes in interior oxygen concentrations. Reduced ventilation, as expected
under global warming conditions, is signified by a reduction in oxygen
inventories. However, natural variability such as decadal oscillations can
obscure climatic trends; long-term data records are needed to fully distinguish
between trends and cycles. This study will use available data, including Argo
profiling floats, ship-based surveys, and satellite-derived surface densities,
collected in the North Pacific over the past decades. This study is unique in
that it examines physical mechanisms of ocean interior oxygen variability using
a data-only approach, overcoming biases and misrepresentations possible with
ocean models and reanalysis products. The team combines the expertise of two
researchers in satellite oceanography and ocean hydrography respectively.
Undergraduate summer interns will be incorporated into the project and trained
in these fields with the goal of fostering geoscience education. Both PIs are
also active in graduate student advising and outreach activities in public
schools and at the Pacific Science Center. Results from this research will be
included into such outreach, raising public awareness about the changing ocean
environment. Monitoring ocean ventilation is important because a reduction in
ventilation reduces the ocean ability to take up anthropogenic CO2 with
important feedbacks to the global climate system. Declining North Pacific O2
concentrations may become stressors for marine organisms if threshold values are
reached. The data methods used are transferrable to other ocean basins as
well.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will focus on the North Pacific
thermocline, where some of the world ocean's largest oxygen variations have been
observed. These variations, described as bidecadal cycles on top of a small
declining trend, are strongest on subsurface isopycnals that outcrop into the
mixed layer the northwestern North Pacific. It has been hypothesized that
changes in the isopycnal outcrop positions and area, including complete
cessation of outcrop, are the cause for the subsurface oxygen changes observed
downstream. Argo data will be combined with satellite sea surface data and ocean
interior data from continued repeat hydrography sections, time series stations,
and also emerging bio-Argo profiling floats (with O2 sensors) to examine records
of North Pacific surface density over the past ~40 years, in combination with
water transfer into the thermocline and ocean interior O2 variability. The study
will focus on seasonal to decadal variability and long-term trends. Specific
objectives are (1) computing sea surface density and isopycnal outcrop area
variability in the northwestern North Pacific, (2) estimating annual subduction
rates and O2 fluxes from the outcrops into the thermocline, and (3) linking
subduction in the northwestern North Pacific to downstream oxygen variability in
the northeast. It is hypothesized that surface densities in the northwestern
North Pacific exhibit decadal cycles similar to subsurface oxygen (as well as a
declining trend) and that oxygen variations in the eastern North Pacific
interior (thermocline) are correlated with surface density/subduction rate
variations in the northwestern North Pacific with a few year
lag.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.