* 1851726
* Collaborative Research: Robo-advising and Decision Making Under Risk
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2019,03/31/2020
* Nagpurnanand Prabhala, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Jeryl Mumpower
* 03/31/2020
* USD 238,008.00

Algorithmic-based advice, a.k.a robo-advice, is disrupting the access to and
delivery of advice regarding industries ranging from medical services to
personal-shopping to financial advising and wealth management. Understanding the
processes through which robo-advising affects individual decision-making is
critical if we are to design advisors to benefit investors through better and
tailored advice and to appropriately shape public policy with respect to the use
of robo-advising. This project aims to study the effects of adopting robo-advice
on the quality of decisions individuals make. The project will further the
scientific knowledge about the cognitive and social impact of new technologies
in the realm of professional advice to non-experts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project aims to study the following aspects of the relationship between robo-
advising and decision-making under risk: (i) the extent to which robo-advising
might correct well-documented behavioral biases in decision-making under risk;
(ii) the extent to which robo-advising can improve over that provided by human
financial advisers; and (iii) how individual investors' algorithm aversion makes
human and robo-advice complementary, in which case robo-advising may increase
rather than decrease the scope for human financial advice. To address the first
question, the authors will employ several empirical techniques that range from
linear regression to machine learning and artificial intelligence semi-
parametric methods like boosted regression trees (BRT). For the second question,
the authors will analyze the results of a randomized control trial involving the
introduction of a tool to relax the attention constraints of financial advisers
at a brokerage house. To address the third question, the authors will assess (i)
whether, once given the option to access robo-advice, investors access it
autonomously or reach out to human advisers for guidance; and (ii) whether, once
investors start to use robo-advice, they reduce their reliance on human
advisers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.