* 1851014
* Psychopharmaceuticals and Medicated Soldiering in America's post-9/11 Military
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2019,01/31/2024
* Jocelyn Chua, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 01/31/2024
* USD 274,999.00

The United States military has seen an unprecedented and marked turn to the use
of psychiatric medications by service personnel in the post-9/11 wars in Iraq
and Afghanistan. In 2006, the US Department of Defense developed for the first
time official criteria for the use of FDA-approved psychiatric medications "in
theater", in the physical and tactical spaces of military operations including
active combat. Conservative estimates suggest that 1 in 6 service members is now
taking at least one psychiatric medication. The use of psychiatric medications
by the US military has attracted public attention, and is poised to influence
the ways that Americans think about soldiering and the nature of war. Studies on
the topic remain largely theoretical and center on the ethics of military
psychiatric medication use. This project aims to understand how these
medications are prescribed and used in practice, as well as how military service
members understand medication effects on the work of counterinsurgency. The
results from this study will have important implications for public knowledge
and policy, as well as for veteran advocates and clinical practice aimed at the
post-service transition of veterans. The project fosters the inclusion of
underrepresented student veterans in military and veteran-related academic
research and to support diversity in social and behavioral science. It will do
so by 1) mentoring student veterans, 2) bringing together researchers and
veterans in a symposium to address ways forward for collaborative research, and
3) publishing a co-edited volume on this important topic.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Jocelyn Chua of the University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill will explore how psychiatric medications have been assimilated into
the operations, infrastructures and norms of post-9/11 counterinsurgency, how
these medications are understood and experienced by soldiers, and what impact
these medications have had on the cultural landscape of soldiering in the U.S.
Given the Army's prescription trends and prominent role in ground combat
operations compared with other military branches, the research will focus on the
US Army, Army Reserve, and Army National Guard. The PI and research team will
use in-depth interviews, focus groups, and ethnographic observation to
understand the formal and informal ways that psychiatric medications are being
prescribed, accessed, used, and shared. The research team will also assess
enlisted soldiers' experiences of psychiatric medication use in deployment and
their evaluations of the propriety of these medications to counterinsurgency
soldiering. The PI will also conduct archival research to contextualize current
military psychiatric medication use within the recent history of the practice of
US military behavioral and mental health. Research will be based in North
Carolina and Washington, DC. Home to four military bases, including Fort Bragg
Army base, North Carolina currently has the third highest number of active duty
and reserve members of all US states. The National Archives and the National
Library of Medicine in Washington, DC and Maryland, respectively, house
extensive military resources for the archival research. Findings from this
research will illuminate how psychiatric medications are used in deployment and
soldiers' own accounts of their use in order to determine the extent to which
theoretical concerns and public debate align with the experiences and concerns
of soldiers themselves.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.