* 1851796
* Adaptive estimation of mixed discrete-continuous distributions under smoothness and sparsity
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2019,03/31/2023
* Andriy Norets, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 03/31/2023
* USD 200,023.00

Economists often analyze questions such as whether a consumer will buy a car or
not (yes or no) and if so how much to spend on the car (an amount that takes any
value). Economists do not have a good method to analyze these questions. This
research project will develop a new and efficient method to analyze data that
has these characteristics. The results will give social science researchers an
important tool to analyze problems that involve complicated data structures.
With ever increasing sophisticated data collection and the availability of
powerful computing power, a method that can be used to efficiently analyze such
complicated data sets will be extremely valuable to researchers and policy
makers in all fields. The methods developed in this research will be programmed
and be freely available to all researchers. The results of this research will
allow researchers to give more accurate advice to policy makers and thus improve
decision making and economic growth.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research project
develops a framework for estimating mixed discrete-continuous distributions
where the multivariate discrete part of the distribution can have either a large
or a small number of support points; may be smooth or not, and these
characteristics can differ from one discrete coordinate to another. The optimal
convergence rates for estimation of discrete-continuous distributions will be
derived in these settings. Preliminary results suggest that smoothing is
beneficial only for a subset of discrete variables with a quickly growing number
of support points or sufficiently high level of smoothness. The proposed
estimation procedures are based on Bayesian mixtures of multivariate normal
distributions with covariate dependent mixing weights. The proposed methods will
deliver practical and optimal adaptive nonparametric alternatives to standard
econometric models such as ordered probit and Poisson regression, and first
stage estimators in two stage estimation procedures for structural discrete
choice models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.