* 1851173
* Workshop on Technology for Automated Capture of Diet, Nutrition, and Eating Behaviors in Context
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2022
* Lena Mamykina, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 02/28/2022
* USD 49,984.00

This award supports a workshop on computational and engineering approaches to
measuring eating behavior and nutrition. The workshop brings together
investigators, policy makers and biomedical researchers to develop a
multidisciplinary future in nutrition and eating behavior assessment. To date,
the biomedical community is still measuring nutrition and eating behavior using
either 24-hour recall or having people come to the hospital so that food can be
rationed and measured precisely. The use of technology is limited and the
computing and engineering community have struggled with targeting the correct
behaviors (e.g., food purchases versus time chewing) and units of measures
(micronutrients versus time chewing). Thus, the tools being developed do not
match the needs and does not advance the scientific community as a whole. To
develop effective models and methods, ultimately requires the collaboration of
diverse researchers who normally do not talk together nor attend similar
conferences nor read the same academic literature. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Eating
behavior and nutrition has long been a focus of the computing and engineering
communities because they are rich with exciting technical challenges. For
example, understanding food intake at a granular level will likely require
advances in computer vision, optics and/chemical engineering. Thus, this
workshop will bring together those who are building new methods and tools with
those who will use them to create a research plan for the future of these
diverse research groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.