* 1851815
* REU Site: Undergraduate Robotics Research in Human-Swarm Interaction
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2019,02/28/2023
* Yu Gu, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 02/28/2023
* USD 303,310.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site at West Virginia
University (WVU) will allow eight undergraduate students each year, mostly from
the Appalachian region, to perform state-of-the-art robotics research. Through
challenging them with real-world problems, this project will provide training,
mentorship and support to undergraduate students so that they can become
independent researchers. The overall project management strategy will follow the
spirit of swarm intelligence: encouraging the frequent interactions among a
diverse group of undergraduate students to achieve something that might not
otherwise be achievable by the individuals alone - for example, advancing the
state-of-the-art in human-swarm interaction research). Throughout the project,
the faculty and graduate student mentors will encourage creative thinking and
frequent interactions to enhance the students' problem solving skills. This will
allow them to transition from passive learners to independent thinkers of the
future. This effort in turn will contribute to the growth of a high-quality and
diverse US scientific workforce in the important area of
robotics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual focus of this project is to
allow one human operator to effectively manage a large robot swarm to achieve
desired global objectives. Tailored around a swarm system inspired by the
cooperative thermal soaring and foraging behaviors of hawks, three sub-projects
will be conducted by undergraduate students during this REU project. First, a
swarm testing environment with 50 custom designed robots will be developed.
Second, distributed, non-hierarchical agent-level interaction rules that will
allow the emergence of desirable robot swarm behaviors will be investigated.
Third, novel human-swarm interaction modes for managing a large self-organized
robot swarm without using a direct command and control structure between the
operator and robots will be invented and experimentally demonstrated. Through
these efforts, the undergraduate students will have the opportunity to work as a
team in performing both fundamental research and hands-on experiments. The
successful completion of the project will enable many potential robot
applications such as search and rescue, environmental monitoring, and robotic
mining and construction. The outcomes from this project will be broadly
disseminated through demonstration videos, peer-reviewed publications, and open
sharing of the developed software. This project is jointly funded by the
Information and Intelligent Systems Division of the Computer and Information
Science and Engineering Directorate and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.