* 1851629
* Learning From Diverse Sources and Models
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* Julia Aislinn Bohren, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2023
* USD 441,997.00

This award funds research in economic theory. Markets are increasingly saturated
with very detailed and precise information, such as data about consumer
preferences, social networks or product attributes. An important but
understudied aspect of these settings is how the multiplicity of sources of
information available to consumers and firms affects their decisions, as well as
the diverse ways in which this information is interpreted. For example,
different past experiences and views of the world may lead individuals to
interpret information in starkly different ways. A central objective of the
proposed work is to identify the inefficiencies of information production and
aggregation that emerge when the informational environment is complex, and to
understand the ways in which these inefficiencies can be ameliorated via
appropriate restructuring and regulation of the informational environment. There
are many possible interventions. For example, a policymaker can release
information by making a public announcement or seeding information with specific
individuals, restructure the environment by restricting certain kinds of data
sharing, or influence how individuals interpret information by providing
information about others' preferences or beliefs. The projects funded by this
award develop theoretical frameworks for clarifying the differences between
these interventions and identifying which are most effective. These findings
will be of practical use to inform policy regarding the design, dissemination,
and regulation of information. Further, the problem of how to regulate data
markets is of recent interest in many disciplines, including computer science,
law, and sociology. The research will contribute to this interdisciplinary
literature by focusing on the economic consequences to 'big data' production and
usage. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research plan proposal consists of three
projects. The first project focuses on the production of data when agents have
access to many interrelated sources of information. The second proposes a model
in which information about consumers is pooled across various markets and
examines the consequences of sharing this information with firms. The third
project considers how agents learn from their peers when they have mis-specified
models of inference and seeks to characterize how an information planner can
release information or modify the informational environment to facilitate
learning. Although there is a classic and well-developed economics literature on
learning and information acquisition, consideration of heterogeneity in sources
and information-processing models has only recently begun to attract interest.
For example, the learning literature has mostly focused on agents with
correctly-specified models (i.e. Bayesian learners with priors that put positive
weight on the true model). While more recent work has focused on the case where
agents have mis-specified models, the question of what happens when agents with
different mis-specified models interact is an important open channel for
research. Similarly, the information acquisition literature has mostly studied
learning from a single source, focusing on questions such as how much
information should an agent acquire, and at what level of precision. Recent work
introduces diverse information sources and studies dynamic information
acquisition patterns. But study of the economic interactions between agents who
aggregate information across diverse sources, e.g. in market settings, where
firms aggregate information across consumers and markets for screening, remains
incomplete.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.