* 1851194
* BEE: Testing the evolutionary responses of mixotrophs to future ocean conditions
* GEO,OCE
* 05/15/2019,04/30/2023
* Holly Moeller, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 04/30/2023
* USD 536,087.00

Aquatic ecosystems host a wide variety of single-celled, microscopic organisms.
Many of these species live near the surface of the water, where they grow and
reproduce using different metabolic strategies that shape their place in the
marine food web. For example, biologists have traditionally grouped planktonic
microbes into either primary producers (which use photosynthesis to create new
organic matter) or heterotrophs (which eat organic matter - such as the bodies -
produced by other organisms). However, a large number of species are actually
mixotrophic: they "mix" these two forms of metabolism by simultaneously
conducting photosynthesis and eating smaller cells, including bacteria.
Furthermore, many mixotrophs are metabolically flexible: they may rely more or
less on each source of metabolism depending on environmental conditions. Because
photosynthesis (which takes carbon out of the atmosphere and locks it into
organic matter) and heterotrophy (which respires organic matter back into carbon
dioxide) control whether or not oceanic food webs act as carbon sinks (having a
net removal of carbon dioxide from the atmosphere), understanding mixotroph
metabolism is critical to predicting the effects of marine plankton on
atmospheric carbon. This project advances understanding of mixotroph metabolism
by quantifying the extent to which mixotrophs can alter their reliance on
photosynthesis over short and long timescales. The project tests how quickly
mixotrophs can adapt to both warmer and colder water conditions, and how these
adaptations alter their role in the carbon cycle. Researchers - including
graduate students, a postdoctoral researcher, and undergraduate trainees - will
measure the physiological responses of experimentally evolved mixotrophs and use
mathematical models to connect these changes to global oceanic carbon cycling.
As data are collected, they are shared with the public through outreach
seminars, annual open house events, and weekly scientific presentations at the
local Santa Barbara Museum of Natural History.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to
predict biologically mediated feedbacks in the climate system, we must
understand how marine plankton will respond to future ocean conditions. While a
number of studies have sought to quantify the potential evolutionary response of
phytoplankton, much less is known about the impacts of shifting conditions
(e.g., increased temperature) on mixotrophs. What data are available suggest
that mixotrophs may modulate a positive climate feedback loop: when warmed,
mixotrophs become more heterotrophic, thus reducing their contribution to the
biological pump and enhancing local respiration of organic carbon. Warming may
also result in reductions in cell size, reducing sinking fluxes and carbon
export from the upper ocean. Furthermore, because the predicted increase in
oceanic stratification is expected to favor mixotrophs, their metabolic
responses may be increasingly significant to understanding the global carbon
cycle. The PI of this project is experimentally evolving mixotrophs under a
range of temperature conditions in a fully factorial design that also
manipulates the availability of light (photosynthesis) and prey (heterotrophy).
She quantifies the carbon budget, grazing activity, nutrient content, and grazer
palatability of evolved lineages in order to estimate the impact of any observed
adaptations on carbon cycling. Specifically, the investigator asks how evolved
lineages compare to ancestral lineages in their ability to tolerate altered
thermal conditions, and connects differences in fitness to shifts in reliance on
photosynthesis versus heterotrophy. Simultaneously, she incorporates a
mixotrophy module into a global ocean biogeochemistry model, allowing the
quantification of the impact of mixotrophs with either contemporary or evolved
physiological traits. This work will provide some of the first known data on
mixotroph plastic and evolutionary responses, and allow the scaling of these
responses to their potential impacts on upper ocean
biogeochemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.