* 1851572
* Collaborative Research: The role of eddies in the propagation and dissipation of wind-driven near-inertial energy: a numerial study bridging OGCM and process simulations
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2019,02/29/2024
* Marie-Pascale Lelong, NorthWest Research Associates, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 02/29/2024
* USD 279,844.00

This project will examine how energy from wind forcing of the ocean propagates
into the ocean interior and dissipates. The methods used include combining
different types of numerical models to examine the detailed physical processes
governing wind forced near-inertial wave energy in the presence of ocean eddies.
The study also includes collaboration with French researchers to make
comparisons with and analyze observations from the LAgrangian Transport
Experiment (LATEX). The results will be useful for developing improved physical
representations of mixing processes in climate ocean models. Results will be
disseminated to the scientific community through presentations at conferences
and scientific publications. The project will support one undergraduate student
in summer research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While the role of anticyclonic eddies
in fluxing near-inertial energy into the deep ocean has long been established
observationally, theoretically and numerically, the fate of this energy once it
leaves the mixed layer remains unconstrained. Observations at depths remain
relatively sparse. The proposed research will use numerical modeling and
analysis of observational data to explore interactions between eddies and near-
inertial waves and determine the dissipation processes for wind-driven near-
inertial waves (NIW) in the presence of mesoscale eddies. A Boussinesq model
with high vertical resolution and non-hydrostatic dynamics will be nested in a
regional circulation model (NEMO-GLAZUR64) to provide realistic forcing and
boundary conditions. The model results will be compared with data from the LATEX
experiment in the Gulf of Lyon.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.