* 1851878
* Collaborative Research: Technological Shocks and Institutional Effectiveness under Heterogeneous Risk
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2023
* Robert Holahan, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 04/30/2023
* USD 226,482.00

Scholars have long been interested in the linkages between governance
institutions and the sustainability of common-pool resources (CPRs), of which
oil and gas are canonical examples. Institutions that facilitate efficient
collective action are often seen as the best hope for a solution to the tragedy
of the commons, and the long endurance of institutions is often viewed as a
best-case scenario. Long-enduring institutions, however, lock participants in to
a particular path that may or may not be efficient when exogenous changes occur.
This project expands on the intellectual tradition of CPR scholars by examining
how a solution to a dilemma today can exacerbate a different CPR dilemma
tomorrow. The problem with such institutions is not necessarily the possibility
of resource collapse (i.e., a tragedy of the commons), but rather of continued
action in the face of substantially changed circumstances. CPR governance
institutions can continue to be used to facilitate collective action long after
collective action ceases to be efficient or equitable for the group. Previously
stable and efficient institutions may now have the effect of redistributing
rents from those who are least vulnerable to the new risks introduced by an
exogenous shock to those who are most vulnerable. This research examines the
changing implications of oil and gas production and regulation in the United
States. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;How effective are existing regulations at managing
the risks from high volume hydraulic fracturing (HVHF), commonly known as
"fracking?" HVHF is a technique for producing oil and gas from shale formations
that has revolutionized the domestic energy landscape. In the U.S., states are
the primary regulators of oil and gas production, so there is variation in the
types of and effectiveness of regulations in-use. Many of these regulations were
enacted in the early-to-mid 1900s and were designed to manage conventional oil
and gas production. Given the rapid expansion of HVHF across the country, this
research explores the effects of these regulations and HVHF production
techniques. The project first develops a cross-state database of current
regulations used to manage oil and gas production, which will be available
online for the public, state regulators, journalists, and academics to explore
how different states manage oil and gas production and how effective those
regulations are. Second, the project engages landowners in focus groups to
better understand the perspectives of people impacted, both positively and
negatively, by the HVHF boom. Third, the project uses a series of laboratory
economic experiments to advance scholarly understanding, in a controlled
setting, of how different regulations incentivize individual decisions whether
to sign leases to allow oil and gas production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.