* 1851610
* Collaborative Research: Preference Structures
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2023
* Hiroki Nishimura, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 06/30/2023
* USD 111,532.00

This award funds research in economic theory. The research team seeks to develop
a model of how individuals make decisions. They propose a framework that could
be an alternative to the standard approach of modeling economic preferences. The
team wants to replace this standard approach with an alternative that can better
explain results from experimental and behavioral economics. They seek to develop
an approach that is quite general, so that it can be applied to any economic
decision. Their model will replace the simple preference relation (which ranks
all alternatives) with a concept they call a preference structure. Preference
structures include two relations. The first captures all rankings that the
individual finds easy or straightforward. The second relation that comes from
observing how the individual makes decisions between two alternatives, whether
that decision is easy or hard. The goal is to provide new methods for behavioral
economics. If the project provides a more accurate way to model actual decision
making that can also be used to predict future decisions, it would be useful in
a wide variety of practical contexts in business management and public
policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The model of preference structures includes two
binary relations. The first captures easy rankings. As cyclical choice patterns
are unlikely to rise from easy pairwise choice problems, this relation is
required to be transitive but not necessarily complete. The second relation is
complete, but may not be transitive. The two relations are consistent. This
model subsumes many preference models, such as those that allow for
indecisiveness, imperfect ability of discrimination, regret, and completions
based on recommendations. Moreover, there is a natural way of modeling the
choice behavior induced by a preference structure by using the notion of top-
cycles. This leads to a generalization of standard rational choice theory which
meets three goals. It has predictive power, it has appealing existence and
uniqueness properties, and it provides ways of empirically eliciting preference
structures from choice data. The team plans to explore a number of avenues, from
classical consumer theory to game theory. They also hope to consider decision
making under risk and uncertainty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.