* 1851936
* REU Site: Sustainable Chemistry at Texas A&amp;M University
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Holly Gaede, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 03/31/2024
* USD 323,939.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site award to Texas A&amp;M
University, located in College Station, TX, supports the training of 9
undergraduate students for 10 weeks during the summers of 2019-2021. This
program, funded by the Division of Chemistry, engages participants in research
centered around sustainable chemistry, particularly on pollution prevention and
reduction of the negative impacts of chemical processes on human health and the
environment. To enhance professional development, participants take part in a
weekly sustainable chemistry workshop with presentations from university and
industrial experts who provide background knowledge, as well as the larger
context for their projects. The program also emphasizes the importance of
science communication. With coaching from local TV producers and the college
science communication manager, the undergraduate students produce and
disseminate videos on the theme of sustainable chemistry to the general public.
The site leverages Texas A&amp;M University's institutional strengths in serving
veteran students and long-standing partnerships to recruit underserved student
veterans and underrepresented minority students and provide them with continuing
mentoring to help them continue in scientific
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Participants take part in quality research
experiences that address impactful problems in sustainable chemistry, such as
the development of greener solvents and reagents; the development of more
efficient reactions and processes; and the exploration of renewable energy
resources. The projects utilize the department's expertise in sustainable
chemistry and its strong infrastructure, including facilities for X-ray
diffraction, NMR spectroscopy, mass spectrometry, materials characterization,
and molecular simulation. The REU Site also provides participants with multiple
mentors, both at the intra- and extra-institutional level, and these
relationships are intentionally sustained past the formal duration of the summer
program. This program provides students at early career stages with
opportunities for graduate level research and continued mentoring while seeking
to increase the number of qualified students in the STEM
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.