* 1851752
* A Model of Credit, Money, Interest and Prices
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2023
* Saki Bigio, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 04/30/2023
* USD 186,540.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI Last Name: Bigio&lt;br/&gt;Title: A Model of
Credit, Money, Interest and Prices&lt;br/&gt;Proposal ID:
1851752&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Monetary policy affects everyone's life by
affecting our ability to borrow and lend and, thus, our decisions to consume and
invest. Monetary policy is enacted through operations of central banks such as
the Federal Reserve Bank in the United States. The operations of the Federal
Reserve impacts bank decisions and therefore the credit markets. This research
project develops a model to examine how monetary policy affects bank lending
decisions. The model looks at how the difference between lending and borrowing
rates can be influenced by monetary policies, which in turn impacts borrowers
and lenders differently. The main insight is that monetary policy can in general
control credit spreads and inflation independently.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
contribution to the frontier of economics is to integrate recent frameworks that
study the implementation of monetary policy through banks, into an incomplete-
markets economy. Once we conceive that monetary policy operations can control
spreads and affect inflation independently, we begin to challenge many
preconceived views. For example, although some monetary policy operations are
long-run neutral, others are not. It is often thought that monetary policy
cannot set monetary aggregates independently from policy rates. Here, monetary
aggregates and rates are independent instruments that grant independent control
over spreads and inflation. The model can also rationalize several empirical
regularities: the presence of a liquidity effect in monetary policy expansion
and a higher elasticity for loan rates than deposit rates, to policy changes.
Finally, the model highlights a trade-off between the depth of a crisis and the
amount of risk-insurance ex-ante, if we think of monetary policy as a
macroprudential tool.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.