* 1851955
* REU Site: Disparities in the Criminal Justice System
* SBE,SMA
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2023
* Christi Metcalfe, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 08/31/2023
* USD 342,128.00

The project is jointly funded by the Research Experiences for Undergraduates
(REU) Sites program in the SBE Directorate and the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR). It has both scientific and societal
benefits and integrates research with education. The REU in the study of
Disparities in the Criminal Justice System (DCJS) at the University of South
Carolina brings together an academically gifted and diverse group of students to
work on innovative projects with graduate students and faculty to learn the
research process and produce publishable products from the findings. The
projects focus on how race/ethnicity, class, and gender shape the involvement of
juveniles or adults in criminal offending, and how these factors are connected
to decisions made within the criminal justice system, including the
implementation of policies meant to address crime. They also examine how and why
these disparities are occurring and the impact on individuals, families, and
communities. Given the small percentage of minority students currently pursuing
graduate degrees and entering the criminology field, increasing the diversity of
students in academe adds new perspectives to research and contributes to the
types of research questions being asked in the discipline. The knowledge and
skills acquired from the research experience is beneficial both for students
considering graduate school and those who plan to become lawyers, practitioners,
and policymakers.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; The DCJS-REU site provides an
opportunity for undergraduate students to learn about research in their field of
interest, develop their academic and research skills, and expose them to the
possibility of pursuing a graduate degree. The team-based structure of the
program, as well as the planned academic and social activities, are designed to
foster long-term working relationships between faculty and students. The main
objective of this REU site is to provide program participants with opportunities
to ask compelling research questions and recognize how studies can inform our
understanding of crime and criminal justice system policies. The five explicit
aims are: (1) to target for participation underrepresented undergraduate
students; (2) to expose students to the research process through mentoring from
faculty; (3) to offer students opportunities to learn how to disseminate
research findings; (4) to enhance learning and skill development through
discipline-specific training, university workshops, and interactions with
criminal justice professionals; and (5) to successfully prepare students to
apply to and attend graduate programs in criminology/criminal justice or related
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.