* 1851543
* Experimental Impacts of Intensive Municipal Governance and Community Organization on Gang Governance
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2021
* Santiago Tobon, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Lee Walker
* 07/31/2021
* USD 450,000.00

Criminal governance is increasingly common in Latin America, and elsewhere. How
these organizations operate and how to combat them is a major frontier of
political science, economics, criminology and public policy. Around the world,
hundreds of millions of people live under the armed rule of criminal groups.
These groups pose a major threat to governments, regional stability and the U.S.
homeland. Yet we know relatively little about the organization of business and
life under this armed rule. This is partly because criminal governance is often
hiding in plain sight, in slums and urban peripheries where state forces can go
but rarely establish a continual presence. This study aims to understand this
entire criminal ecosystem by means of large-sample qualitative interviews with
high-, mid- and low-ranking gang members, quantitative data collection on
criminal groups, and experimental interventions with criminal gangs. This study
also promotes training and scholarship by involving several post-doctoral and
pre-doctoral students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study addresses critical gaps
in knowledge: how are urban criminal groups structured, how and why do they
govern civilians, and how can authorities crowd them out? In Medellin, Colombia
most poor- and middle-income neighborhoods are governed by criminal gangs. More
than 300 local gangs resolve disputes, police and prevent crime, manage legal
and illegal markets, and tax businesses. Above these local gangs lie roughly a
dozen mafia-like organizations. These groups have developed complex hierarchies
and rules to regulate crime, minimize conflict, and govern. By studying this
entire criminal ecosystem, this project takes advantage of a unique, large-N
setting to generate knowledge about criminal organization and governance. Unlike
traditional case studies of single gangs or mafias, this study leverages the
large number of armed groups in Medellin to develop more generalizable theory
and findings through a three-pronged design that combines qualitative and
quantitative research methods: (i) a qualitative study of the internal
organization and external governance of dozens of gangs, through large-sample
and multi-year interviews, with high-, mid- and low-ranking criminal members;
(ii) primary and observational data collection, designed to measure variation in
internal organization and external governance of hundreds of gangs; and (iii)
the first of several experimental anti-gang interventions, beginning with one
designed to understand and reduce criminal governance. This study will also have
a broader impact on different dimensions by testing a locally-developed, non-
militarized strategy; it could be used in similar contexts across Latin America.
Moreover, it demonstrates that it is feasible to experiment on gang policy with
rigor and scale, and spur further ethical experimentation in combating armed
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.