* 1851462
* Coastal mosaics of local adaptation and the eco-evolutionary dynamics of a marine predator-prey interaction
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Eric Sanford, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 03/31/2024
* USD 519,028.00

Historically, ecologists regarded evolution as a process that typically acts
slowly over very long time scales. However, recent studies suggest that
evolution might also shape the way species interact over much shorter timespans,
ranging from weeks to years. Are these sorts of rapid feedbacks between
evolution and ecology important in marine ecosystems? This project will address
this question along the Pacific coast of the United States by studying predatory
snails (Channeled Dogwhelks) that feed on California Mussels, an important
habitat-forming species on rocky intertidal shores. Prior research shows that
some dogwhelk populations are composed of an assortment of individuals that
differ genetically in how effectively they can drill through mussel shells. This
project will test whether short-term changes in the environment can impose rapid
natural selection that favors some of these drilling variants over others,
altering the effects that a dogwhelk population has on the surrounding mussel
bed. At the same time, this project will examine whether regional differences in
mussel shell thickness have influenced the evolution of drilling ability among
dogwhelk populations distributed along &gt;900 kilometers of the California and
Oregon coasts. Overall, this study seeks to understand the dynamic feedbacks
between evolution and ecology that might influence marine communities in the
face of changing ocean conditions. This project will train diverse undergraduate
and graduate students and will provide the foundation for a significant public
outreach component, including the production of accessible video
documentaries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to advance our
understanding of eco-evolutionary dynamics in the sea by investigating links
among oceanographic variation, natural selection, species interactions, and
community succession. This project will use the interaction between the
Channeled Dogwhelk (Nucella canaliculata) and the California Mussel (Mytilus
californianus) as a model system to address two central objectives. (1) The
research team will explore how spatial mosaics of selection drive adaptive
differentiation among populations of consumers. Newly collected and archived
mussels will be analyzed to characterize variation in shell thickness along the
coasts of California and Oregon, and to evaluate whether this spatial mosaic has
been consistent or variable over the past two decades. Laboratory experiments
will test whether dogwhelk populations distributed across this mosaic have
diverged in the thickness of shell that they can drill successfully. (2) The
research team will examine whether temporal variation in selection on consumer
phenotypes shapes predator-prey interactions, with cascading effects on
ecological dynamics. In particular, the project will test whether short-term
variation in prey recruitment and shell thickness can impose rapid selection on
the frequency of drilling phenotypes within a dogwhelk population. A field
experiment will also test whether selection on these predator phenotypes in turn
alters the trajectory of mussel bed succession.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.