* 1851108
* Collaborative Research: Measurements and Modelling of the Indonesian Throughflow International Experiment (MINTIE)
* GEO,OCE
* 06/15/2019,05/31/2024
* Stephen Riser, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Baris Uz
* 05/31/2024
* USD 1,406,808.00

The Indonesian Seas play a fundamental role in controlling the Earth's climate.
They are located near the largest centers of atmospheric deep convection and
represent the connection of the tropics to the global overturning circulation.
In this area, Pacific Warm Pool waters are cooled and freshened forming a unique
water mass that it can be traced across the Indian Ocean basin and beyond.
Amongst other processes, tidally-driven mixing plays a critical role in this
water mass transformation and impacts regional upwelling, sea surface
temperature (SST) patterns and thus global climate. This project will be the US
component of an international collaborative study, called MINTIE (Measuring and
Modeling the INdonesian Throughflow International Experiment), developed for the
understanding of the oceanic processes in the region. The international MINTIE
observational effort is a novel combination of a 3-year deployment of a
transport and water mass resolving mooring array within the major Indonesian
Through Flow (ITF) passages. In addition, it includes simultaneous measurements
of hydrography using profiling floats, turbulence dissipation and fine-scale
shear in the interior seas, and ship-based detailed surveys in the straits. The
moored array will be a joint effort between USA, China, and Indonesia, while the
float array is a coordinated joint effort between USA, Australian, and
Indonesia. The project, in addition to the in-situ measurements utilizes state-
of-the-science numerical simulations and diagnostic tools to probe the drivers
and dynamics of the Indonesian Through Flow. US graduate and undergraduate
students will be supported by the project and trained in sea-going oceanography
and cutting-edge numerical modelling. At the same time the students will be
exposed to international scientific collaborations. Results and data will be
broadly disseminated within and beyond the scientific community through targeted
workshops, presentations at oceanographic meetings, and a web site. Insights and
quantification of transport controls and mixing processes in this key region
will have application in global modelling systems used for ocean and climate
forecasts. The participation of US scientists in a collaborative international
project maintains US scientific competitiveness. Indonesia, a principal partner,
will provide ship time and logistical support; local students and early career
scientists who will participate in the field program and analysis advancing an
active ocean observing capability in that country. The float deployments will
lay the groundwork for an ongoing regional Argo array, which to date has not
been possible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The highly successful INSTANT program, a
multinational effort that involved the US and 5 more countries increased
significantly our understanding of the Indonesian Through Flow (ITF) over 12
years ago. Since then, sparse ongoing observations and regional modelling
studies have exposed our remaining knowledge gaps. We have little knowledge on
how the interplay between the ITF, incoming remotely-forced wind-driven
planetary wave energy and locally generated internal tidal waves and the mixing
they produce impacts export heat and freshwater fluxes and SST. These issues
will be addressed using more detailed observations of internal hydrography,
mixing rates and Inflowing/outflowing heat and freshwater fluxes. In addition,
since the end of INSTANT in 2006, a significant shift has occurred in the Indo-
Pacific system, and likely also the ITF. The drivers of this shift remain
unexplained. While INSTANT shed light on the mean transport and its variability,
shear and dissipation observations were largely absent, water mass observations
both in the straits and internal seas were sparse and large uncertainties in
transport estimates limited inferences about mixing and transformation
processes. The simultaneous observations of water mass and transport variability
in inflow and outflow straits, provided by this project, along with hydrography,
velocity fine-scale, and dissipation in the internal seas, will shed new light
on how and where transformation occurs. These unprecedented observations will be
combined with a tailored set of high resolution, tidally resolving and
dynamically nested simulations and diagnostic tools that allow quantification of
water mass transformation, isolation of drivers of flow and pathway variability
and controls on SST.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.