* 1851591
* REU Site: Computational Sensing for Human-centered AI
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Reynold Bailey, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 03/31/2024
* USD 384,115.00

The Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site in Computational Sensing
for Human-centered Artificial Intelligence recognizes that the boundaries
between human-computer interaction (HCI) and artificial intelligence (AI) are
blurring and that AI is growing increasingly agile and pervasive. Thus, the next
generation of computational scientists must be capable of responsibly and
effectively leveraging a spectrum of sensing data from data-generating humans.
With this focus, the REU Site will expand its trajectory as an attractor for
highly diverse students, including women or gender minorities and students with
disabilities, who will gain experience with sensing hardware and software
towards transformative advances in intelligent systems focused on human
behaviors and cognitive processes. Enabling diverse stakeholders early in their
careers to discover how to collect, fuse, make inference with, and visualize
multimodal human data helps nurture a workforce that can transform how humans
and machines engage and collaborate. The research in the REU Site will address
two limitations in AI: first, that underserved populations are at risk of being
marginalized with the present focus on big data AI and, second, that AI trainees
often lack experience with human data collection and critical thinking about
human-elicited datasets. The REU Site will stimulate novel, safe ways for
systems to team up with people to address society's vexing problems while
remaining fair, attuned to bias, and representative of the diverse fabric of the
general population. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The REU Site in Computational Sensing
for Human-centered Artificial Intelligence sets three ambitious and attainable
goals and will publish widely on the findings at computational and Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) research and education venues:
(1) to advance basic research in computational sensing for human-centered AI,
integrating human study with sound AI experimentation focused on modestly-sized,
inclusive datasets; (2) to develop programmatic mechanisms for aiding students
to transition confidently from being taught to being mentored by research
faculty and ensure their readiness for entering computer science/STEM PhD
programs; and (3) to enhance and intensify our recruiting strategies with the
aim of doubling Native American or Latina/o students and students with
disabilities among our applicant pool, as well as reach even more demanding
selection targets for exceptionally diverse cohorts. We link these objectives to
four associated Site aims: (a) to offer team-based research with real-world
problems that emphasize social good and impact; (b) to cost-effectively enable
global awareness and skills-building, by facilitating on-campus international
cultural exchange for REU cohorts; (c) to provide outreach enrichment for
cohorts to learn how to communicate research broadly; and (d) to disseminate
lessons learned from the REU Site to the scientific
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.