* 1851763
* REU Site: Upper Gila Preservation Archaeology Field School
* SBE,SMA
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2023
* Jeffery Clark, Archaeology Southwest
* Standard Grant
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 03/31/2023
* USD 309,521.00

This project is funded from the Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
Sites program in the SBE Directorate. It has both scientific and societal
benefits in addition to integrating research and education. The Upper Gila
Preservation Archaeology Field School, located in rural southwestern New Mexico,
provides hands-on training in ethically responsible and scientifically rigorous
archaeological methods in the context of a long-term research project. Training
is conducted within a Preservation Archaeology ethos, a philosophy integrating
big-picture research, use of existing collections, focused fieldwork, site
preservation, and local community outreach. Under the close supervision of a
team of experienced instructors, this program offers undergraduate students an
immersive environment in which to learn the fundamentals of archaeological field
and laboratory work and how to link their work to broader anthropological issues
that have contemporary relevance. Specifically, students are trained in
excavation and survey techniques, experimental archaeology, artifact processing
and analysis, report-writing, and public presentation. Based on the premise that
sites are non-renewable resources, the Preservation Archaeology Field School is
training the next generation of academic, private sector, and government agency
archaeologists. This project attracts exceptional students from a variety of
cultural and economic backgrounds. Student recruiting targets underrepresented
groups, including Native American, Hispanic, and community/small college
undergraduates with limited STEM opportunities, as well as students from major
academic institutions to increase the diversity of views represented in the
discipline. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Student efforts contribute directly to
Archaeology Southwest's long term research program focused on the Salado
Phenomenon in the southern U.S. Southwest during the late pre-contact period
(A.D. 1200-1450). This research studies the processes of migration and social
integration of culturally diverse groups during this time of upheaval and crisis
across much of the Southwest. Students think critically about the values of
archaeology and history to different communities and explore different ways to
communicate the results of scientific research. Students present their work to
various audiences through participation in outreach events for the local
community, writing research reports, and presentations at professional meetings.
Even students who do not go on to pursue careers in archaeology learn valuable
skills in collaboration and collegiality, critical thinking, engaging the
public, and the importance of cultural resources, in an active research
setting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.