* 1851875
* Low-Torque-Ripple Sensorless Control of Mutually Coupled Switched Reluctance Machines (MCSRMs)
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Jin Ye, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 07/31/2021
* USD 360,000.00

The proposed research will advance motor drive technologies by designing a novel
control scheme for mutually coupled switched reluctance machines. Such machines
are of great importance to satisfy the increasing demand for cost-effective,
highly reliable and efficient motor drive systems in electrified transportation,
industrial applications, and home appliances. Although induction and permanent
magnet synchronous machines are currently dominating the market, due to the
soaring prices and rapid depletion of rare-earth materials, researchers in the
U.S. and world-wide are searching for rare-earth-free alternatives. Switched
reluctance machines belong to the group of such alternatives. They are
increasing in popularity due to their simple and rigid structure, fault-tolerant
capability, and extended-speed constant-power range. However, conventional
switched reluctance machines suffer from high torque ripples, acoustic noise,
vibration, and non-standard asymmetric bridge power converters. Mutually coupled
switched reluctance machines that are the focus of the proposed research are
outperforming conventional switched reluctance machines as they can be driven by
a standard six-switch converter. The proposed research will address these
technical challenges impeding the widespread utilization of mutually coupled
switched reluctance machines. The work will greatly advance the research in
power electronics and motor drive technology and will promote research,
teaching, training, and learning. The research will be integrated into the
undergraduate and graduate electric power engineering curriculum to educate
future engineers who will have the skills and knowledge to meet the emerging
needs of the industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the proposed research is
to develop a novel control scheme for mutually coupled switched reluctance
machines using a standard six-switch converter to minimize torque ripples and
enable position sensorless control. Three specific objectives will be pursued:
(1) Reduce torque ripples through the use of a two-stage current profiling
scheme. (2) Attain position sensorless control. (3) Use a six-switch standard
converter to develop a low-torque-ripple sensorless control. Accomplishing the
objectives of the proposed research will develop mutually coupled switched
reluctance machines into the next generation of rare-earth-free electric
machines by overcoming key obstacles high torque ripples and non-sensorless
control. To date, the modeling of mutually coupled switched reluctance machines
has originated from conventional switched reluctance machines; however, due to
the unique torque production mechanism, this modeling approach will complicate
control system developments. This work will also investigate nonlinear models of
mutually coupled switched reluctance machines and integrate nonlinear models
into the design of the two-stage torque ripple reduction scheme and position
sensorless control, thereby bridging the gap between the modeling and control in
the field of mutually coupled switched reluctance machines. In addition, a six-
switch standard converter will be used to replace the asymmetric bridge
converter to increase cost effectiveness and improve its suitability in
electrified transportation, industrial applications, and home appliances.