* 1851683
* Collaborative Proposal: Response of mercury cycling to disturbance and restoration of low-gradient forested watersheds
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Martin Tsui, University of North Carolina Greensboro
* Continuing Grant
* Alberto Perez-Huerta
* 07/31/2024
* USD 164,740.00

Environmental pollution of mercury is a global concern. Due to foliar uptake of
atmospheric mercury, forested ecosystem represents an important receptor of
mercury pollution, while low-gradient forest watersheds in the southeastern
United States represent hotspots for production of highly toxic methylmercury
that poses a risk to humans and wildlife through consumption of fish and other
high trophic level food sources. Throughout the southeastern region, there is an
initiative to restore the native longleaf pine over the existing loblolly pine.
The proposed research will examine how forest restoration affects various
mercury cycling processes in southeastern coastal plain forests. This work will
lead to an enhanced understanding of how forest restoration can affect the
retention of mercury within watersheds and the production of toxic
methylmercury. The proposed work will provide unique training opportunities for
undergraduate and graduate students of diverse academic backgrounds from the
University of North Carolina at Greensboro (UNCG), a minority serving
institution, the University of Michigan (U-M), and the Clemson University. Also,
home-schooled students in the coastal region of South Carolina will be involved
in the sample collection and processing in order to provide a more formal STEM
training to these groups of children lacking resources. The principal
investigators will integrate this research into teaching materials of existing
classes, including field visits and case studies, and also carry out outreach to
professional foresters to inform them about how forestry practices may alter
mercury cycling. The work will be widely disseminated through seminars,
conference presentations, and peer-reviewed publications.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The project proposes to use stable mercury isotopes as an integrative
tool to better understand the effects of short-term forest disturbance
(prescribed fires, thinning, and clear cut) and longer-term forest restoration
(switching back to native tree species with lower water demand) on mercury
cycling in a low-gradient coastal forested watershed in South Carolina, where
mercury methylation is extensive in poorly drained soils. The project will take
place in a paired watershed at Santee Experimental Forest, a typical coastal
plain forest headwater watershed. Specifically, the project will use stable
mercury isotope ratios to monitor depositional pathways of mercury into the
experimental forested watershed and also to distinguish the depositional
pathways of mercury exported by the streams. Further, methylmercury isotopes
measured in terrestrial and aquatic food web components will provide insights
into methylmercury formation and degradation pathways during and after forest
manipulation in the experimental watershed. Thus, the proposed work will provide
a unique chance to test the utility of stable mercury isotopes for tracking
atmospheric mercury deposition and mercury methylation and for following uptake
of mercury from different sources into the food webs of both experimental and
reference watersheds. Further, microcosm studies will be conducted in order to
disentangle different environmental factors and their effects on mercury
methylation in these forest soils. Through answering these interrelated
questions, the proposed work will be able to reveal the effects of forest
management on mercury deposition and methylmercury production in a forested
ecosystem in the southeastern region of North America.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.