* 1851962
* REU Site:  Exploring 21st Century Careers in the Biological Sciences: A Comparative Regenerative Biology Approach
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2023
* Jane Disney, Mount Desert Island Biological Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 03/31/2023
* USD 382,064.00

This REU Site award to Mount Desert Island (MDI) Biological Laboratory, located
in Salisbury Cove, ME, will support the training of 10 undergraduate students
for 10 weeks during the summers of 2019- 2021. Students will explore topics
related to regenerative biology and aging using a variety of animal models,
including zebrafish, salamanders, and nematodes. Students will contribute to the
understanding of how limbs and organs regenerate under varying environmental
conditions. Additional opportunities for students include learning about career
options and deeper scientific concepts thru scheduled seminars, symposia, and
workshops. To experience the entrepreneurial facet of scientific research, all
students will participate in an entrepreneurship workshop in which they will
learn about career avenues for scientists whose research interests span
disciplinary boundaries. In addition, all students will attend a bioinformatics
workshop in which they will learn how to work with big data sets as well as
career paths in the evolving field of computational biology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is anticipated that a total of 30 students, primarily
from schools with limited research opportunities, will be trained in the
program. Students will learn how research is conducted and how to communicate
their research findings through participation in a weekly science communication
course and an on-campus Summer Science Symposium at the culmination of their REU
experience. It is possible that students will present their results in other
scientific venues and contribute to scientific publications in peer-reviewed
journals. A common web-based assessment tool used by all REU Site programs
funded by the Division of Biological Infrastructure will be used to determine
the effectiveness of the training program. In addition, students will
participate in a campus-wide survey to determine how to improve the summer
research experience for future students at MDI Biological Laboratory. Students
will be tracked after the program in order to determine their career paths.
Students will be asked to respond to an automatic email sent via the NSF
reporting system. More information about the program is available by visiting
https://mdibl.org/education/hs-undergrad/undergraduate-applications/reu/ or by
contacting the PI (Dr. Jane Disney at jdisney@mdibl.org) or the co-PI (Dr.
Dustin Updike at dupdike@mdibl.org).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.