* 1851589
* Glacial-Interglacial Changes in Oxygen Minimum Zones Using Deep-Dwelling, Low-Oxygen Planktic Foraminifera
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2019,09/30/2020
* Catherine Davis, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 09/30/2020
* USD 201,064.00

Oxygen minimum zones (OMZs) are naturally occurring regions of low oxygen found
across large swaths of the ocean at depths of 100 to 1000 meters below the
surface. OMZs play an important role in biogeochemical cycling and ecosystem
function and any change in the expanse of their low oxygen waters can have far
reaching implications for marine life and valuable fisheries resources. Marine
oxygenation is variable on multiple timescales in response to global climate
change, with recent observations showing that OMZs have expanded over the past
half century. This project will explore promising new geochemical and
morphologic proxies applicable to low-oxygen environments in the planktic
foraminifer Globorotaloides hexagonus, a unicellular calcifying organism whose
fossil record in seafloor sediments is well suited to reconstructing past low-
oxygen environments in the water column. The project will focus on the extensive
OMZ of the eastern tropical Pacific. The first goal is to evaluate and calibrate
the targeted measurements for modern G. hexagonus collected live in plankton
tows. The second goal is to apply these proxies to fossil specimens in sediment
cores to generate records of glacial-Holocene change. The outcomes will be
useable proxies for generating records of the OMZ environment, and a better
understanding of how a major regional OMZ changed during the most recent period
of rapid climate change. Both outcomes represent important progress towards
understanding natural oscillations in the OMZ as well as modeling and planning
for a changing OMZ in the face of global climate perturbations. The project will
provide opportunities for undergraduate researchers as well as support a female
early career researcher.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The marine sedimentary record is
the most promising archive from which to reconstruct long term marine
oxygenation. However, significant limitations exist in the available proxies for
low oxygen marine environments. This project aims to address this need by
evaluating and applying a range of promising geochemical (trace element and
stable isotope) and morphologic (area-density and porosity) proxies relevant to
low oxygen environments in the planktic foraminifer Globorotaloides hexagonus.
The project will develop viable proxies based on the morphology and geochemistry
of G. hexagonus shells previously collected in depth-distributed MOCNESS
(Multiple Opening/Closing Net and Environmental Sensing System) tows from the
eastern Pacific. The results from this proxy development in modern shells will
then be ground-truthed and applied to two already well characterized sediment
cores from the Mexican Margin and Panama Basin that span from the Last Glacial
Maximum through the Holocene. The sediment records will be used to reconstruct
past conditions in the eastern tropical Pacific OMZ, where significant questions
about glacial-interglacial oxygenation persist. This research will lead to a
more mechanistic understanding of how OMZs respond to climate more
broadly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.