* 1851432
* RUI: Collaborative Research: Trait differentiation and local adaptation to depth within meadows of the foundation seagrass Zostera marina
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Cynthia Hays, Keene State College
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 03/31/2024
* USD 217,126.00

Understanding how species cope with spatial variation in their environment (e.g.
gradients in light and temperature) is necessary for informed management as well
as for predicting how they may respond to change. This project will examine how
key traits vary with depth in common eelgrass (Zostera marina), one of the most
important foundation species in temperate nearshore ecosystems worldwide. The
investigators will use a combination of experiments in the field and lab, paired
with fine-scale molecular analyses, to determine the genetic and environmental
components of seagrass trait variation. This work will provide important
information on the microevolutionary mechanisms that allow a foundation species
to persist in a variable environment, and thus to drive the ecological function
of whole nearshore communities. The Northeastern University graduate and Keene
State College (KSC) undergraduate students supported by this project will
receive training in state-of-the-art molecular techniques, as well as mentorship
and experience in scientific communication and outreach. A significant portion
of KSC students are from groups under-represented in science. Key findings of
the research will be incorporated into undergraduate courses and outreach
programs for high school students from under-represented groups, and presented
at local and national meetings of scientists and stakeholders.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Local adaptation, the superior performance of "home" versus "foreign"
genotypes in a local environment, is a powerful demonstration of how natural
selection can overcome gene flow and drift to shape phenotypes to match their
environment. The classic test for local adaptation is a reciprocal transplant.
However, such experiments often fail to capture critical aspects of the
immigration process that may mediate realized gene flow in natural systems. For
example, reciprocal transplant experiments typically test local and non-local
phenotypes at the same (often adult) life history stage, and at the same
abundance or density, which does not mirror how dispersal actually occurs for
most species. In real populations, migrants (non-local) often arrive at low
numbers compared to residents (local), and relative frequency itself can impact
fitness. In particular, rare phenotypes may experience reduced competition for
resources, or relative release from specialized pathogens. Such negative
frequency dependent selection can reduce fitness differences between migrants
and residents due to local adaptation, and magnify effective gene flow, thus
maintaining greater within-population genetic diversity. The investigators will
combine spatially paired sampling and fine-scale molecular analyses to link
seed/seedling trait variation across the depth gradient at six meadows to key
factors that may drive these patterns: local environmental conditions,
population demography, and gene flow across depths. The team will then
experimentally test the outcome of cross-gradient dispersal in an ecologically
relevant context, by reciprocally out-planting seeds from different depths and
manipulating relative frequency in relation to both adults and other seedling
lineages. The possible interaction between local adaptation and frequency-
dependence is particularly relevant for Zostera marina, which represents one of
the best documented examples of the ecological effects of genetic diversity and
identity. Further, a better understanding of seagrass trait differentiation is
not simply a matter of academic interest, but critical to successful seagrass
restoration and conservation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.