* 1851845
* Broadening Participation in STEM Faculty: A Program to support the Diversity Initiative for Tenure in Economics (DITE)
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2019,09/30/2023
* William Darity, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 09/30/2023
* USD 479,500.00

Minorities are seriously under-represented in tenured economics faculty
positions in US universities resulting in lack of role models for young under-
represented groups. This lack of racial and ethnic diversity hampers the
creation of a diversified STEM workforce and also lead to lack of diversity in
research topics in economics. Broadening Participation in STEM Faculty: A
Program to Support the Diversity Initiative for Tenure in Economics (DITE) is a
program to support under-represented junior faculty in economics. The broad goal
of the program is to increase the number of faculty from under-represented
populations in economics who hold tenured positions in the academy generally.
The project will also focus on increasing tenured faculty in economics at
Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs) and Hispanic Serving
Colleges and Universities (HSCUs). DITE fellows will be mentored by
distinguished professors of economics in integrating research projects,
establishing a credible research portfolio and publishing and service record
that will get them tenured in economic departments. DITE will support a yearly
cohort of 15 junior economics faculty over the two-year span of this proposed
grant (for a cumulative total of up to 30). DITE fellows who obtain tenure are
expected to mentor your economic faculty of color. By helping to diversify the
economics faculty in the US, the proposed activity will help to create a
diversified STEM workforce and research agenda for the 21st century, thus
strengthening the US economy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broadening Participation in
STEM Faculty: Broadening Participation in STEM Faculty: A Program to Support the
Diversity Initiative for Tenure in Economics (DITE) is a program to support
under-represented junior faculty in the economics profession. The continued
gross under-representation of economists from racial minorities and ethnic
groups in the ranks of college and university faculty creates an imperative for
special efforts to change the STEM field and the academy through increased
presence of under-represented groups (URM). Serious under-representation does
not only inhibit US?s ability to create a diversified STEM workforce for the
21st century and beyond, it also skews economic research away from issues that
may concern to these under-represented groups. Because there are so few URM
professors of economics, there is a greater cost to society when any single one
of these professors is lost in the tenure pipeline. The DITE curriculum is
designed to help URM faculty of economics decode the academy, demystify the
promotion and tenure process, and identify, develop, and leverage a research
program to a tenure position. The DITE program will therefore benefit the US
through a diversified economics faculty and an enhanced research
portfolio.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.