* 1852837
* North Carolina High School Mathematics Master Teacher Fellows Program
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2024
* Karen Hollebrands, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Kimberly Tanner
* 04/30/2024
* USD 1,844,149.00

With support from the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program, this Track 3:
Master Teaching Fellowships project aims to serve the national need of improving
the development of highly effective secondary mathematics teacher leaders in
high-need school districts. Each of the twenty Master Teachers prepared by the
project will teach approximately 150 students per year. As a result, over the
duration of the five-year project, up to 15,000 students in high-need North
Carolina school districts will receive mathematics instruction from a highly
qualified mathematics teacher leader. The project aims to build on experiences
from two prior Noyce scholarship programs at North Carolina State University and
a North Carolina Quest grant to support practicing high school mathematics
teachers to implement new state standards for
mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project includes partnerships between
North Carolina State University, The Innovation Project (a nonprofit
organization committed to improving education for all students in North
Carolina), and four local high-need school districts (Cabarrus County Schools,
Mount Airy City Schools, Rockingham County Schools, and Wayne County Schools).
The project aims to prepare twenty mathematics Master Teachers across the state
of North Carolina. Each cohort of Master Teacher Fellows will include two
teachers from each of the partnering high-need school districts. During the
five-year project, Fellows will complete graduate coursework in mathematics
education, fulfilling requirements for National Board Certification in
Adolescence and Young Adulthood Mathematics. In addition, they will engage in
mentorship training to learn how to support student teachers and early career
teachers, and will participate in leadership professional development.
Evaluation activities have the potential to provide insights into how the
project: (i) prepares and retains experienced mathematics teacher leaders; (ii)
influences teachers' effectiveness as mathematics teachers and teacher leaders;
and (ii) impacts the development of leadership skills in teachers at
participating districts. The Noyce program supports talented STEM undergraduate
majors and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers in high-need
school districts and experienced, exemplary K-12 STEM teachers to become STEM
master teachers. It also supports research on the persistence, retention, and
effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.