* 1852297
* REU Site:  Research Experiences for Undergraduates in Conservation Science at Zoo Miami
* BIO,DBI
* 01/15/2020,03/31/2024
* Steven Whitfield, Zoo Miami Foundation, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 03/31/2024
* USD 499,877.00

This REU Site award to Zoo Miami, in partnership with Florida International
University, located in Miami, FL, will support the training of 10 students for
10 weeks during the summers of 2020- 2022. The REU Site, focused on conservation
science, includes projects in field conservation (population biology, habitat
ecology, invasive species biology, and global change ecology) and management of
captive populations (wildlife disease biology, wildlife nutrition, animal
psychology, animal behavior, reproductive physiology). Students will conduct
closely mentored but independent research projects under the guidance of Zoo
scientists and university-based researchers. Students will gain valuable skills
in experimental design and data collection, written and oral communication, data
management and data analysis, and reading and interpreting scientific
literature. Students will gain exposure to STEM-related careers both within and
outside of academia. In addition, students will learn STEM education in informal
settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is anticipated that a total of 30 students
will be trained in the program over the 3 year period of the grant. This program
focuses on advancing diversity and participation of underrepresented groups in
STEM. At least 50% of students will come from groups underrepresented in STEM,
and at least 70% of students will come from colleges and universities with
limited research opportunities, including community colleges. Students will
engage in every part of the research process and many will present the results
of their work at scientific conferences. A common web-based assessment tool
(used by all REU Site programs funded by the Division of Biological
Infrastructure) will be used to determine the effectiveness of the training
program. Students will be tracked after the program in order to determine their
career paths. Students are expected to respond to an automatic email sent via
the NSF reporting system. More information about the program is available by
visiting https://www.zoomiami.org/reu_program, or by contacting the PI (Dr.
Steven Whitfield at steven.whitfield@miamidade.gov) or the co-PI (Dr. Elizabeth
Anderson at epanders@fiu.edu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.