* 1852496
* REU Site:  Research and Training in Biochemistry, Biophysics and Biodesign (B3) for Undergraduates
* BIO,DBI
* 01/15/2020,12/31/2023
* David Jeruzalmi, CUNY City College
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 12/31/2023
* USD 437,743.00

The Biochemistry, Biophysics and Biodesign (B3) REU site award to City College
of New York (CCNY), located in New York, NY, will support the training of 10
students for 10 weeks during the summers of 2020-2022. The B3-REU program draws
mentors from the Departments of Chemistry &amp; Biochemistry, Biology, and
Physics, the Biomedical Engineering and Chemical Engineering and the CUNY School
of Medicine. Students will be selected by the program steering committee based
on their interest in research and fit in the program. The program will recruit
students from: 1) CCNY and the City University of New York (CUNY) system, 2)
students from community colleges in the CUNY system, and 3) students from
outside CUNY. Student research will be supplemented with workshops and field
trips to enable students to develop a science identity that will motivate
pursuit of advanced degrees and careers in science. Workshops will train
students on keeping a lab notebook, responsible conduct of research, writing a
scientific paper or poster and others. To assess the program, the BIO REU common
assessment tool will be used. Students will be tracked after the REU for their
progress in their pursuit of a STEM career. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU Site
will train students on a variety of contemporary problems in biochemistry and
biophysics. Example projects include the structural and functional analysis of
macromolecular complexes, DNA repair, organelles, environmental sensing,
microbial cytokinesis, membrane biogenesis; affinity of protein side chains and
interaction of proteins and peptides with membranes. Students will learn how
professional scientists think about problems, formulate hypotheses, design and
perform experiments, and analyze data. It is anticipated that at least 30
students, primarily from schools with limited research opportunities, will be
trained in the program. The broader impact of the program will be measured by
the number of students trained, including women and members of under-represented
groups, and by contributions to advances in science thru publications and
presentaions. Students will learn how research is conducted, and many will
present their work at scientific conferences. Students who have been accepted to
the program will be asked to respond to an automatic email sent via the NSF
reporting system. More information about the program is available by visiting
https://www.b3-reu.ccny.cuny.edu, or by contacting the PI (Dr. David Jeruzalmi:
dj@ccny.cuny.edu; Twitter: @CCNYB3REU; Instagram:
ccny_b3_reu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.