* 1852274
* REU Site: Summer MAterials Research @ Tulane (SMART)
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2019,02/28/2023
* Henry Ashbaugh, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 02/28/2023
* USD 338,334.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: The Summer MAterials Research @ Tulane Research
Experiences for Undergraduates (SMART-REU) site engages a diverse cohort of
students in summer materials research projects, thereby sustaining a pipeline of
students entering advanced graduate study in STEM. SMART participants engage in
cutting-edge research projects supervised by Tulane University's faculty, learn
about a broad range of research and graduate school topics in weekly workshops
and discussion panels, and strengthen relationships through group activities in
the greater New Orleans community. Research projects offered to participants
broadly fall within the fields of materials for Health, Energy, and the
Environment, which reflect the strengths of Tulane's Science and Engineering
faculty; furthermore, these fields are nationally in need of skilled STEM
graduates to sustain growth in advanced technology development. To broaden
participation across a range of groups, SMART actively recruits women and
participants from under-represented groups through partnerships with faculty at
Xavier University of Louisiana (a Historically Black College or University),
Dillard University (HBCU), Prairie View A&amp;M University (HCBU), and the
University of the Incarnate Word (a Hispanic-Serving Institution), as well as
from institutions that do not have doctoral programs in STEM to reach
undergraduates who may not have many research opportunities at their home
institutions. The long-term payoff of the SMART-REU site is the promotion of
advanced STEM field study to a broader base of students with ties to Louisiana
and the Gulf Region who can support future tech sector economic development both
regionally and nationally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: To build
undergraduate student competence in advanced research techniques, participants
in the SMART-REU summer research program engage in a wide range of materials
research projects like the synthesis of polymeric transdermal drug delivery
vehicles (Materials for Health), the development of large area, ultra-high-power
density two-dimensional photovoltaics (Materials for Energy), and the
fabrication of nano-porous membranes to recover oil from emulsions (Materials
for the Environment). To broaden exposure to the field of materials science and
engineering, SMART-REU participants attend weekly faculty-led research workshops
covering all aspects of materials research taking place at Tulane University. To
explore potential careers in an advanced STEM field, participants engage in
biweekly discussion groups on the graduate school experience (led by graduate
mentors), possible research careers (led by faculty), and entrepreneurship (led
by faculty who have commercialized their research). The summer program concludes
with a poster symposium where students present their research successes to the
greater Tulane community. SMART tracks past participants through surveys
assessing the impact of the SMART-REU program on their career paths to
proactively improve the program in ways that maximize the impact of the site for
future participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.