* 1852249
* REU Site: Data Analytics and Information Retrieval
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Jiangping Chen, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Peter Brass
* 02/29/2024
* USD 399,849.00

This three-year Research Experiences for Undergraduates site in Data Analytics
and Information Retrieval is hosted at the University of North Texas (UNT). The
objective of this project is to provide a supportive and engaging research and
learning environment for students to build research experiences in data
analytics and information retrieval, develop broadly applicable research skills,
enhance skills in research collaboration and communication, and explore research
interests in data science. It offers a ten-week research program for ten
undergraduate students each summer. During the ten-week period, each student
engages in closely mentored research, under advising of a faculty mentor, in one
major research topic in data analytics and information retrieval. The faculty-
student interaction, as well as interaction among students, take many different
forms. The project supports continual mentoring of students after the summer
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The site leverages the expertise of the faculty
mentors in data analytics, computational linguistics, and information retrieval
to develop state-of-the-art integrated research projects in data analytics and
information retrieval for more effectively advising students in research. The
research projects cover the fundamental issues in algorithms, models, tools, and
applications of both data analytics and information retrieval. The sample
research projects include: 1. Data analytics of biomedical images, 2. Content
based image retrieval, 3. Information retrieval of large-scale text collections,
and 4. Social media information retrieval for disaster
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.