* 1852160
* REU Site: Advanced Chemistries for Energy and Sensing Applications at the University of Tennessee
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Michael Best, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 05/31/2024
* USD 329,840.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates site award to the University of
Tennessee Knoxville, located in Knoxville, TN, supports the training of 10
undergraduate students for 10 weeks during the summers of 2019-2021. In this
program, funded by the Division of Chemistry, participants engage in research
projects and receive mentoring to develop complementary professional skills
critical for successful scientific careers. The individual research projects
center around the theme of advanced chemistries for energy and sensing
applications. The professional development and mentoring component places an
emphasis on building undergraduates' communication skills through collaboration
with the English Department. The students create high quality science writing.
This program also exposes participants to a variety of possible careers in
chemical research through interaction with neighboring institutions such as the
Oak Ridge National Laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Undergraduates' research
projects, falling under the broad umbrella of advanced chemistries for energy
and sensing, include studying shape-changing polymeric materials, characterizing
single-molecule magnets and chemical qubits, computationally studying polymeric
membranes for gas separation, understanding structure-property relationships of
polymerization catalysts, and designing liposomes for triggered release of
encapsulated contents. This REU Site emphasizes the inclusion of a diverse group
of undergraduates to address the under-representation of demographic groups.
Ultimately, this site works to develop a well-trained and diverse set of
talented chemists primed for future contributions to academics, government
service or industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.