* 1852251
* REU Site: Scalable Nanomanufacturing of Complex Materials
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/2019,10/31/2023
* Susan Trolier-McKinstry, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 10/31/2023
* USD 360,000.00

This Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Site, Scalable
Nanomanufacturing of Complex Materials, hosted by Penn State University,
University Park, provides a diverse cohort of undergraduate students with an
opportunity to work on next generation materials and devices that will underpin
the future of microelectronics research and also participate in a focused
professional development and mentoring program. As industry projects the end of
Moore's law in terms of device scaling, "More than Moore" approaches which
utilize new materials to enable new functionalities will become increasingly
critical. This REU site will enable ten students annually to work in the field
of advanced nanomanufacturing in state-of-the-art user facilities. Emphasis will
be placed on developing processes and models for deposition and patterning of
emerging materials with complex chemistries that change the available palette of
functions for semiconductors, sensors, and actuators. The program builds on Penn
State expertise in the areas of two-dimensional chalcogenides for applications
in next generation electronics as well as integrated piezoelectrics and
pyroelectrics. While the materials described above are interesting in and of
themselves, combinations of these two classes of materials: the 2D chalcogenides
and high strain piezoelectrics based on complex oxides should enable low power
computation for wearable devices and the Internet of Things, CMOS-compatible
actuation voltages for miniaturized medical ultrasound transducers, adjustable
optics, self-powered sensors, conformable electronics, and RF electronics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU program is hosted by the co-located Penn State
Nanofabrication facility and the 2D Crystal Consortium- Materials Innovation
Platform facility, whose faculty, students, and staff will work with a diverse
cohort of ten undergraduate students annually selected from institutions across
the nation to conduct research in the field of heterogeneous integration of
complex materials in a nanomanufacturing environment. Long-term skills imparted
will include the development and testing of a scientific hypothesis, practice in
oral and written scientific communication, and management of scientific data.
Through engagement with industry partners, the REU participants will gain
perspective on research career pathways beyond academia and be exposed to the
organization and operational infrastructure of an industrial research facility
in industrial R&amp;D, manufacturing and management. Students will be paired
with faculty and trained graduate student mentors in an environment for which
the team has a long track record of success in recruiting and inspiring diverse
undergraduate populations. Special recruitment efforts will be made to encourage
applicants from academic institutions where research programs are limited,
female students, students with disabilities, students who are veterans of the
U.S. Armed Services and underrepresented minority
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.