* 1852379
* UNS: Collaborative Research: Dynamics of Active Particles in Anisotropic Fluids
* ENG,CBET
* 08/09/2018,07/31/2019
* Nicholas Abbott, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 07/31/2019
* USD 43,512.00

1510949(Cordova) & 1508987(Abbott)

The goal of the proposed research is to investigate with both experiments and
computations the behavior of complex, anisotropic active fluids. Active fluids
are fluids that behave in unique ways, because of the presence of active
particles that can self-assemble, or can move and pack in different ways, giving
different macroscopic properties to the fluid. The proposed research can uncover
novel phenomena that could be exploited for design new fluid materials that are
responsive to their external environment.

Past studies have focused largely on the physics of "active colloids" in
isotropic Newtonian fluids, yet many future applications of active fluids would
require an understanding of their behavior in complex fluids. This is the white
space that this proposal covers: how anisotropy in the viscoelastic properties
of a fluid can impact fundamental transport phenomena involving active colloids.
A first research thrust will focus on the effect of the anisotropic environment
of a liquid crystal suspension has on the diffusivity of a self-propelled
particle within the suspension. Specifically, Brownian Dynamics (BD) simulations
will be combined with experiments involving tracking of single self-propelled
colloidal Janus particles at the interface of a nematic liquid crystal. A second
thrust will focus on the effects of a suspension of active particles hosted
within an anisotropic fluid on the diffusion of passive tracer particles. Motile
bacteria dispersed within biocompatible liquid crystals will be used to explore
how passive particles diffuse in the presence of the motion of the rod-shaped
bacteria. The overall outcome of this integrated program of experiment and
simulation will be new knowledge regarding fundamental transport processes
driven by internally generated gradients in complex fluids. The collaborating
group will establish a collaboration with the Teacher Preparation Program at the
University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez to develop, disseminate and assess bilingual
educational modules. Educational activities are proposed to expose students to
cross-cultural educational experiences and to prepare them to work in diverse
settings. An interdisciplinary class on soft matter will be offered to students
at both institutions.