* 1852273
* REU Site: Creating research pathways and enhancing diversity through the study of Earth's interior, surface, and climate
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2024
* Karen Fischer, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wenner
* 04/30/2024
* USD 272,331.00

The Dynamic Earth in the 21st Century: Undergraduate research on the evolution
of Earth's interior, surface and climate REU Site is a research internship
summer program that will bring undergraduate students to Brown University to
work with faculty in the Department of Earth, Environmental and Planetary
Sciences. The students will also engage in career development activities through
the Leadership Alliance, which is a national consortium comprised of 36 PhD-
granting Institutions, Minority-Serving Institutions and private industry
dedicated to training and mentoring students from diverse cultural and academic
backgrounds for competitive graduate programs and professional research-based
careers. A primary goal of this REU Site is to recruit eight students, primarily
from underrepresented minority groups, to engage in research in Earth and
environmental science. The program will support a different group of students
for nine weeks in each of three summers. Research projects will include work on
the record and consequences of climate change, the physics of volcanic
eruptions, the structure of the Earth's interior inferred from seismic waves,
and other fundamental topics in the Earth and environmental sciences. This
research experience will help the students to develop skills with critical
thinking, research methodologies, scientific writing and oral presentations.
Through their research and a range of other activities, students will also gain
insight on possible pathways through graduate school and research careers. These
activities include a weekly study group, the Leadership Alliance National
Symposium, participation in a national science meeting, as well as other
professional development and networking events. This project is jointly funded
by the Earth Sciences REU program and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU Site, Dynamic Earth
in the 21st Century: Undergraduate research on the evolution of Earth's
interior, surface and climate, is a collaborative venture between the Department
of Earth, Environmental and Planetary Sciences (DEEPS) at Brown University and
the Leadership Alliance. Our goals are to: 1) enable a diverse group of
undergraduates from outside of Brown to investigate fundamental processes
regulating the evolution of the Earth's interior, surface and climate; 2) help
students develop critical research, communication and professional skills, in
order to increase their confidence and gain greater understanding of the
research process and research careers; and 3) promote student awareness and
understanding of graduate school to facilitate transition into competitive
graduate programs in Earth science and the broader physical sciences. This REU
Site builds on a successful three-year DEEPS-Alliance partnership that engaged
12 diverse undergraduates in innovative research and aided them on their
pathways to research careers. The Site will continue to focus on recruiting
students from underrepresented minority groups in the geosciences, women, first
generation college students, students from lower income households, students who
attend schools where STEM research opportunities are limited, and students with
disabilities. Research projects will include those that address key questions
about paleoclimate changes inferred from marine and lake sediments; ice sheet
albedo and its implications for melting; human interactions with atmospheric
chemistry; magma chamber properties and their potential for eruption; the
determination of igneous rock thermal histories; and the properties of the
lithosphere and asthenosphere measured by seismic waves. During three summers,
eight student-interns will work for nine weeks with a member of the DEEPS
faculty, and will be further supported by their surrounding research team, a
weekly study group, and the highly effective professional development and
networking programs of the Leadership Alliance, both at Brown and nationally.
The students will learn to communicate their work in writing, and through
presentations at the Leadership Alliance National Symposium, a research
symposium at Brown, and either the Fall American Geophysical Union or the
Geological Society of America meetings. This REU Site will synthesize the well-
established network of Leadership Alliance minority-serving and undergraduate-
focused institutions with DEEPS research opportunities to create a new pool of
research-focused, highly qualified scholars for graduate programs in the
geosciences. The program will also develop best practices and methodologies for
activities at Alliance and DEEPS partner institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.