* 1852243
* REU Site: Environmental Engineering Solutions for Pollution Prevention
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2024
* Alan Rabideau, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 04/30/2024
* USD 359,875.00

This renewal REU Site: Environmental Engineering Solutions for Pollution
Prevention (EESPP) at SUNY Buffalo, will train undergraduate researchers to
address global pollution prevention concerns within three themes: detection,
source control, and remediation. The 10 week program stresses laboratory-focused
projects that will provide students with confidence, creativity, and
independence. A diverse student cohort will be annually recruited from local,
regional, and national universities with limited undergraduate research
opportunities. Research projects in the EESPP-REU integrate engineering and
science to solve pollution prevention issues relevant to the Buffalo-Niagara
region and the globe. Each project will have an immediate impact on
environmental or human health and/or the economy of western New York. Inherent
with pollution prevention is the potential for societal benefits through
improvements to health or the economy. Consistent with the program's themes,
projects may identify pollutants that were previously unrecognized, develop
technologies that limit air/water pollution emissions, or remediate sites that
threaten health. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During the 10-week summer program
students will make focused contributions to faculty projects in thematic
research clusters addressing pollutant detection, source control, and
remediation. These themes, considered together, address the wider "Pollution
Prevention" focus of the EESPP-REU program. The theme also allows the EESPP-REU
program to directly address NSF focus areas. Students and faculty participants
will disseminate research results through conference presentations and peer-
reviewed publications, expanding opportunities for knowledge advancement.
Selected participants will then be paired with a research mentor to conduct
transformative pollution prevention research. Weekly group meetings of the REU
cohort will foster student-student communication in conjunction with training
workshops and professional or social networking opportunities. An annual
community service project will provide concrete evidence of societal impact
while fostering student-student communication. A concluding Research Symposium,
as well as support for post-REU conference presentations and publications, will
help students hone their communication skills. In addition, the EESPP-REU
program promotes graduate school enrollment by providing Kaplan Test Prep GRE
training to interested participants. A portfolio of external assessment
activities supports the continuous improvement of the REU
site.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.