* 1852996
* SBIR Phase II:  Ambient energy harvesting technology for IoT wireless sensor applications
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2019,06/30/2021
* Mark Bachman, XIDAS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 06/30/2021
* USD 1,241,576.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project will be the development of unique portable
energy harvesting and storage technology that can enable ubiquitous deployment
of small wireless sensor modules throughout the nation's industrial, civil,
agricultural, and institutional infrastructure. The portable power technology
developed in this project will enable such devices to be deployed without the
need for electrical cables or batteries. This will remove the single biggest
technology barrier to growth of the industrial Internet of Things (IoT), namely
the difficulty of installing and maintaining large numbers of wireless sensors
in locations that need them. Wireless IoT systems, such as for safety
monitoring, performance optimization, or predictive maintenance, can
significantly increase productivity, efficiency, safety, and cost reduction of
operations. This project's developments in electromechanical design, circuit
design, and integrated manufacturing will advance the art of ambient energy
harvesting technology. These perpetual energy products will help the United
States take global leadership in IoT, providing significant economic benefit to
the companies that use this technology for their IoT applications. Successful
deployment of IoT directly translates into economic growth, increased worker
safety, improved environment, and job creation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed project will develop and manufacture small, inexpensive energy
harvesters with built in energy storage for wireless IoT applications. These
energy harvesting units will extract energy from ambient sources, such as
vibrations, and will provide electrical power for small autonomous IoT devices.
The units will feature on-board energy storage, providing power even if the
ambient energy source is intermittent or if surge power is temporarily needed.
The first units will be optimized for efficiently extracting electrical power
from small amplitude vibrations at low frequencies, and can be manufactured at
low cost. The same underlying technology can be used to extract energy from
other sources, such as air/water flow, mechanical movement, or thermal
gradients. The project leverages unique circuit designs and manufacturing
processes that enable this unit to be (1) easily integrated into existing
electronic systems, (2) efficient in extracting electrical power from low energy
sources, and (3) manufacturable at an affordable, market-driven cost. This will
result in the development of an extensive product line of small, portable
inexhaustible energy sources for wireless IoT.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.