* 1852189
* REU Site:  Next Generation Sequencing
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Betsy Read, California State University San Marcos Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/29/2024
* USD 423,344.00

This REU Site award to California State University San Marcos, located in San
Marcos, CA, will support the training of 10 students for 10 weeks during the
summers of 2019-2021. This intensive research program will focus on the unifying
theme of Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) and Beyond: From Beetles to Beer.
Students will select a mentor from a diverse team of scientists who use genomic,
transcriptomic, metagenomic, and epigenomic methods to address fundamental
biological questions, including biological control, yeast biology in beer
flavoring, soil microbiomes in agriculture, amphibian ranavirus pathogenesis,
and biomineralization in invasive coccolithophores. The residential program will
foster a community of scholars who will transition from being students to
researchers, and from learning to discovery. Weekly enrichment activities are
embedded in the program with seminars, bioinformatics workshops, and field
trips, to highlight the breadth of NGS applications. In addition to graduate
school and career workshops, a culminating Poster Showcase is planned to
celebrate research accomplishments of participants and encourage future
presentations at regional and national meetings.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;It is
anticipated that a total of 30 students, primarily from schools with limited
research opportunities, will be trained in the program in conducting and
presenting independent research. With a strong commitment to supporting
underrepresented groups, including veterans, and first-generation college
students, the CSUSM NSF REU program will contribute to building a diverse and
talented population of next generation scientists. We hope to host a strong
cohort of biologists that will be well poised to apply to competitive
doctoral/Masters programs.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;A common web-based assessment
tool used by all REU Site programs funded by the Division of Biological
Infrastructure, and a tri-weekly assessment of applying knowledge to research
will be used to determine the effectiveness of the training program. Students
will be tracked after the program in order to determine their career paths.
Students will be asked to respond to an automatic email sent via the NSF
reporting system. More information about the program is available by visiting
https://www.csusm.edu/bioreu/index.html, or by contacting the PI (Dr. Betsy Read
at bread@csusm.edu) or the co-PI (Dr. Arun Sethuraman at
asethuraman@csusm.edu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.