* 1852554
* EAGER: TWC: Collaborative: iPrivacy: Automatic Recommendation of Personalized Privacy Settings for Image Sharing
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2018,08/31/2019
* Dan Lin, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 08/31/2019
* USD 120,679.00

The objective of this project is to investigate a comprehensive image privacy
recommendation system, called iPrivacy (image Privacy), which can efficiently
and automatically generate proper privacy settings for newly shared photos that
also considers consensus of multiple parties appearing in the same photo. Photo
sharing has become very popular with the growing ubiquity of smartphones and
other mobile devices. However, many people especially young users of social
networks often share private photos about themselves and their friends without
being aware of the potential impact on their future lives caused by unwanted
disclosure and privacy violations. Although some photo sharing platforms start
to offering functions of privacy configuration, such manual process could be
very tedious for users and also error-prone since not many users have sufficient
background knowledge about privacy. This project will address these rising
privacy concerns of photo sharing in social sites and benefit billions of social
network users. The broader impact of this project will be further enhanced by
the integration of education and research. A range of educational activities
will be carried out including curriculum development, professional training for
students and cybersecurity camp for K-12 teachers, with emphasis to under-
represented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will seamlessly integrate
expertise from two different domains: image understanding and privacy
management, leading to one of the first comprehensive and automatic policy
recommendation systems. The proposed project contains the following innovative
researches. First, a multi-party privacy-sensitive object identification
algorithm will be developed which will be capable of automatically generating
the identity of each human subject in a photo so as to automate the subsequent
privacy harmonization process. Second, a unique privacy harmonization approach
will be designed, which will conduct hierarchical privacy policy mining to
understand different levels of privacy concerns in communities, recommend
policies that effectively harmonize privacy preferences of multiple people
appearing in the same photo and also adapt to the evolution of people's privacy
preferences. The proposed iPrivacy system will not only fully release the burden
of privacy configuration at users' side, but will also promote better privacy
practice based on knowledge learned from large-scale historical and societal
information. &lt;br/&gt;