* 1852083
* REU Site: Microbial Symbioses and Diversity Research Experience at the University of Arizona
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2023
* S-Patricia Stock, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 03/31/2023
* USD 478,287.00

This REU Site award to the University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ, will support the
training of 12 students for 10 weeks during the summers of 2019- 2021. The theme
of microbial symbioses and biodiversity will allow students to gain an
appreciation of microbes and their interactions with other organisms and the
environment. Research projects will focus on 5 core areas: 1) systematics and
evolution; 2) plant/animal mutualistic and antagonistic interactions; 3)
microbes and the environment; 4) microbial metabolites and bio-products and 5)
genetics, genomics and bioinformatics. Students will receive training in core
elements of interdisciplinary research, including experimental design, data
interpretation, professional network development, and scientific ethics.
Additional activities include seminars, mentor-mentee and student meetings,
professional development activities, and field trips. Applications will be
reviewed based on the following: a) resume; b) student personal statement; c)
letters of recommendation; d) interest in the faculty mentor research program;
and e) potential impact on the student career. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is
anticipated that a total of 36 students, primarily from 2-year colleges in
Western US and across the country and schools with limited research
opportunities, will be trained in the program. Students will develop research
skills and independent thinking enhancing their success for careers in academia,
industry, and government agencies. Students will be supported to publish their
research, and many will present results of their work at scientific conferences.
A common web-based assessment tool used by all REU Site programs funded by the
Division of Biological Infrastructure will be used to determine the
effectiveness of the training program. In addition, weekly assessments will
measure the quality and effectiveness of different components of the program
including the research experience, mentors, professional development activities,
and housing. Students will be tracked for at least five years after the program
to determine their career paths. Students will also be asked to respond to an
automatic email sent via the NSF reporting system. More information about the
program is available by visiting https://www.stocklab-insectpathogens.com/nsf-
reu-site.html or by contacting the PIs, Dr. Patricia Stock
(spstock@email.aizona.edu) and Dr. Gayatri Vedantam
(gayatri@email.arizona.edu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.