* 1852276
* REU Site: The Summer Systematics Institute: training the next generation of scientists for the field, the lab, and sharing their science with the world
* BIO,DBI
* 02/15/2019,01/31/2023
* Lauren Esposito, California Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 01/31/2023
* USD 470,974.00

This REU Site award to the California Academy of Sciences, located in San
Francisco, CA, will support the training of 10 students for 9 weeks during the
summers of 2019? 2021. Research will primarily be conducted at the Academy and
at local field sites in Sonoma County, CA. The Academy's Institute for
Biodiversity Science and Sustainability is a research hub focused on
understanding the natural world and finding solutions to sustaining it. The
institution houses world-class natural history research collections, along with
modern day technology and genomics tools needed to study these specimens.
Participants of the Summer Systematics Institute will begin the summer with
fieldwork and immersive workshops, before returning to the Academy to be paired
with mentors, who are curators in the Institute, to work on original research
projects and attend seminars which provide tools in the field of systematics and
phylogenetics. The summer culminates with writing a scientific abstract and a
popular science article, and giving an oral presentation to the community in in
end-of-program symposium. Students apply through an online application system
and will be recruited from universities and community colleges across the
country. Applicants identify potential mentors during the application process,
and applications are competitively reviewed by advisors who make the final
selection of participants. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is anticipated that a total
of 30 students, primarily from schools with limited research opportunities, will
be trained in the program. Students will learn how biodiversity-focused research
is conducted, and many will present the results of their work at local symposia
and scientific conferences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A common web-based assessment
tool used by all REU Site programs funded by the Division of Biological
Infrastructure will be used to determine the effectiveness of the training
program. Students will be tracked after the program in order to determine their
career paths. Students will be asked to respond to an automatic email sent via
the NSF reporting system. More information about the program is available by
visiting https://www.calacademy.org/summer-systematics-institute, or by
contacting the PI (Dr. Lauren Esposito at lesposito@calacademy.org) or the co-PI
(Dr. Rebecca Johnson at rjohnson@calacademy.org).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.