* 1852813
* Building Capacity towards Certification of Middle Grades STEM Teachers through Partnership, Needs Assessment, and Curriculum Revision
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/2019,02/28/2021
* Richard Whittecar, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Lewis
* 02/28/2021
* USD 75,000.00

With support from the NSF Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program, this
Capacity Building project aims to serve the national interest in high-quality
STEM teaching by exploring curricular changes and potential partnerships to
increase the number of highly qualified middle school teachers in STEM fields.
The project will revise existing STEM curricula at Old Dominion University to be
compatible with requirements for middle school STEM licensure in at least two of
three areas: mathematics, science, and technology. The project also seeks to
continue a partnership with Tidewater Community College and pursue stronger
relationships with local area schools: Chesapeake City Public Schools, Norfolk
City Public Schools, Portsmouth City Public Schools, Suffolk City Public
Schools, and Franklin County Public Schools. Three additional partners will also
be targeted: Thomas Nelson Community College, Norfolk State University, and the
National Institute of Aerospace - Center for Integrative STEM Education.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to establishing these important partner
relationships in preparation for development of a Noyce Track 1 proposal, the
primary activities of the project will be curriculum revision and needs
assessment. The proposed curriculum revisions aim to prepare middle school
teachers for licensure in science and mathematics. The revision process will be
applied to the Ocean and Earth Science major and refined for use with additional
STEM majors. Changes will occur in upper-division science courses as well as
elective mathematics courses, which will be re-designed to focus on depth of
content relevant for middle school teachers. Extensive needs assessment will
examine existing data, conduct semi-structured interviews, and survey a large
stratified sample of high school students, community college students and
alumni, and current undergraduates regarding needs and barriers with respect to
pursuit of careers in teaching. The new knowledge gained by these activities
will be disseminated to support both local recruiting efforts and research on
STEM teacher preparation. The Noyce program supports talented STEM undergraduate
majors and professionals to become effective K-12 mathematics and science
teachers in high-need school districts and experienced, exemplary K-12 STEM
teachers to become STEM master teachers. It also supports research on the
persistence, retention, and effectiveness of K-12 teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.