* 1852614
* Arctic water isotope cycle processes and patterns in the Central Arctic during an International Arctic Drift Expedition (MOSAiC)
* GEO,OPP
* 03/01/2019,01/31/2023
* Jeffrey Welker, University of Alaska Anchorage Campus
* Standard Grant
* Roberto Delgado
* 01/31/2023
* USD 299,828.00

The Arctic is experiencing dramatic changes that are impacting land and ocean
environments in the north and in regions that include the entirety of the US,
Europe and Scandinavia. Changes in the Arctic are even being felt in tropical
regions through increased drought frequency and the intensity of water
shortages. These changes are continuing to occur at faster and faster rates and
are recognized and amplified by the shrinking of the Arctic's sea ice, the
thawing of permafrost and ancient carbon emissions into the atmosphere,
declining terrestrial snow pack, shrub encroachment of the tundra, and more
frequent and prolonged Arctic Vortex blasts of cold air and snow into the US,
Europe and Scandinavia. One of the most important changes that is central to the
entirety of Arctic change is how the water cycle is behaving now, how it
interacts with sea ice and how weather events dictate transport of Arctic
moisture and air into the lower latitudes and how low latitude moisture is
transferred into the Arctic, dictating precipitation patterns and the delivery
of freshwater around the north. However, understanding how the Arctic water
cycle is behaving over the entire calendar year, including during polar night
with measurements and observations directly in the Arctic Basin during winter
has been tremendously difficult as the region at times is almost as remote and
inhospitable as the dark side of the moon. The goal of this project is to test,
measure and develop a completely new understanding of the real-time behavior of
the Arctic water cycle continuously during 1.5 years as part of a major Arctic
climate initiative involving land-based stations in coordination with
simultaneous measurements aboard the Polarstern icebreaker. &lt;br/&gt;These
coordinated, real-time measurements will take place as the icebreaker drifts
during fall, winter, spring and summer from the eastern Arctic, across the North
Pole, along the east coast of Greenland and into the Barents Sea region. This
project will take continuous measurements of water vapor and precipitation
chemistry from Thule Air Base and Station Nord in Greenland and will be
coordinated with measurements being taken on the ship and from other land-based
stations in the Arctic. This simultaneous data will be used in new visualization
packages to display, share and observe how sea ice, atmospheric transport
patterns, and weather patterns are dictating the distribution of water vapor and
precipitation throughout the Arctic and into North America, Europe, Scandinavia
and Eurasia. This project has several broader impacts, outreach and educational
outcomes. By coordinating the measurements with the MOSAiC drift mission, it
will contribute to the collective wisdom and understanding of the Arctic System,
helping to develop a more holistic understanding of it?s behavior over an entire
year, including the most unresolved period, polar night &amp; winter. The
project also aims to educate students in classrooms during the observation
period of what is discovered, including real-time depictions of water vapor and
precipitation chemistry as storm systems develop and then propagate across the
Arctic Basin and from the Arctic Basin into North America and Europe and from
Europe and North America into the Arctic. The project includes training a
postdoctoral scientist whereby she/he will become familiar with cutting edge
technology and she/he will have opportunities to explore new venues of study by
working with like-generation scientists from many of the Artic countries
including partners from Germany, Sweden, Finland and Denmark. The project also
aims to develop a new set of Arctic Water Cycle and Arctic Change lectures to be
offered through UArctic (http://education.uarctic.org/studies/courses) and
posted for public access. These lectures will also be made available to the
global community including the US, Finnish, Swedish, German, Danish and
Norwegian societies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.