* 1852184
* Collaborative Research: Multiscale Characterization and Dynamics Modeling of Stomatal Function in Plants
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2019,12/31/2023
* Jun Zou, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 12/31/2023
* USD 237,795.00

This grant will support research that will improve our understanding of the
functions of stomata, the micro-size pores in plant leaf surfaces. As the
gatekeeper of carbon dioxide and water vapor exchange between plants and their
surrounding environment, stomata are not only crucial to the health of the
individual plants, but also have a direct and global impact on the evolution of
our entire ecosystem. However, currently our understanding of stomatal movement
and function is limited by the conventional strategies that only captured
static, averaged, and long-term macro scale behaviors of stomata. Little is
known about the qualitative characteristics of stomata behavior and functions at
the micro-scale, and their correlation with the underlying physiological
processes of the host plant. This award supports fundamental research to create
a multiscale dynamics modeling framework centered on instantaneous stomatal
movement. Success of this research will create a unique, powerful tool for
stomata studies and a game-changing sensing device for monitoring and
controlling plants' physiological activities, opening up and enabling a wide-
range of fundamental biological research (e.g., defending mechanism of plants
against insect attack, plant-environment interaction) and frontier agricultural
applications (e.g., optimal crop growth control, rapid genotype to phenotype
transition). Thus, results from this research will benefit both the U.S. society
and the economy. The multidisciplinary nature of the research across dynamic
system modeling and diagnostics, micro-electro-mechanical systems, and plant
biology will help to attract and broaden participations of underrepresented
groups in engineering and science fields, and positively impact engineering and
science education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The multiscale characterization and
modeling of stomatal movement can provide the tools needed for revealing the
missing links between the internal molecular dynamics and the external cellular
movement involved in stomatal regulation, and for mapping and correlating
biomechanical evolutions of stomata and their underneath genetic roots. However,
scientific challenges are yet to be addressed to establish such a modeling
framework. The research team will create a biophysics-based multiscale stomatal
dynamics model that links and correlates subcellular mechanical evolutions to
microscale cellular activities during stomatal movement. The modeling approach
will be built upon a novel atomic force microscope technique to quantitatively
map nanomechanical evolutions during single stoma movement, and one-of-a-kind
miniaturized sensors to measure the water vapor and electrical potential
variations caused by the stomata movements. They will also identify, evaluate,
and optimize the stomatal dynamics model through experiments, by using maize and
Arabidopsis thaliana as example systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.