* 1852690
* Inspire and Prepare Noyce Scholars to Teach in Rural Environments
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2025
* Edward Freeman, St. John Fisher College
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 05/31/2025
* USD 1,177,339.00

With support from the NSF Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program, this Track 1
Scholarships and Stipends project aims to serve the national interest in high-
quality STEM teaching. It will do so by focusing on two national challenges in
STEM education: (i) the shortage of highly qualified STEM teachers, particularly
in rural high-need schools; and (ii) the lack of prepared college-ready
secondary students in STEM. The project is a collaboration between St. John
Fisher College (SJFC), Finger Lakes Community College (FLCC) and four rural
high-need local central school districts (Sodus, Geneva, North Rose-Wolcott, and
Penn Yan). Through this partnership, the project aims to prepare twenty new STEM
teachers over five years. These teachers will be recruited from undergraduate
majors in biology, chemistry, mathematics physics, and computer science. The
undergraduates will be provided with two-year scholarships to cover their unmet
financial needs. Project activities in collaboration with FLCC include early
exposure of undergraduates to teaching as a career, and inclusion of FLCC
transfer students in pre-service teaching activities. This innovative project
plans to supplement curricular requirements with educational modules on
Culturally Aware Mentorship (adopted from the University of Wisconsin-Madison),
to develop lessons and laboratories that require minimal resources, to educate
preservice teachers about trauma-sensitive classrooms, and to increase
understanding of poverty's effects on learning environments. Mentoring of
Scholars and teachers will also be included. By promoting an educational
partnership among local rural school districts, FLCC, and SJFC, this project
aims to provide a replicable model of preparation of STEM teachers for high
needs, rural school districts across the Nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project aims to accomplish three objectives that address the national need for
highly qualified STEM teachers: 1. Recruit twenty STEM undergraduate students,
including transfer students from community colleges, to teach in rural
environments and support them as they earn the credentials to become mathematics
or science teachers; 2. Provide these Noyce Scholars with scholarships and an
integrated enrichment and support program to equip them with the knowledge,
skills, and disposition to teach effectively in high-need school districts; and
3. Create new knowledge through a research study measuring how introduction of
trauma-sensitive pedagogy affects future STEM teachers and their classroom
practices. The project aims to support new teachers through ongoing mentoring,
professional development, and networking activities, including the development
of a community of practice focused on creating trauma-sensitive school
communities. Results will be widely shared through such means as publications,
professional meetings, and conference presentations. Preparing highly capable
STEM teachers trained in creating trauma-sensitive classrooms has the potential
to improve educational outcomes as well as college readiness for students in
high-needs and rural school districts, informing practices across the STEM
community. The Noyce program supports talented STEM undergraduate majors and
professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts and experienced, exemplary K-12 STEM teachers to become STEM master
teachers. It also supports research on the persistence, retention, and
effectiveness of K-12 teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.