* 1852294
* REU Site: Proactive Health Informatics
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Katie Siek, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 02/29/2024
* USD 304,990.00

The Proactive Health (ProHealth) Informatics Research Experience for
Undergraduates (REU) site at Indiana University Bloomington will teach ten
college students how to do research for eight weeks. They will make smart health
systems to help people take care of their health. Students may be from groups
that do not often go into computing research. Students will build intelligent,
pervasive systems that monitor health and help people make better choices. The
students' work will contribute to the fields of human-computer interaction,
pervasive computing and advanced analytics. This research should improve the
health of all United States citizens. Students will conduct their research with
children and older adults.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the ProHealth
REU Site is to train undergraduates from diverse backgrounds to become the next
generation of researchers who design, develop, and evaluate intelligent,
pervasive systems that empower lay people to proactively manage their health.
Innovations include the design of new mobile or wearable health systems that
integrate seamlessly into a person's life while providing valuable and
appropriately shared feedback. The ProHealth site will provide undergraduates
with the opportunity to conduct research with world-renowned faculty members in
the fields of human computer interaction, pervasive computing (mobile or
wearable), environmental sensing (ambient and on-body) and machine learning. The
ProHealth REU site will actively recruit students from traditionally
underrepresented groups in science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM),
including first generation college students, and students who do not have access
to research opportunities. The undergraduate students will have the opportunity
to: (1) learn how to design and build new mobile, wearable or ambient health
systems; (2) use the data collected from these systems to improve one's
performance or create personalized recommendations; (3) investigate the
implications of data collected at the individual and community level; or (4)
understand the needs of various populations to design better technology. These
projects can potentially improve the health of the broader United States
population. Undergraduate researchers will learn how to: conduct ethical
research; document their progress; represent themselves professionally online;
prepare for graduate school; network in professional settings; appropriately
disseminate one's findings through writing and presentation; and prepare oneself
for future career opportunities. In addition, the ProHealth REU team will
inspire lifelong learners - from K-12 to older adults - to consider computing
through interactive experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.