* 1852940
* I-Corps:  Costumer Discovery for Demand-responsive Transverse Rumble Strips
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2018,02/28/2019
* Alexander Paz, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 02/28/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to provide a
safety device to reduce traffic crashes, injuries, and fatalities. Existing
alternative technologies alone are unable to address the existing demand. In the
U.S, nearly 6,000 pedestrian fatalities and 70,000 pedestrian injuries occur
each year. From 2016 to 2017 there was a 27% increase in pedestrian fatalities.
Additionally, 130,000 schools across the United States need enhanced techniques
to increase driver alertness. In 2017, over 2,000 crashes resulting in 289
deaths occurred at rail crossings. A strong global demand exists for the
proposed traffic safety device because there are not alternatives with similar
effectiveness. Because the proposed device will be active only when required, it
has a much broader range of applications compared to alternative technologies.
For example, the proposed devise provides redundancy in the case of autonomous
vehicles to minimize the likelihood of crashes due to failures and/or
malfunction in the detection or navigation systems. That is, the proposed device
provides an alternative communication channel to alert the autonomous vehicle to
slow down or stop. The concept behind the proposed device to enhance safety can
be extended to other environments such as construction sites.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is about customer discovery for a
Demand-Responsive Transverse Rumble Strip (DRTRS) mechanism, which becomes
active (lowers an array of strips) only when necessary to alert drivers and
vehicles through noise and vibration of downstream risks. Permanent transverse
rumble strips are mainly used on approaches to intersections, toll plazas,
horizontal curves, and work zones to slow down traffic. Traditional transverse
rumble strips have been shown to be effective. However, drivers become familiar
with their location over time and their effectiveness tends to diminish.
Unnecessary noise, vehicle deterioration, and pavement wear out are additional
concerns associated with traditional transverse rumble strips. The intellectual
merits of our research are: (i) an effective and deployable DRTRS mechanism that
addresses the above issues and (ii) evaluation of its effectiveness and required
maintenance. The proposed intellectual merits required addressing simultaneously
significant challenges including operability and reliability under extreme
environmental and heterogeneous traffic conditions, small depth to minimize
affecting the integrity of the existing pavement, easy and rapid maintenance and
replacement, minimal maintenance schedules, and durability under snow plow
operations. In addition, this project is helping us improve our understanding of
using acoustic and haptic senses to prevent accidents.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.