* 1852263
* REU Site: Collaborative Research: Water Resources and Quality in the Riviera Maya, Mexico
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2019,01/31/2023
* Kenneth Voglesonger, Northeastern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Aisha Morris
* 01/31/2023
* USD 56,852.00

This REU site will engage students in research related to water resource
management issues in the Yucatan Peninsula in Mexico. Science and engineering
undergraduate students will work with faculty mentors from Northern Illinois
University, Northeastern Illinois University, and the Yucatan Center of
Scientific Research. Student projects will be interconnected and broadly related
to the important groundwater resources of the area. Projects will also explore
how this vital resource is impacted by human activities with a focus on the
economically important tourism industry. More specific areas of study include
the impacts of groundwater extraction, using geophysical methods to characterize
the groundwater system, natural and human-caused impacts on groundwater
chemistry, groundwater contamination and impacts on public health, and local
perceptions of the quality of groundwater in the Yucatan. The goals for
participants of this REU site include: developing scientific skills in the field
and laboratory, developing a global perspective of water resource issues,
building communication skills, and developing appreciation for international
scientific collaborations. The student projects will be interconnected to better
understand the water issues in Yucatan within a cultural and historical context.
Because the research project is in Mexico and encompasses a cultural aspect,
students interested in the region will be attracted to apply. In addition to
carrying out research, the students will produce materials for online platforms
to share information with the public, make presentations in Mexico to local
officials about the research findings, and publish the results in open access
journals. Through this work, the students and faculty will approach their work
from multiple areas of expertise and address fundamental questions about the use
of water resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During an eight-week period, this REU
Site will provide a high-quality research environment and mentoring to a diverse
group of 8 undergraduate students that may not otherwise have the opportunity to
be engaged in scientific activities in an international context. The summer
experience will take place in three phases. (1) Participants will spend two
weeks at Northern Illinois University where students will define the research
they will pursue in the field, participate in ethics training, discuss the
relationship between culture and water issues in Yucatan, receive safety and
travel information, and virtually meet the team members from Mexico. (2) The
next four weeks will be spent in Mexico sampling and collecting field data. The
participants will stay in local neighborhoods, away from the tourist areas to
gain more in-depth appreciation for the culture. During this period,
participants will be working side by side with Mexican scientists and students.
(3) During the last two weeks participants will return to Northern Illinois
University to continue with data analyses and synthesis. Through the combination
of high-quality research, international collaboration, development of mentor-
mentee relationships, and an immersive experience, the project aims in to
increase the representation of underrepresented groups in the sciences, while
also providing training to develop the students into high-caliber scientists who
will be well prepared to continue in graduate studies or professional
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.