* 1852338
* REU Site:  Biological Basis of Social Behavior
* BIO,DBI
* 01/15/2020,12/31/2023
* Kirsten Bohn, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 12/31/2023
* USD 383,838.00

This REU Site award to Johns Hopkins University, located in Baltimore, MD, will
support the training of 10 students for 10 weeks during the summers of 2020-
2022. Participants will conduct research with faculty mentors from the
Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences and the School of Medicine that
use cutting edge techniques. In addition to research, the program will include a
"Foundations in Scientific Research and Methodology" course which will instruct
participants on all aspects of research including responsible conduct of
research, animal welfare, experimental design, statistical analysis and
presentation of scientific data. The program also includes GRE preparation,
poster presentations at a campus-wide student summer research conference and
social activities with other summer research program students. Underrepresented
minorities, first generation students and students from institutions with
limited research opportunities are encouraged to apply. Students can apply
online and are selected by a committee of faculty mentors. It is anticipated
that a total of 30 students, primarily underrepresented groups from schools with
limited research opportunities, will be trained in the program.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research focuses on using comparative models and diverse
taxa (bats, owls, octopuses, primates and/or rodents) for understanding animal
social behavior. Areas of research include ethology, neurobiology and
neuroendocrinology with projects that look at both how and why social behavior
is produced. A common web-based assessment tool used by all REU Site programs
funded by the Division of Biological Infrastructure will be used to determine
the effectiveness of the training program. Students will be tracked after the
program in order to determine their career paths. Students will learn how
research is conducted, and many will present the results of their work at
scientific conferences. The combination of activities will serve to promote
students' enthusiasm and confidence for science, provide experience in all
aspects of conducting scientific research and develop a scientific foundation
that will serve to maximize success in graduate school and beyond. Students will
be asked to respond to an automatic email sent via the NSF reporting system.
More information about the program is available by visiting
https://sites.krieger.jhu.edu/reu-social-behavior/, or by contacting the PI (Dr.
Kirsten Bohn, kbohn1@jhu.edu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.