* 1852316
* REU Site: Research on Security of Mobile Devices and Wireless Networks at NYIT
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2022
* Ziqian Dong, New York Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jill Denner
* 12/31/2022
* USD 470,226.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site award funds the renewal
of an outstanding REU site at New York Institute of Technology. The site will
recruit undergraduates from across the nation to participate in research related
to securing mobile devices such as smart phones and wireless networks. Securing
mobile devices and networks is an area of current interest that is well-suited
to undergraduate research productivity. The students will address the challenges
of securing mobile devices and wireless networks by creating new biometrics for
seamless and secure user authentication on mobile devices, developing power-
efficient, privacy-preserving cryptographic protocols for secure wireless
communications, detecting malware and identifying attacks of mobile devices to
protect data integrity and privacy, and securing medical devices and data. This
site should help develop a group of computing professionals who can design the
systems of the future that impact society and enhance our quality of life. The
REU experience provides students with the foundations and inspiration to pursue
computing careers and research in areas that are rapidly evolving and are of
importance to the nation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is led by a team of
researchers offering state-of-the-art facilities and professional mentors to
guide undergraduates in explorations of problems related to mobile security.
Students will learn how to use current tools and techniques to solve those
problems that have direct impact on people. The team will use proven strategies
to recruit undergraduate students from groups traditionally under-represented in
computer science. The students will participate in research and professional
development activities all designed to achieve the goals of retaining and
graduating undergraduate students in computer science and engineering, and
increasing recruitment of students into graduate
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.