* 1852070
* REU Site: Microbiology at the University of Iowa
* BIO,DBI
* 03/15/2019,02/29/2024
* Linda McCarter, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/29/2024
* USD 359,046.00

This REU Site award to the University of Iowa, located in Iowa City, IA, will
support the training of 8 students for 10 weeks during the summers of 2019-2021.
The scientific focus of the research program is microbiology. Each student will
conduct an independent laboratory research project under the guidance of a
faculty and a graduate student co-mentor from the Department of Microbiology
&amp; Immunology. Lectures, workshops and social activities will promote
professional development, familiarize students with graduate school and career
options, and provide training in responsible conduct of research. Students will
present their findings at a university-wide symposium and at regional and
national meetings. The program is open to undergraduates who are interested in
scientific research and are U.S. citizens or permanent residents. Recruitment
will use both traditional mailings and various forms of electronic outreach.
Special emphasis will be given to recruitment of students from demographic
groups that are underrepresented in the sciences and/or students from small
colleges (including community colleges) where opportunities for research are
lacking. Students will be selected by the program directors based on academic
record, letters of recommendation and potential for outstanding future careers
in the biological sciences. Post-program mentoring will promote retention of
students in the sciences, while tracking will assess the lasting influences of
the research experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is anticipated that a total of
24 students, primarily from schools with limited research opportunities, will be
trained in the program. Students will learn how research is conducted, and many
will present the results of their work at scientific
conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A common web-based assessment tool used by all
REU Site programs funded by the Division of Biological Infrastructure will be
used to determine the effectiveness of the training program. Students will be
tracked after the program in order to determine their career paths. Students
will be asked to respond to an automatic email sent via the NSF reporting
system. More information about the program is available by visiting
http://www.medicine.uiowa.edu/microbiology/summer/ , or by contacting the PI
(Dr. David Weiss at david-weiss@uiowa.edu) or the co-PI (Dr. Linda McCarter at
linda-mccarter@uiowa.edu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.