* 1852624
* Increasing and Diversifying the Mathematics Teacher Pipeline for High-Need Districts
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2024
* Michael Rutter, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* James A. M. Alvarez
* 04/30/2024
* USD 1,012,553.00

With support from the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce), this
Track 1: Scholarships and Stipends project aims to serve the national need of
recruiting and preparing highly-qualified secondary mathematics teachers who are
dedicated to teaching in high-need school districts. This project has the
potential to directly benefit the Erie, Pennsylvania community by recruiting and
training mathematics teachers for four urban and rural Pennsylvania school
districts: Erie (urban), Iroquois (urban), Corry Area (rural), and Northwestern
(rural). One hundred students will be recruited to the project's High School
Mathematics Institute, a two-year program exploring mathematics as a discipline
and potential career path. Each year, an internship experience will engage six
sophomore STEM undergraduates with students from high-need school districts. As
a part of their on-campus methods training, undergraduate Noyce scholars will
design and teach lessons for visiting K - 12 students from partnering school
districts. Project investigators will provide continued support for Noyce alumni
through mentorship and professional development opportunities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sixteen undergraduate mathematics majors will be awarded
Noyce scholarships over the project's five-year duration. Each undergraduate
scholar will be assigned two Noyce mentors from partnering school districts.
Scholars will complete field experiences and one-week immersions in both rural
and urban partnering districts. The project aims to: (1) increase the number of
dual-major graduates from the institution's secondary mathematics education and
mathematics programs; (2) provide rich mathematical experiences for students
from local high-need school districts; (3) provide experiences for Noyce
scholars that promote positive dispositions for working in high-need school
districts; and (4) equip and support Noyce scholars for successful careers in
high-need school districts. Evaluation of progress toward these goals will
utilize surveys, essays, lesson observations, and exit interviews. Results will
be disseminated to the broader mathematics education community through
conference presentations and scholarly articles. The Noyce program supports
talented STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K - 12
mathematics and science teachers in high-need school districts and experienced,
exemplary K - 12 STEM teachers to become STEM master teachers. It also supports
research on the persistence, retention, and effectiveness of K - 12 teachers in
high-need school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.