* 1852199
* REU Site: Undergraduate Research Experiences in Long Range Communications with Ham Radios, Cool Algorithms, and Innovative Antennas
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/2019,02/28/2023
* Tamal Bose, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 02/28/2023
* USD 324,992.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site will provide support for
eight undergraduate students each summer (24 students over 3 years) to gain
research experience under the mentorship of a team of experienced faculty and
advanced graduate student researchers in topics related to high frequency (HF)
long range wireless communications. Long range HF communications allow wireless
communication over thousands of kilometers without the need for satellites, and
are of immeasurable importance to military and government, aviation, air-to-
ground communications, maritime services, public safety and civil service
distress communications, space and satellite operations, weather stations, FM
and TV broad casting, and many other communication needs. This REU site will
provide participating students a high quality, immersive, and hands-on learning
experience in this exciting area. Participants will receive coaching to prepare
for graduate school and professional development, and they will be mentored into
becoming independent creative thinkers and researchers. Participants will gain
experience in scientific dissemination and communication, including publishing
in professional conferences and journals, and giving scientific
presentations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Long range HF communications work by the
reflection of radio waves by the ionosphere layer of the atmosphere. These
communications can travel around curvature of the earth, and work without the
need for significant infrastructure like satellites, cellular networks,
internet, etc. The challenge with HF communications is that propagation via the
ionosphere may be unreliable, the ionospheric conditions may change very
rapidly, and different frequencies have different propagation characteristics
via the ionosphere. Successful communication depends on the time of day,
location of users, selection of frequency, modulation, antenna type, and power
level. This project will generate new solutions to key problems that will enable
more dependable and efficient long range HF communications. Specifically this
project will investigate and develop: (i) New designs for spectrum agile radios
for high frequency communications that can switch communication parameters such
as modulation, coding, pulse shape, equalizer, power, etc.; (ii) Machine
learning algorithms that can learn the best communication parameters for
changing channel conditions; (iii) Low profile antennas that can be used in HF
communications; (iv) Software and algorithms to predict network level
connections that are possible ahead of time; (v) Qualitative and quantitative
Ionospheric communications models; (vi) Flexible and automatic antenna tuning
circuits; and (vii) Smart algorithms that can learn from their past experiences
in varying Ionospheric conditions, weather situations, time and
location.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.