* 1852259
* REU Site:  IQ-Bio-REU:Interdisciplinary and Quantitative Biology Research Experience for Undergraduates
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2019,02/28/2022
* Patricia Ordonez, University of Puerto Rico-Rio Piedras
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/28/2022
* USD 363,102.00

This REU Site award to the University of Puerto Rico, Rio Piedras, located in
San Juan, PR, will support the training of 10 students for 9 weeks during the
summers of 2019- 2021. IQ-BIO-REU offers opportunities to be immersed in
research and receive training in statistics, data analysis and its application
to investigate biological phenomena from molecules to ecosystems. Participants
will take on projects that allow for the simultaneous exploration of multiple
STEM domains, such as the integration of quantitative analyses towards
understanding changes in the physical and biochemical traits of organisms and
the use of big data and machine learning approaches to document the effects of
environmental changes on biological systems. Skill development workshops on the
use of statistical and computational tools to address biological problems will
scaffold the hands-on work. Career development workshops will offer guidance in
the process of applying to graduate school, obtaining funds for research, and
exposure to career opportunities. The criteria for evaluation will be academic
performance and a demonstrated interest in pursuing a career in science at the
intersection of biology and computational sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is
anticipated that a total of 30 students, primarily from schools with limited
research opportunities, will be trained in the program. Students in any STEM
field, particularly individuals from groups historically underrepresented in
science, are encouraged to apply. Students will participate in a scholarly
environment throughout the summer including the presentation of their work and
achievements at a student hackathon. After participating in the program,
students will be encouraged to present their work at national and international
conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A common web-based assessment tool used by all
REU Site programs funded by the Division of Biological Infrastructure will be
used to determine the effectiveness of the training program. Students will be
tracked after the program in order to determine their career paths. Students
will be asked to respond to an automatic email sent via the NSF reporting
system. More information about the program is available by visiting
http://iqbioreu.uprrp.edu, or by contacting the PI (Dr. Juan S. Ramirez-Lugo at
juan.ramirez3@upr.edu) or the co-PI (Dr. Patricia Ordonez at
patricia.ordonez@upr.edu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.