* 1852045
* REU Site: Growing up STEM: An Interdisciplinary Research Experience in Undergraduate STEM Education
* EDU,DUE
* 04/15/2019,03/31/2024
* Jennifer Momsen, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 03/31/2024
* USD 384,272.00

To enhance learning in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM),
we need to better understand how students acquire and use STEM knowledge, and
how instructors can help students learn. Discipline-based education researchers
(DBERs) contribute to this understanding by applying their STEM expertise to the
study of teaching and learning. DBER is a relatively young field and we need to
train more scholars to do this important research. This Research Experiences for
Undergraduates (REU) Site at North Dakota State University (NDSU) will address
this need by hosting a summer program that will engage 30 undergraduate students
in conducting discipline-based education research in science and
mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through this REU Site, the student
participants will select from a wide variety of research projects that pose
important questions about the nature of teaching and learning in STEM. The
interdisciplinary team of faculty mentors provides a diverse set of projects
across the disciplines of biology, chemistry, mathematics, physics and
psychology. This diversity in research exposes REU participants to nearly a
dozen other projects to enrich their experience with and understanding of the
breadth of investigations conducted in DBER. Students will jump-start their
research experience through online interactions with their mentors, including
reading and discussing relevant research papers. The benefits of this early,
virtual mentoring will be two-fold: students receive essential training in
education research and begin to develop relationships with their research
mentors prior to arriving on campus. Once they arrive at NDSU, the REU fellows
will participate in a learning community that includes cohort-building
activities, as well as both faculty and peer mentoring to support their research
activities. REU students will also participate in a well-structured professional
development series in which they will learn about ethical practices; research
methods; scientific communication and presentation skills; pathways to graduate
school; and careers in STEM. Students will present their research and results
through informal chalk talks in the first half of the program and then more
formally at a capstone poster symposium at the end of the summer. In addition to
summative evaluation, the project team will implement continuous formative
evaluation to provide feedback that helps them refine and improve the REU Site
each year. Student entrance and exit surveys, student interviews, faculty
surveys, and alumni follow-up surveys will provide essential data for continuous
program improvement. Overall, this REU Site will build the discipline-based
education research talent pool and contribute to improvements in undergraduate
STEM education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Research Experiences for Undergraduates
(REU) program supports active research participation by undergraduate students
in areas of research funded by NSF. This REU project is supported by NSF's
Education &amp; Human Resources Directorate Core Research (ECR) Program and its
Improving Undergraduate STEM Education (IUSE) Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.