* 1852756
* Workplace Earnings Polarization: A Four-Country Panel Analysis
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2024
* Donald Tomaskovic-Devey, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Melanie Hughes
* 06/30/2024
* USD 277,272.00

There has been a rapid rise in earnings inequalities across workplaces in the
U.S. and in other countries. Shifts in firm market power, global competition and
firm structure are implicated in these changes. To cut costs, some dominant
brand manufacturers have been spinning off supplier functions to lower wage
firms. Branded companies may also subcontract out most low skill labor while
absorbing the profits associated with the brand. Other mechanisms include
franchisors leasing their brand to revenue constrained franchisees and global
commodity chains in which large retailers or manufacturers in high income
countries delegate routine production to low wage locales. This package of
dynamic shifts in the power, productivity, boundaries, and global scope of
dominant firms appears to have been encouraged in some countries by national
employment policy models and the rise of a shareholder performance model. This
project will both generate and test organizational level explanations for rising
within and between firm earnings inequalities. Project findings will have
implications for national labor market policy development in the U.S. and
abroad.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project includes interdisciplinary
collaborators and data on four countries sampled because they have different
levels of exposure to the global economy and different patterns of contemporary
shifts in institutional employment protections. In each of these countries the
project will access multiple years of linked employer-employee administrative
data collected directly from employers by each nation's government. Sample sizes
range from a low of 20,000 workplaces and 1,500,000 employees in one country to
comparable data on the entire economies in other countries. Using thirty-year
country-specific panels of workplaces, the project will model national and
workplace level dynamics in both between and within workplace earnings
inequalities as a function of industrial restructuring, changes in the
organization of production, as well as the pressures of shifting institutions
and global competition. Multivariate error correction panel models will be used
to estimate causal effects. The project will contribute to the sociological
theories and literatures on organizational restructuring, skill based
technological change, organizational inequality and comparative political
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.