* 1852943
* I-Corps:  RFID Surgical Tagging System for Early Detection of Bone Screw Loosening
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2019,12/31/2019
* Robert Morgan, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 12/31/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is a cost-
effective method for preemptively monitoring bone screw loosening. The current
medical diagnostic market is dominated by expensive and time-consuming scans and
procedures such as X-rays, CT scans, and MRI scans. These scans are costly and
strain medical resources causing delays in the delivery of healthcare. The
project will explore the commercial feasibility of streamlining the field of
medicine, specifically in the diagnosis of bone screw loosening, through
implantable diagnostic tools. Given the trend of preventative health care and
growing need for healthcare cost reduction, developing a cost-effective method
to diagnose bone screw loosening could augment both of these efforts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is to ascertain which customer
segment would value the improved diagnostic efficiency of the RFID surgical
tagging system such that its commercial application could be realized. The RFID
surgical tagging system is a novel method to detect bone screw loosening through
an implantable tag placed on surgical screws. This system utilizes low-cost
components and an intuitive, yet unique design based on previously patented
technology. The original patented technology is used to determine the screw
status of hardware on large manufacturing equipment such as rockets. The
surgical tagging system yields actionable screw status data in a faster and more
easily accessible manner compared to current diagnostic measures for bone screw
loosening. Based on the above competencies, the RFID surgical tagging system
provides a viable alternative to current diagnostic scans. Through the I-Corps
cohort, the team will explore and discover which customer segment values this
technology in the medical diagnostic market.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.