* 1852691
* Transformation Elastography
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2023
* Thomas Royston, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 05/31/2023
* USD 422,094.00

Elastography refers to mapping mechanical properties in a material based on
measuring wave motion in it using noninvasive optical, acoustic or magnetic
resonance imaging methods. For example, increased stiffness will increase
wavelength. Stiffness and viscosity can depend on both location and direction. A
material with aligned fibers or layers may have different stiffness and
viscosity values along the fibers or layers versus across them. Converting wave
measurements into a mechanical property map or image is known as reconstruction.
Reconstruction in isotropic materials, with the same mechanical properties
regardless of direction, is easier than in anisotropic materials, whose
properties vary with direction. Transformation Elastography is based on the idea
of distorting the material as part of the reconstruction algorithm to make the
anisotropic problem become isotropic. This strategy, which has been shown to
work in simple two-dimensional reconstruction problems, will be extended to more
complex three-dimensional problems. Elastography is a potentially transformative
measurement technology for basic research into material mechanics. Extending it
to anisotropic materials is essential to advance its application in geophysical
exploration, fiber composite analysis, and medical diagnosis of diseases of the
brain, skeletal muscle, heart and other organs with aligned fibers for which
changes in stiffness and viscosity have been proven to correlate with disease.
This research supports NSF's mission to promote the progress of science and
advance national health. Research developments will be integrated into courses
and multimedia educational materials for a diverse group of students at multiple
levels, from K-12 through graduate level
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Elastography relies on a constitutive model of
mechanical wave motion in the viscoelastic material to interpret the noninvasive
measurements. To make the modeling problem analytically tractable, isotropy and
homogeneity are often assumed, and the effects of finite boundaries are ignored.
But, infinite isotropic homogeneity is not the situation in most cases of
interest, when there are pathological conditions, material faults or hidden
anomalies that are not uniformly distributed in fibrous or layered structures of
finite dimension. Introduction of anisotropy, inhomogeneity and finite
boundaries complicates the analysis forcing the abandonment of analytically-
driven strategies, in favor of numerical approximations that are computationally
expensive and yield less physical insight. A new strategy, Transformation
Elastography, is planned that involves spatial distortion in order to make an
anisotropic problem become isotropic. Development and experimental validation of
this new strategy requires inverting the algorithm and extending initial
developments from two- to three-dimensional problems with
inhomogeneity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.