* 1852032
* REU Site:  A Transformative Approach for Engaging First-Generation Underrepresented Minorities in a Research Experience
* BIO,DBI
* 02/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Kazuhiro Sonoda, Heritage University
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 07/31/2024
* USD 539,325.00

This REU Site award to Heritage University, located in Toppenish, WA, will
support the training of 10 students for 10 weeks during each summer of
2020-2022. All students participate in pre-REU workshops that will cover topics
on ethics and the responsible conduct of research, sexual harassment, cross-
cultural dimensions of research, and critical thinking skills in experimental
design. Additional workshops are scheduled during the summer to increase student
competence in doing research and to improve their ability to effectively present
their research. The Heritage University REU (HU REU) will focus its recruitment
on students from Heritage University, Columbia Basin College, Yakima Valley
College, Portland Community College, Portland State University, and universities
and community colleges from the Pacific Northwest region. Students from other
institutions who desire placement at one of the partner labs are encouraged to
apply. A rolling student application process begins in January prior to each
summer research experience. Students with completed application will be
interviewed prior to placement in a lab that matches their interest. It is
anticipated that a total of 30 students, primarily from schools with limited
research opportunities, will be trained in the program. A common web-based
assessment tool used by all REU Site programs funded by the Division of
Biological Infrastructure will be used to determine the effectiveness of the
training program. Students will be asked to respond to an automatic email sent
via the NSF reporting system and tracked after the program in order to determine
their career paths. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Heritage University REU trains
students in research involving the molecular and cell biology of plant and
animal development and their interactions with the environment. Research is
conducted under the mentorship of faculty and scientists at several locations:
University of Puget Sound (Tacoma, WA); USDA ARS (Wapato, WA); Western
Washington University (Bellingham, WA); Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center
(Seattle, WA); Washington State University (Prosser, WA); Yakama Nation
Fisheries; and Oregon State University (Corvalis, OR). Example projects include
phytochrome signaling in plants, cell biology of Tetrahymena and C. elegans, and
microbial-plant interactions, and many others. Students are encouraged to visit
http://heritage.edu/academic-paths/special-programs/hu-nsf-reu/ , or contact the
PI (Dr. Bob Kao at kao_r@heritage.edu ) or the co-PI (Provost Dr. Kazu Sonoda at
Sonoda_K@heritage.edu ).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.