* 1852647
* Analyzing Weather Data from Historic Logbooks to Assess Changing Wind and Atmospheric Pressure Patterns
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2019,02/28/2023
* Timothy Walker, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 02/28/2023
* USD 119,120.00

This research project analyzes historic weather patterns using American whaling
ship logbooks to understand how oceanic wind and pressure patterns have varied
spatially over the past approximately 250 years. The project integrates
disparate scholarly subfields as historians work with oceanographers to extend
the instrumental meteorological record back two centuries and with a broader
geographical distribution than is currently available. For safety, mariners
recorded hazards to navigation on their charts, as well as weather data. The
project extracts substantial meteorological data from historic logbooks, records
heretofore inaccessible to modern scientists, and makes them freely available
online. The investigators use these historic weather records to address current
questions regarding shifts in wind and atmospheric pressure patterns. These
include changes in high pressure systems that are related to the subtropical dry
zones on land and the westerly storm tracks that steer the passage of rain-
bearing weather systems. The understanding of past variability in these wind and
atmospheric pressure patterns has societal relevance as these patterns directly
impact agricultural productivity and can improve weather forecasting and
modelling. Furthermore, the research can identify weather and navigational data
that are of practical benefit to contemporary shipping, underscoring the
project's importance to modern commercial navigation and maritime defense. The
project includes training students in convergent science. Research results will
be made available to the public via informal learning opportunities at museums
and to the broader scientific community at interdisciplinary
conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Long-term datasets are invaluable to
meteorological research as they establish a baseline against which to measure
recent changes, can validate models, and illuminate how the atmosphere and ocean
interact. The historic logbooks being analyzed contain systematic weather
observations (e.g., wind strength and direction, storms, sea state,
precipitation, air temperature, atmospheric pressure) that will significantly
extend the instrumental record. The newly-recovered historical data are combined
with existing observational and reanalysis products to understand robustness and
long-term context of variations in the Earth's atmospheric circulation over the
past approximately 250 years. The investigators specifically consider: (a)
changes in the Hadley circulation that are related to the expansion of
subtropical dry zones, such as in the U.S. Southwest; and (b) changes in
strength and position of subtropical high-pressure systems as manifestations of
the descending limb of Hadley Cell circulation and changes in strength and
position of the Southern Hemisphere westerly winds that were traversed by the
whalers on their way to historical whaling grounds and which have recently
experienced strong poleward shifts. Understanding long-term variability in
subtropical high-pressure systems and westerly storm tracks has relevance for
any regions affected by such meteorological patterns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.