* 1852255
* REU Site: Integrated Nanomanufacturing
* ENG,EEC
* 03/15/2019,02/29/2024
* Thomas Bifano, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 02/29/2024
* USD 407,428.00

This renewal REU Site: Integrated Nanomanufacturing at Boston University (BU)
will bring a diverse cohort of undergraduate students from universities and two-
year colleges with limited research opportunities to engage in summer research
in more than 30 potential interdisciplinary labs in Nanotechnology, Electrical
and Computer Engineering, Biomedical Engineering, Materials Science Engineering,
and/or Mechanical Engineering at the BU Charles River campus. Nanomanufacturing
research is an emerging interdisciplinary area at the intersection of
nanotechnology and fabrication. Four thematic research areas will serve as the
foundation for this renewal: 1. nanosystems that generate, sense, and
manipulate, 2. nanofabrication of photonic and electronic nanostructures, 3.
nanomaterials synthesis and characterization, and 4. nanophotonics
neurophotonics and development of photonic devices. Nanotechnology seeks to
develop and synthesize systems that manipulate, measure or control physical
processes at the nanoscale, while integrated nanomanufacturing incorporates
nanofabrication and materials research. This site is committed to offering an
interdisciplinary and transformative experience to students from varying
engineering disciplines that reflect the diversity of the mentors in Integrated
Nanomanufacturing. The inclusion of REU participants working with startup
companies in the Boston University Business Innovation Center is a new research
opportunity in this REU site. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over a ten-week summer
program, REU participants will be mentored and coached through a unique problem-
based research experience, from basic skills building to open-ended discovery,
with a focus on developing research independence. Students will participate in
mentored discovery, engineering of new devices, and fabrication at the nanoscale
level to explore optical and integrated nanoscale systems, while developing
critical skills, awareness and confidence necessary to advance along their
career pathways in academics and research. Through this site, students will gain
the opportunity to share their work with the research community at BU through
presentations and to also submit to national conferences or co-author
publications based on their research. The NSF REU Site in Integrated
Nanomanufacturing will provide a site with the aim of educating members of the
next generation of engineers in nanotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.