* 1852040
* REU Site: Broadening Participation in Atmospheric Science, Oceanography and Geosciences Research: A Multi-Institution Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Program
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2023
* Lewis Huey, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Manda S. Adams
* 08/31/2023
* USD 362,745.00

Georgia Institute of Technology (i.e., Georgia Tech), in collaboration with
Clark Atlanta University, Spelman College and Morehouse College, will host 10
undergraduate students per year over 3 years (Summers 2020, 2021 and 2022) to
conduct research within topics that span Atmospheric Science, Oceanography and
the Geosciences (AOG). Selected undergraduate participants will work with
faculty mentors over a 10-week period that have well established research
programs on topics that include meteorology, climate science, geophysics,
oceanography and planetary science. Additionally, students will participate in a
number of professional development opportunities in concert with pre-existing
REU programming at Georgia Tech. This includes regular group meetings, a weekly
AOG professional development series, team-building activities, undergraduate
research symposia and field trips to AOG-related industrial and government
sector organizations. At the end of the program, students will produce a
conference-style research presentation and research poster as well as a research
paper that may potentially lead to publication of their research. It is
anticipated that these research products will prepare participants for graduate
school opportunities within the atmospheric, oceanographic, geoscience and
related disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary aims of the multi-
institutional NSF REU program in AOG are to: (i) provide high quality research
experiences and professional development activities for cohorts of visiting
undergraduate researchers, (ii) motivate and prepare talented undergraduates to
pursue, and succeed in, graduate study, (iii) assemble a cadre of participants
that reflects the diversity of the U.S. population, (iv) attract students from
institutions that have limited research activities, (v) continue engagement of
the participants beyond the summer program when they return to their home
institutions and (vi) foster collaborations in research and instruction between
the four institutions in the consortium. The program seeks to enhance
interactions between the institutions in the consortium and thereby enhance the
capacity for research at predominantly undergraduate minority-serving
institutions. Furthermore, it is expected that the collaboration within the
consortium will provide an opportunity to recruit and train a diverse group of
participants, both from within the consortium and across the nation. The
professional development activities described above, in partnership with other
pre-existing REU programming at Georgia Tech, serve to acquaint participants
with a broad array of projects, enhance their presentation skills, and provide a
perspective of AOG research in a scholarly, entrepreneurial, economic, ethical
and interdisciplinary framework.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.