* 1852450
* Collaborative Research: The Role of Information & Influence Campaigns in Structuring Public Responses to U.S. policy, 1988 - 2015
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2018,04/30/2021
* Robert Brulle, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Melanie Hughes
* 04/30/2021
* USD 29,980.00

Collaborative Research: The Role of Information & Influence Campaigns in
Structuring Public Responses to U.S. Policy, 1988-2015

There is a growing consensus that public debate has been transformed through the
increased use of information and influence campaigns (IICs) by a range of
organizations to affect political decision-making around a variety of nationally
important issues. This research aims to explain the extent and impact of these
strategic communications campaigns. To do this, the project: (1) maps which
organizations participate in specific national issue debates; (2) conducts an
extended analysis of communications tools and tactics used in public contexts
for purposes of influence; and (3) examines the viewpoints and motivations
guiding the actors who carry out these activities. The project considers the
political contests and the coordination of resources among a wide variety of
actors, including corporations, trade associations, research institutes,
regulatory bodies, advocacy organizations, and governmental and non-governmental
organizations over a 27-year period from 1988-2015. This research supports
efforts to increase the role of the behavioral sciences in the federal
government's policy development and implementation. This research informs policy
makers about the complex processes of interaction that are part of the design
and development of policy, and thus contribute to policy makers' ability to
better engage businesses and the public in the development and implementation of
government policy. It also contributes to multiple areas of research in
sociology, political science and media studies.

The overall objective of this research is to critically inquire into the
extent, influence, and impact of professional advocacy campaigns on debates in
the public sphere. The research will explain the extent and impact of strategic
communications campaigns on political and public responses to specific policy
efforts. To achieve this goal, the project maps the organization of one specific
public policy area and analyzes the factors that influence its shape over time.
The researchers conduct an extended analysis of communications tools and tactics
used in public contexts for purposes of influence. The researchers also carry
out extended field observations and interviews to develop a situated
understanding of the viewpoints, motivations, and schemes guiding the actors who
carry out these activities. Combining methods from sociology and communication
studies, the researchers will (a) apply a macro-level network analysis to map
which organizations have been featured in this issue arena between 1988 and
2015, what functions they serve, and how media and government forums help to
establish each organization's level of prominence and legitimacy; (b) gather
organizational characteristics to define and analyze the factors that drive the
nature, extent, and impact of professional advocacy in this issue area (meso-
level analysis); (c) conduct semi-structured interviews and observations at
major industry events to assess the motives and rationales of the actors who
create information and influence campaigns in this issue arena (micro-level
analysis). The research contributes to understanding how social networks and
institutional arrangements shape participants' understandings and thinking about
policy issues. The research can assist scholars, policy advocates, and
policymakers in developing better communications strategies that target
particular publics and lead to more efficacious policy development.