* 1852182
* REU Site: Research Experiences for Undergraduates in Chemistry at Kansas State University
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2023
* Christopher Culbertson, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 04/30/2023
* USD 344,225.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site award to Kansas State
University, located in Manhattan, KS, supports the training of 10 undergraduate
students for 10 weeks during the summers of 2019-2021. This program, funded by
the Division of Chemistry, engages participants in chemistry research projects.
These research projects have applications in national security related to health
and energy. Participants also receive individual faculty mentorship through the
research experience. In addition to conducting research during the summer, the
undergraduate students take part in a number of professional development
activities including seminars introducing participants to research, laboratory
safety, scientific presentations, and the nature of science and scientific
inquiry. Through this program, participants engage in the scientific research
process and are prepared for graduate school and careers in the chemical
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research projects conducted by the
undergraduate researchers are in diverse areas of chemistry, impacting national
biosecurity. The projects include the development of diagnostic devices for the
detection of diseases and disease organisms, the synthesis of a variety of
molecules with potential impact on human health, and the development of
inexpensive renewable energy and energy storage devices and catalysts. This site
recruits participants nationwide, with a particular focus on students in the
Midwest and students from community colleges and institutions with limited
research opportunities. In addition to the research experience, the diverse
group of undergraduates partake in a seminar series and networking social
functions that serve to prepare them for graduate school and careers in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.