* 1852641
* Examination of Antecedents and Consequences of Business-Government Relationships
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2019,05/31/2022
* Nan Jia, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Songqi Liu
* 05/31/2022
* USD 293,122.00

Examination of Antecedents and Consequences of Business-Government
Relationships&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will study the source and
effects of the connections between businesses and governments. Business elites
have played an active role in building various types of connections with
political elites for decades in many countries. The primary goal of this project
is to (1) demonstrate general patterns of how publicly listed firms, across a
large number of countries in the world for over 30 years, hired politically
connected individuals as their leaders, including top management team and board
of directors; (2) examine how a key antecedent created by the external
environment -- financial crises -- critically shape the formation and
dissolution of firms' political connections, and (3) in each country, study the
consequences of changing political connections of large publicly listed firms on
the economic outcomes of small and medium-sized firms in the same country;
including the emergence of young and new firms or local
entrepreneurship.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Antecedents and consequences of business-
government relationships will be studied in the following ways. Recently
developed information technologies in text analysis will be utilized to analyze
and synthesize the information obtained from existing data and media coverage to
build a large database of politically connected boards of directors and top
managers of the largest publicly listed firms in multiple countries over time.
One study will provide extensive and in-depth documentation of both the dynamic
patterns of changes to political connections over time and the geographic
distribution across different countries. The second set of analyses will
investigate the effect of financial crises on the hiring of politically
connected leaders by top listed firms. Various econometric analyses will be
conducted in order to identify the causal effect of financial crises on
corporate political connections. The third set of analyses will focus on how the
distribution of firm size in each country change in association with changes to
top listed firms' political connections. The project will advance scholarship in
business organizations and political economy, particularly regarding the process
through which businesses build political connections. It will also advance the
research insights on how multi-country institutional contexts exert different
influence on the formation and dissolution of political connections. Lastly, the
study will draw attention to how financial crises and how different public
policies employed in response to financial crises affect the evolution of
corporate political connections, a common way in which economic and political
power become connected.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.