* 1852161
* REU Site: Engineering Sensors Systems and Signal Processing for Speech Pathology
* ENG,EEC
* 03/15/2019,02/29/2024
* Todd Freeborn, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 02/29/2024
* USD 352,034.00

This REU Site: Engineering Sensors, Systems, and Signal Processing for Speech
Pathology at the University of Alabama Tuscaloosa will immerse a diverse cohort
of undergraduate students in research at the interface of engineering/computer
science and speech pathology. Research projects will apply engineering
principles to develop technologies to improve screening, diagnosis, and therapy
for populations impacted by communication, voice, and swallowing disorders.
These experiences will provide an opportunity for students to contribute to
projects that have direct applications to improve society and increase student's
awareness of social responsibility in engineering. Students will receive
technical and clinical mentorship from faculty in both engineering/computer
science and speech pathology, providing truly interdisciplinary research
experiences. Additionally, professional development training and clinical
shadowing will expand the range of student experiences to prepare them for
conducting research and understanding the critical issues faced by patients and
clinicians. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goals of the proposed NSF REU site
are to: 1) engage undergraduate students from science/engineering in speech
pathology practice to understand critical issues faced by patients and
clinicians, 2) integrate the experiences and information from these groups to
apply engineering principles to develop technologies to improve screening,
diagnosis, and therapy in speech pathology research, 3) develop communication
skills to support interactions with professionals, clinicians, and the wider-
public, 4) increase the number of students from under-represented groups in STEM
and research-limited institutions participating in research, and 5) increase
awareness of social responsibility in engineering and raise student interest in
pursuing graduate studies. During clinical practice, clinicians utilize a range
of technologies including audio recording/acoustic analysis, electromyography,
and video imaging/analysis. While there are tools available for speech
pathologists, their research needs that require application-specific sensors,
systems, and signal-processing methods are often under-served as a result of
disconnects between speech pathology and engineering/computer science. This REU
Site aims to bridge that disconnect by introducing undergraduate students to
interdisciplinary research requiring image analysis, sensor design, algorithm
development, and information processing applied to research investigating
hearing assessment, voice problems, swallowing problems, speech language
processing, pediatric feeding, and stuttering events. Additionally, students
will interact with clinicians and patients during the REU through shadowing
experiences coordinated at the Speech and Hearing Center to introduce students
to the wide range of practice of these professionals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.