* 1852175
* REU Site: Summer Integrative Neuroscience Experience (SINE) in Jupiter
* BIO,DBI
* 01/15/2020,12/31/2023
* Bethany Stanhope, Florida Atlantic University
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 12/31/2023
* USD 387,457.00

This REU Site award to Florida Atlantic University (FAU), located in Jupiter, FL
will support the training of 10 students for 10 weeks during the summers of
2020-2022. Students will have the opportunity to work in laboratories at FAU,
Scripps-Florida and the Max Plank-Florida Institute on research that focuses on
a range of neuroscience projects, including synaptic function, behavioral
pharmacology, neurogenetics and systems neuroscience. Students will participate
in workshops that provide a broad background in scientific communication,
research approaches, and responsible conduct in research. Students will be
selected based on academic merit, and potential for success in research, with
the goal of recruiting under-represented minorities (URM), first generation
college students, and those from non-research intensive institutions. Formal
mentoring will continue beyond the completion of the summer internship to
provide support for those students interested in pursuing graduate school,
industry positions, or other science-related opportunities. Taken together, this
summer program will provide students an integrative experience that will support
the pursuit of research-oriented careers in neuroscience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
It is anticipated that a total of 30 students, primarily from schools with
limited research opportunities, will be trained in the program. Students will
learn how research is conducted, enhance their lab skills, and learn concepts in
neuroscience. Many will present the results of their work at scientific
conferences including the summer undergraduate research symposium. Students will
also interact with other REU programs at FAU and Scripps and engage in
scientific networking activites throughout the summer. A common web-based
assessment tool used by all REU Site programs funded by the Division of
Biological Infrastructure will be used to determine the effectiveness of the
training program. Formative and summative assessments will be done to determine
student perception of career goals, research experience, and confidence in
different science areas, i.e. research, microscopy, statistics, presentation.
Students will be tracked after the program in order to determine their career
paths. Students will be asked to respond to an automatic email sent via the NSF
reporting system. More information about the program is available at
http://www.fau.edu/jupiter/reu-program.php or by contacting the PI (Dr. Alex
Keene at Keene@FAU.edu) or the co-PI (Dr. Stackman at
rstackma@fau.edu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.