* 1852670
* Preparing Secondary STEM Teachers for Success in Teaching Students with Disabilities and from Diverse Backgrounds
* EDU,DUE
* 04/15/2019,03/31/2025
* William Lokar, University of Lynchburg
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Ellis
* 03/31/2025
* USD 1,221,518.00

With support from the NSF Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program, this Track
1: Scholarships and Stipends project aims to serve the national interest in
high-quality STEM teaching. This proposal specifically responds to a national
and local shortage of qualified and certified mathematics and science teachers.
The University of Lynchburg seeks to recruit 22 undergraduate STEM students (in
four cohorts) who are majoring in biology, chemistry, physics, environmental
science, or mathematics and minoring in secondary education as they obtain
teacher certification. The project focuses on increasing the effectiveness of
future STEM teachers in teaching special education students with learning or
developmental disabilities, an issue of national importance as these students
can compose more than 10% of the student population. STEM educators need
specialized preparation to work with special education students and students
from a culture different than their own, as many are not prepared in educational
techniques specific to these populations. This lack of teacher preparation leads
to poor academic outcomes in many cases. This project also aims to recruit more
diverse and qualified teacher candidates by developing educational pathways that
enable community college STEM students to transfer to the University of
Lynchburg, where they will complete a baccalaureate degree in a STEM major and
obtain secondary teacher certification. This pathway will be facilitated by
working with a local nonprofit whose mission is to empower high school students
from disadvantaged backgrounds in pursuing higher education. These strategies
are intended to increase the diversity among the Noyce scholars.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This project, led by the University of Lynchburg, is a partnership
with Central Virginia Community College, the nonprofit Beacon of Hope, and the
Lynchburg City, Amherst County, Bedford County, and Campbell County school
districts. It is designed to advance science and mathematics teacher preparation
through experiential teaching opportunities, faculty advising, mentoring, and
workshops to prepare preservice teachers to effectively teach students with
disabilities and from diverse backgrounds. Faculty and in-service teacher
mentors will be trained in the New Teacher Center model, which focuses on three
domains that work synergistically to create an "optimal learning environment"
by: (1) creating emotionally, intellectually, and physically safe environments;
(2) implementing equitable, culturally responsive, and standards-aligned
curriculum and instruction; and (3) meeting the diverse needs of every learner.
A series of eight workshops focusing on supporting students with disabilities
who are from diverse backgrounds will be provided to the Noyce Scholars and
their peer-mentor, in-service teachers. Related to these workshops and field
experiences on teaching STEM to students with disabilities, the project's
research agenda will explore the following important questions: (1) Does
participation in the Noyce workshops significantly alter knowledge and beliefs
of pre-service and in-service STEM teachers about teaching students with
disabilities? (2) How does interaction with students with disabilities during
field experiences alter pre-service STEM teachers' beliefs about these students?
(3) How do the in-service Noyce scholars, in their first year of teaching, rate
their level of preparation and job satisfaction, and how do their results
compare to those of other teachers who did not participate in the Noyce program?
What skills, beliefs, or knowledge do in-service STEM teachers consider most
important for working effectively with students with disabilities? This
investigation has the potential to add new knowledge about the preparation of
STEM teachers for teaching differently abled students in the general classroom.
The evidence generated may advance new teacher preparation. Educational
materials used in the workshops, data on workshop participants' knowledge gains,
and the perceived effectiveness of the workshops, especially for preparing
teachers for working with differently abled students within the STEM classroom,
will be disseminated to the broader STEM education community. The Noyce program
supports talented STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to become
effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 STEM teachers to
become STEM master teachers in high-need school districts. It also supports
research on the persistence, retention, and effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers
in high-need school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.