* 1852798
* Collaboration for Opportunities in and Advancement of STEM Teaching and Learning
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Jens-Uwe Kuhn, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* James A. M. Alvarez
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,414,269.00

With support from the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce), this
Track 1: Scholarships and Stipends project at the University of California,
Santa Barbara (UCSB) aims to serve the national need to prepare high-quality
science teachers for high-need school districts. In partnership with Santa
Barbara City College, Santa Barbara Unified School District, and the Wolf Museum
of Exploration + Innovation (MOXI), UCSB intends to develop science teachers who
will be highly effective in teaching both science and engineering to culturally
and linguistically diverse students. Through field placements and coursework,
the project will engage undergraduate interns and Teacher Candidate Scholars to
be effective in using the Next Generation Science Standards. This goal will be
accomplished by emphasizing convergent science, which includes the merging of
ideas, approaches, and technologies among the disciplines of science and
engineering. The recruitment strategies include career guidance, exposure to
exceptional educator role models, information about career opportunities, one-
on-one mentoring, and targeted assistance for community college students
transferring to a four-year university. The expected outcomes of the project
include: (1) encouraging STEM undergraduates to consider teaching as a career
and supporting post-baccalaureate students with degrees in a STEM discipline to
become certified as teachers; (2) increasing UCSB's production of thoroughly
trained, highly respected science teachers; (3) graduating Scholars with the
knowledge and skills needed to grow innovative science programs in their own
high-need schools; and (4) disseminating strategies found effective in both
preparing exceptional science teachers and teaching convergent science to all
students in high-need schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over its five-year duration,
the project aims to support 24 STEM undergraduates in internships and produce 52
beginning secondary science teachers with baccalaureate STEM degrees and
teaching certification. The project will make a concerted effort to attract
high-achieving students who are first generation college students,
underrepresented students, English learners, and/or transfer students from
community colleges. To recruit and prepare diverse undergraduate interns and
teacher candidates, UCSB will collaborate with both MOXI and the Dos Pueblos
High School's Engineering Academy (DPEA), located in the high-needs Santa
Barbara Unified School District, with the goal of integrating convergence
science in the teacher certification program. Undergraduates will complete a
yearlong internship to learn about teaching convergent science. During the
internship, they will be placed at DPEA and MOXI, as well as enroll in an
introductory science education course at UCSB. In addition to their regular
teacher education coursework and field experiences, teacher Candidate Scholars
will participate in an Industrial and Technology Education methods course at
DPEA and attend field trips to MOXI. Through these efforts, the project aims to
produce reform-based, equity-minded science teachers who will provide
California's diverse secondary school students with greater access to an
excellent and innovative STEM education. The Noyce program supports talented
STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM
teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 STEM teachers to become STEM master
teachers in high-need school districts. It also supports research on the
persistence, retention, and effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need
school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.