* 1852155
* Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site for Computational Sensing and Medical Robotics (CS&amp;MR)
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Ralph Etienne-Cummings, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 09/30/2023
* USD 378,145.00

This REU Site for Computational Sensing and Medical Robotics (CS&amp;MR) hosted
by Johns Hopkins University (JHU) will provide a diverse cohort of undergraduate
and community college participants from institutions nationwide an exciting and
challenging research experience involving projects in a range of engineering
disciplines and computer science. Each participant will be matched with a
research project in one of JHU's robotics labs. These research projects are
aimed at helping surgical doctors to make operations more effective and less
error prone by using modern computation, sensing and robotics tools. Some of the
projects will also help people with disabilities regain some of the lost
functions, by using, for example, devices such as artificial limbs. The students
will work closely with teams composed of a professor, graduate student, other
undergraduate students and, often, high school students and/or teachers. The
undergraduates will also get training in technical writing, oral presentation,
and research ethics. They will tour labs at JHU Hospital (JHU/H), the Applied
Physics Laboratory, and local robotics and biotech companies, and get the
opportunity to perform laparoscopic procedures at the JHU/H Minimally Invasive
Surgical Training. As a result of all these activities, this grant will help
prepare a workforce for an important sector of the US economy at the interface
of healthcare delivery and engineering. The program will increase the number of
experts who can make complex surgery safer, less expensive and more available
nationally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merits of this REU program
stem from its multidisciplinary nature, as it offers each participant during a
ten week summer experience, the ability to conduct research in a variety of
fields and develop strong teamwork collaboration skills. Each faculty mentor
provides a project description that may be created specifically for the program
or designed to carry out a facet of on-going work. Because the Laboratory for
Computational Sensing and Robotics (LCSR) has close ties with the Johns Hopkins
Medical Institutions and the Malone Center for Engineering in Healthcare,
participants can experience the cutting-edge research that is designed to aid
medical diagnosis, interventions, and prosthesis, and contribute to technologies
that are likely to become a part of the "future of medicine." The project team
plans to leverage this experience and offer this REU in CS&amp;MR with an aim of
broadening the areas of research to include more biological inspired and
biologically targeted computational sensing, imaging, and robotics systems.
Quality of the program is assured through mentor training, formative and
summative assessments (by JHU Center for Education and Outreach), and
longitudinal tracking of students (by administrative staff in the Department of
Electrical and Computer Engineering). The broader impact of this REU program
will result from the fact that it addresses a vital national need to improve the
delivery of healthcare by developing new sensing, imaging, and medical robotics
systems as well as techniques designed to enhance the ability of clinicians to
introduce, plan, and execute medical procedures. By recruiting from and
partnering with LSAMP, McNair, SWE, SHPE and other similar programs, minority-
serving institutions and community colleges, this program will help develop a
pipeline of qualified, diverse individuals who will contribute to the workforce
in the area of STEM, particularly in the multi- and interdisciplinary subjects
encountered in technology enhanced biomedical research, clinical interventions,
and basic biological and life sciences. The participants will be well trained in
communications and research ethics, which are essential for success in today's
biotechnology and bioscience work and the marketplace.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.