* 1852544
* REU Site: Developing entrepreneurs in energy storage, catalysis, and biofuels
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2023
* Adam Melvin, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 04/30/2023
* USD 374,220.00

This renewal Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site: Developing
entrepreneurs in energy storage, catalysis and biofuels, at Louisiana State
University (LSU), will annually engage undergraduate students traditionally
underrepresented in STEM fields in energy related research with a focus on
innovation and a special emphasis on entrepreneurship. The goal is to expose
future scientists and engineers to the mechanisms whereby advances in basic
science are transitioned to practice via academic labs, industry and technology
start-ups. The research focus of the REU program will be structured around a
common energy theme with sub-topics including energy storage, catalysis, and
biofuels. LSU has a strong history in energy research, from early work in oil
and gas processing to current work in catalysis, biofuels, and energy storage.
LSU is located in the heart of petrochemical country and has developed
relationships with many of the top petroleum and chemical companies in the
world. PhD engineers from several of these companies will mentor the REU
students on the importance of high quality research in industry and the types of
careers available. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 10-week summer program will provide
REU participants with experience in world-class hands-on energy related research
and will prepare them to pursue graduate science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) degrees. In addition to enabling students to become
independent researchers in the fields of energy storage, catalysis, and
biofuels, the most unique aspect of this REU will be the training of students in
the fundamentals of entrepreneurship and industrial technology development.
Weekly seminars, field trips, and workshops provide students with research skill
development and professional development topics such as ethics, patents, and
intellectual property. Students will also receive direct mentoring on
entrepreneurship from faculty who have successfully launched start-up companies
and mentors from the LSU Innovation Park. Additionally, LSU is home to the
Louisiana Business and Technology Center (LBTC), a world class technology and
small business incubator. The LBTC currently has 36 companies founded by LSU
students and collectively those companies employ 150+ people and have over
$5,000,000 in capital raised to date. The LBTC will host a workshop to train the
REU students on the keys to successful entrepreneurship and what it takes to get
an idea into practice. These excellent training opportunities along with the
chance to work on cutting edge energy research projects will certainly inspire
more students to attend graduate school to have the tools necessary for a career
in innovation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.