* 1852824
* GOALI:  Continuous Spatial Particle Atomic Layer Deposition Processing
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* Alan Weimer, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 07/31/2023
* USD 412,735.00

Atomic layer deposition (ALD) is the most precise method for manufacturing
conformal, continuous thin film coatings. ALD processing is important in many
manufacturing processes for optics, microelectronics, and biomedical
applications, though it can be slow and costly. ALD uses sequential gas-solid
reactions where gas-phase reactions are prevented by having precursors fed
separately into the reaction chamber and react with functional groups bonded to
the surface. The proposed GOALI project is a collaboration between an academic
team from the University of Colorado at Boulder and an industrial partner, ALD
NanoSolutions. The objective of the proposed research is to develop an improved
fundamental understanding of spatial atomic layer deposition on particles (i.e.
spatial Particle ALD), so that high-efficiency and low-cost continuous Particle
ALD can be achieved.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will involve
Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) model development and integrated experiments
aimed at developing a scalable ALD process in which primary particles are coated
uniformly and expensive precursor gases are effectively utilized. A continuum-
scale model will account for agglomerate formation and breakup as well as
chemical reactions, fluid dynamics, heat/mass transport, and all relevant
multiphase interactions during fine particle agitation using vibration. The
hypotheses to be tested include: (1) that a continuum-scale model will
adequately describe the proposed agitated particle system; (2) that it is
possible to coat individual nanoparticles in a continuous vibrating Particle ALD
reactor without loss of active surface area; (3) that Particle ALD processing in
a continuous vibrating Particle ALD reactor can be optimized to utilize the
precursor gases nearly completely; (4) that the modified in-house lab system
will provide data needed for experimental validation of the CFD model; and (5)
that substrate particles coated by continuous spatial particle ALD will compare
favorably with particles synthesized using a batch fluidized bed process - for
the identical number of ALD cycles. Experiments carried out at ALD NanoSolutions
will focus on validating the model predictions and findings of the academic team
and scaling up the process. The ultimate objective of the project is to
substantially improve the fundaental understanding of how Particle ALD enables
primary fine particles, including nanoparticles, to be coated in an agitated
particle bed reactor and enable process scale up for commercial production. A
graduate student will be trained in close collaboration with the industrial
partner and undergraduate students will be engaged in research. The project will
also be used as a capstone design project for undergraduate student teams to
perform process design and techno-economic analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.