* 1852519
* REU Site: Broadening Participation in Physics - A multi-institutional REU program
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Jennifer Curtis, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 03/31/2024
* USD 337,226.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: The Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
site at the School of Physics at Georgia Institute of Technology (Georgia Tech)
engages undergraduate students in an immersive summer research experience that
provides participants with hands-on physics research and encouragement to embark
on graduate studies. This multi-institutional partnership between Georgia Tech
and the institutions in the Atlanta University Center (Morehouse College, Clark
Atlanta University, Spelman College) fosters the nation's interests in creating
a highly-trained, diverse workforce in science, technology, engineering and
mathematics (STEM). The primary objectives of this Site are to: (1) provide high
quality research experiences, in combination with a series of professional
development activities, for cohorts of visiting undergraduate researchers, (2)
motivate and prepare talented undergraduates to pursue, and succeed in, graduate
studies, (3) assemble a cadre of participants that reflects the diversity of the
U.S. population, (4) attract students from institutions that have limited
research activities, (5) continue engagement of the participants beyond the
summer program when they return to their home institutions, and (6) nurture
collaborations in research and instruction between the four institutions in the
consortium. Other components of the site include team-building activities,
regular group meetings, a research seminar series, a workshop series (e.g.,
focused on ethics, presentation skills, and graduate opportunities),
undergraduate research symposia, and field trips to industrial and government
laboratories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: Undergraduate participants
in the Georgia Tech - Atlanta University Center Research Experiences for
Undergraduate (REU) site are paired with a faculty mentor and research group
aligned with her/his physics interests. Summer research projects are selected
from an array of possibilities ranging from atomic physics to condensed matter
physics; from physics of living systems to astrophysics and computational
physics. The Site aims to enhance interactions between Georgia Tech and the
institutions in the Atlanta University Center and thereby increases the capacity
for research at those predominantly undergraduate, minority-serving
institutions. The Site is carefully structured to interweave high-quality
research experiences, mentoring, and community building between the REU
participants in order to provide students with a rich, supportive growth
experience. Students who complete this summer experience are well-equipped with
invaluable skillsets (hard and soft), an enhanced perspective, and a permanent
set of mentors to aid in pursuit of their STEM
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.