* 1852794
* NSF-BSF: Monitoring bedload transport: Advancing seismic and acoustic surrogate methods in ephemeral channels
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Susan Bilek, New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 05/31/2024
* USD 447,373.00

The flow of water in rivers, especially during floods, transports sand, gravel,
rocks, and even boulders. This movement of particles (bedload transport) shapes
the river channel itself, influences the erosion of bed and banks, and helps
give shape to the broader landscape. Measuring bedload transport is difficult,
though, because it changes rapidly in both space and time and can be quite
dangerous to collect data during the high-energy flood events when most material
moves. This project will experiment with new measurement techniques that can be
done safely outside of the river channel. The investigators will compare the
vibration and sound energy collected by seismic sensors placed near the river
bank with direct measurements of bedload transport collected by physical
samplers set into the riverbed. Sampling will take place on two ephemeral
streams in semi-arid regions of New Mexico, USA and Israel, streams which are
usually dry, but which transport a great deal of material when they do flow
during flash floods. The data generated by this project will be used to test and
expand models of how bedload movement generates seismic energy, which will
benefit a wide audience of scientists who want non-invasive methods to monitor
river and bedload processes. In addition, because understanding how bedload
moves is critical for river management, the results will assist water management
agencies such as the US Bureau of Reclamation and the US Army Corp of Engineers.
This project also trains diverse US and international students in hydrology,
seismology, and geomorphology, with a project team that includes experts from
the US, Israel, France, and Germany. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bedload flux is
fundamental to river dynamics and landscape evolution, yet the collection of
representative measurements of this key parameter is inhibited by its spatial
and temporal variability as well as the challenge of sampling in high-energy
environments (for example, desert flash floods) without altering transport.
Surrogate methods are a promising approach, yet calibration remains a challenge,
and the lower grain size limit of detection is uncertain. This project will take
advantage of already-built infrastructure to directly measure bedload transport,
use these data to calibrate acoustic surrogates, and then use both of these to
calibrate and test seismic monitoring of bedload transport. This approach will
provide vital field data to enable the advance of fluvial seismology and
sediment transport modeling in drylands by testing theoretical models of bedload
seismic energy generation. The study sites are ephemeral channels in semi-arid
regions of New Mexico, USA, and Israel, at which riverbed slot samplers will
monitor bedload flux at multiple locations across the channel. These data will
be used to calibrate collocated pipe microphones that collect data throughout
the flood. An array of ~ 70-80 short period, 3-component geophone seismometers
will collect seismic data near the channel, which will then be compared with the
direct and acoustic bedload data. In subsequent years, seismometers will also be
deployed along the channel system to study the movement of bedload throughout an
entire catchment. The data collection and analysis will refine the overarching
theoretical framework of understanding for the transport of sand-rich gravel in
semiarid and arid regions of our planet.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.