* 1852958
* Trade and the Development of Social Complexity
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2019,12/31/2022
* David Killick, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2022
* USD 257,329.00

All modern nations are completely dependent upon the special mechanical and
electrical properties of metals. Iron and aluminum are abundant and widely
distributed, but major deposits of many other critically important metals are
scarce, so these must be obtained by international trade. The southern third of
the African continent is unusually rich in the rarer metals. It has the world's
largest reserves of platinum, cobalt, copper and manganese, and has historically
produced more gold than any other region. Mining and metallurgy now account for
a major proportion of Gross Domestic Product (GDP) of most nations in central
and southern Africa, but few know that mining in this region began long ago.
Iron and copper have been mined and smelted here since at least 200 AD, and gold
since at least 1200 AD. Copper objects are often found in archaeological sites
far from any potential source of copper. Few citizens of southern and central
African are aware of the extent of precolonial mining, or of trade in copper in
this region. The anticipated results of this project on ancient copper mining
and trade will likely be widely covered in African print and electronic news
media, and will be incorporated into educational materials for African schools
and universities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research funded by this award will
study the circulation of copper within southern Africa between 200 CE to about
1700 CE. Dr. David Killick and graduate student Jay Stephens will collaborate
with archaeologists in southern Africa, and with geochemists at the University
of Arizona, to reconstruct long-distance movements of copper in prehistoric
times by matching the lead isotope ratios of copper objects to those from ore
deposits throughout the region. This research will provide a novel way to study
some key issues in the archaeology of southern Africa. These include: tracing
the routes taken by the earliest metal-using peoples (the Bantu migration) into
South Africa; establishing when mining of specific copper deposits began;
documenting trade links between the major prehistoric states in the region; and
providing a new way to look at the changes that occurred in these trading
systems after Europeans settled in the region, from the early sixteenth
century.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.