* 1852298
* REU SITE: BUCKEYE REU SITE
* ENG,EEC
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Gunjan Agarwal, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 03/31/2024
* USD 416,231.00

This award establishes a new Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site
at Ohio State University to fund on-campus research experiences for students in
STEM, with a specific focus in the fields of biomechanics and mechano-biology
(BMMB). The growing interdisciplinary field of BMMB unites an understanding of
the complex and unusual mechanical behavior and response exhibited by biological
systems with an increasing number of applications in healthcare. The BUCKEYE REU
Site will provide opportunities for a diverse cohort of undergraduates from
groups traditionally underrepresented in engineering to conduct novel, cutting-
edge research with faculty mentors from Biomedical, Materials Science or
Mechanical Engineering. The research experience provided by the REU Site will
not only help advance the field of BMMB but also will provide students with an
independent fundamental and/or translational research experience.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU Site will provide ten undergraduates an exciting
summer research experience that will prepare and motivate them for further
education and careers in BMMB and engineering as well as advance and support
novel biomedical engineering and science research. The REU mentor faculty,
employ a number of state-of-the-art experimental and computational tools in BMMB
research to examine a diverse set of biological sample types across various
length scales. REU students will participate in and learn to conduct hands on
research in conjunction with both faculty and near-peer graduate student
mentors. Along with their comprehension of, contribution to and advancement of
ongoing research in the lab, students will learn hypothesis generation and
applications of BMMB in medicine and healthcare. Through their engagement in
weekly journal clubs and presentations of their research during a symposium
and/or a national meeting as well as clinical and research facility tours,
students will become stronger communicators. By participating in weekly
professional development workshops and interacting with research ambassadors and
faculty mentors, students will gain a better understanding of how to prepare
for, apply to, and succeed in graduate school, enhance their technical
comprehension and communication skills and pursue careers in BMMB and
engineering research. Because it is expected that the majority of these students
will pursue a graduate degree they will continue to advance knowledge, serve as
role models for future students from underrepresented groups, and diversify the
STEM workforce. Graduate students and faculty mentors involved in mentoring the
REU participants will also benefit by enhancing their skills in working with a
diverse workforce. Outreach activity to an underserved local middle school will
help attract future generations to research in BMMB and
BME.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.