* 1852378
* REU Site:  Research Challenges of Computational and Experimental Mathematics
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2023
* Eugene Fiorini, Moravian University
* Continuing Grant
* Tiziana Giorgi
* 03/31/2023
* USD 321,759.00

This award provides support for the REU Site "Research Challenges of
Computational and Experimental Mathematics" at Moravian College. As a
collaboration between Moravian College, Muhlenberg College, and Cedar Crest
College, this program will concentrate on research projects associated with
experimental mathematics and its role in stimulating new research. Experimental
mathematics uses computer-assisted techniques to investigate mathematical
patterns and properties. Experimental mathematics is impacting research in
scientific and engineering fields beyond the mathematical sciences, giving it
the potential to increase partnerships between academia, industry, and
government. As society's reliance on data and data driven results has increased,
so has the need for a workforce capable of analyzing and interpreting that data.
This program will equip those students with the necessary tools to understand
(as well as close) the gaps between conjecture, a statistically significant
result, and a formal proof. The investigator and his colleagues will nurture
this capacity by highlighting the important role computers have played in
developing conjectures in areas that include number theory, algorithmic and
enumerative combinatorics, combinatorial number theory, graph theory, game
theory, and many other mathematical fields, as well as tools necessary for
identifying such conjectures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Projections of more powerful
computational devices present the future mathematician with interesting
challenges, including experimentation by developing computational algorithms and
meta-algorithms through the use of computers. The intellectual focus of this
research concentrates on the increasing importance of integrating computer
technology into pure mathematics methodology, as well as its contribution to
other fields, such as algorithmic applications in computer science, biology, and
medicine. Mentors are drawn from the Lehigh Valley Association of Independent
Colleges (LVAIC) and neighboring institutions. Research projects include
experimental mathematics topics such as the Ghandhan problem, Beatty Pair of
sequences, perfect powers that appear uniquely in the Catalan triangle, and
problems emanating from generalizing existing sequences in the Online
Encyclopedia of Integer Sequences. The mentors have experience accessing,
researching, and contributing to open problems in experimental mathematics. The
program goals are to publicize the growing importance of experimental
mathematics among a cadre of students and early-career researchers to help
establish it as a tool in their research arsenal; encourage participants to
continue their education into graduate school and pursue careers in research;
and contribute toward the training of the twenty-first century
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.