* 1852116
* REU Site: Mechanobiology at VCU
* ENG,EEC
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2023
* Rebecca Heise, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 05/31/2023
* USD 331,914.00

This REU site in Mechanobiology at the Virginia Commonwealth University (VCU)
College of Engineering will annually engage a diverse cohort of undergraduate
students and faculty members in biomedical engineering research projects in
areas related to mechanobiology. Mechanobiology is an emerging field at the
interface of biology and engineering that focuses on how physical forces and
changes in the mechanical properties of cells and tissues contribute to
development, physiology, and disease. The field of mechanobiology is a rapidly
expanding research area that requires a unique set of interdisciplinary skills.
The individual projects in this REU program will be focused on gaining
interdisciplinary skills related to cell mechanics, mechanobiology in drug
delivery, pulmonary mechanics, and orthopedic regenerative medicine.
Furthermore, trainees will learn the basic scientific method, statistics skills,
research ethics, and the workings of collaborative biomedical research
laboratories. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This 10 week summer REU site has 3 goals for
the participants. The first goal is to increase participation in mechanobiology
research. The second goal is to provide opportunities to enhance scientific
literacy and communication at the interface of engineering and life sciences.
The third goal is to prepare trainees for graduate study or research careers in
mechanobiology or related fields. The students will be equipped with cutting-
edge research skills in mechanobiology including microfabricated post arrays,
mechanotransduction pathway analysis, FRET-based force sensing, cell-material
interactions, and mechanically enabled drug delivery. Student participants will
also participate in a local outreach activity that enhances engineering
knowledge of K-12 students and teachers. At weekly meetings, students will learn
about research techniques, participate in journal clubs, and hear talks from
experts in mechanobiology. At the end of each summer, students will participate
in a research symposium and draft abstracts to present their work at a national
engineering meeting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.