* 1852077
* GLOBE 23rd Annual Meeting: Intersections of Diverse Environments
* GEO,RISE
* 12/01/2018,11/30/2019
* Julie Malmberg, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 11/30/2019
* USD 245,089.00

The Global Learning and Observations to Benefit the Environment (GLOBE) Program
is a worldwide science and education community that currently consists of more
than 125 U.S. Partners and 121 Partner Countries. It is a community of students,
teachers, scientists, and citizens working together to better understand,
sustain, and improve Earth's environment at local, regional, and global
scales.&lt;br/&gt;The mission of GLOBE is to promote the teaching and learning
of science; enhance environmental literacy and stewardship; and promote
scientific discovery. More broadly, the GLOBE Program strives to expand the
pipeline of future scientists and STEM professionals for industry, academia, and
government as well as to engage citizens in collecting data about their local
environment.&lt;br/&gt;The theme of the 23rd GLOBE Annual Meeting is
Intersections of Diverse Environments. The location for the Annual Meeting,
Detroit, Michigan, is positioned at the intersection of multiple types of
diverse environments culturally, geographically, and economically. The
municipality of Detroit, the largest town on the US-Canadian border, has a
population of over 670,000 people and the metropolitan area is home to close to
6 million people. Within the urban downtown of Detroit is Belle Isle, a 982-acre
island park in the Detroit River between Michigan and Ontario. Belle Isle
includes an aquarium, conservatory, nature center, and natural areas to explore
and discover (about 1/3 of the island is natural woodlands). The island, which
is accessible by car and bus, is home to many types of small animals, birds, and
insects. Protocol trainings will allow Annual Meeting participants to visit
Belle Isle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At the Annual Meeting, the theme of
Intersections of Diverse Environments will be explored further in multiple
strands. These strands are: 1) Finding nature in urban landscapes; 2) Exploring
changing environments, 3) GLOBE and technology, and 4) GLOBE gives back. GLOBE
community members will be invited to propose talks based upon the themes.
Additionally, trainings will be offered by NASA SciAct Earth Science Education
awardees (GLOBE Mission EARTH, The AREN Project, Arctic and Earth SIGNs, and the
NASA Earth Science Education Collaborative (NESEC)). Woven through all the
strands will be the overarching theme of inclusion and diversity. All presenters
will be asked to think about equity and inclusiveness for their talks, panels,
and demonstrations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.