* 1852791
* Supporting Preservice Candidates to be Culturally Sensitive and Technology-Competent STEM Teachers
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2024
* Hui-Yin Hsu, New York Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Julio Soto
* 04/30/2024
* USD 929,215.00

With support from the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce), this
Track 1: Scholarships and Stipends project at the New York Institute of
Technology (NYIT) aims to serve the national and local need of preparing high-
quality STEM teachers with strong content and pedagogical knowledge, cultural
sensitivity, and technology and engineering design skills. The project will
partner with four local high-need high schools (Roosevelt, Westbury, Valley
Stream Central, and Academy Charter) and the New York Hall of Science. The
project will recruit sixteen STEM post-baccalaureates to complete a Master of
Arts in Teaching (MAT) program that includes secondary teacher certification.
The Noyce scholars will receive scholarships to complete the MAT program and
then will be supported during and after their MAT experience with several
professional development experiences and workshops as well as a state-mandated
mentoring program during the induction years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will support sixteen Noyce scholars with baccalaureate degrees in the areas of
Life Sciences, Mathematics, Physics, Engineering and Computer Science. Noyce
scholars will receive a year of intensive professional training, culminating
with a Masters of Arts in Teaching degree that includes coursework in culturally
responsive teaching. Innovative aspects of this project include: (1) cultural
competency courses to develop the Noyce scholars' competencies for teaching in
high-need schools, (2) a teaching assistant program at the partner organization
New York Hall of Science (NYSCI), (3) technology workshops to develop competency
in technology integration and computational thinking skills for the scholars,
and (4) workshops conducted by NYSCI and NASA certified providers to provide the
scholars the opportunity to engage in STEM hands-on activities. These approaches
and outcomes promise to contribute to preparing and retaining high-quality
teachers in high-need schools. Research about these innovative components will
add to what is known about preservice STEM teacher training. The Noyce program
supports talented STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to become
effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 STEM teachers to
become STEM master teachers in high-need school districts. It also supports
research on the persistence, retention, and effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers
in high-need school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.