* 1852352
* REU Site: CAAR: Combinatorics and Algorithms Applied to Real Problems
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/2019,02/28/2022
* William Gasarch, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 02/28/2022
* USD 395,000.00

The project will recruit undergraduates to come to The University of Maryland at
College Park where they will work on research projects. These projects are about
combining theory and practice. For example, several are on machine learning
which uses probability and statistics to train machines to find correlations in
data, identify images, or play games. Other projects are in cryptography, where
Mathematics is used to build secure systems. There will be a special effort to
recruit students in the program from non-research schools and underrepresented
groups. This program will give many of the students a chance to do research,
which they otherwise would not have.&lt;br/&gt;This program will give students
an idea of what graduate school is like in two ways: (1) their research projects
are scaled down versions of PhD theses, and (2) there will be interaction with
the students and current grad students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The students will
be offered a variety of projects. We list some sample projects
below:&lt;br/&gt;(1) Cryptography: Some next generation cryptosystems are based
on the hardness of solving certain problems on lattices (rather than factoring).
This project will explore implementations of known algorithms for solving these
lattice problems as a way to test the security of the new systems.&lt;br/&gt;(2)
Security: Side channel attacks are a way to attack a system by observing how
much time or power (or other visible signs) the system uses. In the past such
attacks have been used to find keys. In this project we develop and implement
attacks that find out information about users' data, as well as develop and
implement ways to prevent these attacks.&lt;br/&gt;(3) Allocation: How should a
firm allocate its limited interviewing resources to select the optimal cohort of
new employees from a large set of job applicants? Solving this problem seems to
require interesting algorithms and machine learning techniques. In this project
the students will implement programs for the problem and run them on real
data.&lt;br/&gt;(4) Machine Learning/Image Recognition: A common problem in
Machine Learning is to train a system to recognize an image, say of a dog. How
to test such systems? Another problem in machine learning is to generate hard
cases for an image-recognizer. In this project we will write programs that
generate fake images that fool an image-recognizer, and we will use these fakes
to improve the original image-recognizer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.