* 1852771
* Frozen Planet II
* GEO,OPP
* 10/15/2019,03/31/2020
* Vernon Chu, BBC Studios Americas, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 03/31/2020
* USD 1.00

Frozen Planet II, a new television series, will introduce viewers to the
extraordinary beauty and critical importance of our frozen planet. Due to be
broadcast in the UK in late 2021 and the US in early 2022, it will air ten years
after the original Frozen Planet series, giving a critically-timed insight into
the fastest-changing part of our planet. While connecting with the greatest
global audience possible, it will bring to the fore the challenges these frozen
worlds face and the global consequences that could arise from their demise.
Building on the hallmarks of the original series -- spectacular cinematography,
compelling storytelling, scientific accuracy and never-before-seen animal
behavior -- Frozen Planet II is intent on advancing knowledge and understanding
of the natural world by showcasing environmental change and its consequences on
wildlife. This is woven into the narrative core of the series, with a final
episode devoted entirely to the future of these worlds. Complementing the
broadcasts, the project will develop online educational materials and a robust
social media campaign.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This award is for logistic support
only for filming marine life and landscapes with NSF-supported research programs
at McMurdo and Palmer Stations in Antarctica. In the decade since the original
Frozen Planet was produced, there have been considerable advances in three key
aspects of wildlife film-making: camera and sensor technology, exploration
techniques and storytelling itself. Stories that would have been impossible to
tell ten years ago are now achievable - from filming krill bioluminescing by
using new low-light camera systems, to capturing extraordinary underwater
encounters through the use of rebreather diving technology. Frozen Planet II's
remit is to both inform and entertain a global audience with stories about the
wonders of Antarctica and the creatures that live there, and show viewers parts
of the continent and behaviors that they have not seen before. This series will
be filmed predominantly in 8K and delivered for broadcast in 4K. The aim is to
show dramatic scenes of animal behavior, highlighting the diversity of life in
this the most hostile place on Earth; to show the wealth of landscapes both on
the continent and in the ocean that surrounds it; and, through featuring
scientists at work in Antarctica to reveal the changes already occurring and the
challenges ahead, some of which are only just beginning to be understood. This
project is supported by the NSF Office of Polar
Programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.