* 1852727
* The Jet Streams in a Warming World: Incorporating Moisture into Our Understanding of Midlatitude Circulation Change
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2023
* Edwin Gerber, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Varavut Limpasuvan
* 05/31/2023
* USD 537,703.00

The jet streams are belts of westerly winds in the extratropics of both the
Northern and Southern Hemispheres. They steer storm tracks across the United
States, Europe, and Asia, as well as Australia, New Zealand, and South America
and play a critical role in precipitation and extreme weather in the mid-
latitudes. This research explores the response of the jet streams and storm
tracks to slow variations of ocean surface temperatures and radiative forcing at
the top of the atmosphere due to greenhouse gas emissions as well as volcanic
aerosols by major eruptions. The position and intensity of the mid-latitude
storm tracks affect precipitation and extreme weather for a substantial fraction
of the world's population. This project will develop strategies to validate and
improve weather and climate forecast prediction systems. Policy makers, industry
stakeholders, and the public rely on model forecasts of storm tracks, and of
potential trends in the future, to make informed decisions. The research will
also support the education and training of three graduate students. It will
provide them the opportunity to develop a physical understanding of the
atmospheric circulation, computer-based modeling of weather and climate, and
experience with high performance scientific
computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Climate models generally predict a
poleward shift in the jet streams in response to global warming, but there is
considerable uncertainty in the amplitude and structure of jet stream changes.
This project will contrast established mechanisms that rely primarily on dry
dynamical theory by exploring the role of moisture, which is a significant
source of uncertainty for predicting jet streams. As warmer air can hold more
moisture, it is expected that the atmosphere will be more strongly influenced by
moist processes in the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.