* 1852308
* REU SITE: IDEA Incubator for Porous Materials: Integrating Discovery, Engineering and Art
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2023
* Mark Shiflett, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 04/30/2023
* USD 375,800.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site will create an IDEA
Incubator at the University of Kansas (KU) by integrating discovery, engineering
and art. The primary goal is to engage a diverse cohort of REU students in a
variety of experiences, both in and out of the laboratory, that will nurture
creativity, communication and other important skills for the 21st Century
workforce. Emphasizing innovative thinking in particular is essential since the
future competitiveness of the U.S. in the global economy depends on innovators
to create products and processes of value to society. REU students will grow as
researchers by engaging in team-based learning on projects focused on porous
materials, which have a wide-variety of biomedical and chemical applications.
With a host of variables that can be altered and tested, this field of research
is ideal for tinkering and ripe for discovery and innovation. Training
activities will also help students build a solid understanding of size and
scale, two concepts that tend to be under-developed but essential for scientific
literacy and discovery. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During the 10-week summer program,
this REU Site offers opportunities for undergraduate students to engage in
research on topics relating to porous materials that range from fundamental to
applied. For example, participants will be immersed in how to design stable
delivery systems for vaccines, adsorbents for chemical separations, nanofiber
scaffolds for tissue engineering, and catalysts for hydrogen generation and
biomass conversion. In addition, students will gain hands-on experience with
state-of-the-art biophysical and analytical techniques for characterizing porous
materials and how these materials interact with other molecules. The REU
students? will be supported in the laboratory by specially trained faculty and
graduate student mentors. The students will also engage in tours of nearby
companies, boredom-busting unseminars, interactive workshops, social mixers and
team-building activities. The extensive partnerships with nine companies and an
art museum, as well as active-learning classrooms and high-tech labs make this
REU Site uniquely positioned to create a successful and inclusive learning
experience for all students. Furthermore, synergistic benefits will arise from
partnering with a KU Research Experiences for Teachers (RET) Site, leading to
broader impacts for high school level educators and
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Directorate
for Engineering (ENG), Division of Engineering Education and Centers (EEC) and
the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.