* 1852126
* REU Site: Secure and Privacy-Preserving Cyber-Physical Systems: Software and Hardware Approaches
* CSE,CNS
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2023
* Syed Rafay Hasan, Tennessee Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Jill Denner
* 01/31/2023
* USD 379,993.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site award funds a renewal
site at Tennessee Technological University focused on preparing future
researchers who can protect the nation's critical infrastructure. The site's
focus is on Cyber-Physical Systems (CPSs), a class of engineering systems where
computation and communication network are used to monitor and control physical
components. CPSs play a major role in the design and development of modern
systems and initiatives, such as smart and safe cities, self-driving cars,
industrial internet of things (IIoT), and smart power grid. Security breaches in
CPSs can occur through software or hardware. Either one can halt critical
infrastructures and reveal citizens' locations and activities, making the
security of CPSs crucial for U.S. national security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An
expert group of faculty members will mentor these REU participants to conceive,
design, implement, and assess research projects in the areas related to security
and privacy in CPSs. The team plans to conduct nationwide recruitment efforts in
partnership with Minority Serving Institutions, and to reach out to meritorious
students from under-represented communities, women, students with disabilities
and from institutions limited in Science, Technology, Engineering and Math
(STEM) research. The site will investigate both software and hardware intrinsic
attacks in CPS. Undergraduate students will have the opportunity to learn
diverse topics including, Blockchain for securing CPS, challenges with hardware
and software attacks on IIoT, threats of adversarial learning attacks on the
deployment of deep learning architectures on resource constraint hardware.
Students will get exposure to different toolsets in domains such as
cryptography, graph-based anomaly detection, and convolutional neural
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.