* 1852344
* REU Site:  Interdisciplinary Program in Multi-scale Biological Networks
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Natalia Kirienko, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/29/2024
* USD 417,702.00

This REU Site award to Rice University, located in Houston, TX, will support the
training of 12 students for 10 weeks during the summers of 2019 - 2021. This
program will expose students to the contributions made by different science,
technology, engineering, and math (STEM) disciplines toward the detailed
understanding of living systems as integrated networks. Students will work in
laboratories that draw from an array of approaches - from classical biochemistry
and genetics to complex theoretical modeling. Research areas include: (i)
biomolecular structure, function, and evolution, (ii) naturally-occurring
genetic networks, (iii) synthetic biology and metabolic networks, and (iv)
ecological networks. Participating faculty mentors come from a range of
departments including Biosciences, Bioengineering, Chemical &amp; Biomolecular
Engineering, Chemistry, and Computer Science. This program seeks to recruit
students who are training across a similar spectrum of disciplines. Students
will also participate in workshops focusing on ethics and responsible conduct of
research, professional communication, and the graduate school application
process. Application to the program requires a transcript, resume, research
statement, and two letters of recommendation. Participants will be selected by a
faculty committee, which will assess student alignment with the program based on
demonstrated excellence in STEM coursework. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;It is
anticipated that a total of 36 students, primarily from schools with limited
research opportunities, will be trained in the program. Students will be
recruited nationwide, with an emphasis on students enrolled at proximal
minority-serving institutions, including community colleges and four-year
institutions. Students will learn how research is conducted, and many will
present the results of their work at scientific conferences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A common web-based assessment tool used by all REU Site
programs funded by the Division of Biological Infrastructure will be used to
determine the effectiveness of the training program. Students will be tracked
after the program in order to determine their career paths. Students will be
asked to respond to an automatic email sent via the NSF reporting system. More
information about the program is available by visiting https://ibb.rice.edu/nsf-
reu-bionetworks, or by contacting the PI (Dr. Joff Silberg at joff@rice.edu) or
the co-PI (Dr. Natasha Kirienko at kirienko@rice.edu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.