* 1852697
* Supporting Future Science and Mathematics Teachers to Become Culturally Competent Educators
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2024
* Bryan Dewsbury, University of Rhode Island
* Continuing Grant
* Julio Soto
* 04/30/2024
* USD 1,199,965.00

With support from the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce), this
Track 1: Scholarships and Stipends project at the University of Rhode Island
aims to serve the local and national need for highly-qualified STEM teachers.
Freshmen and sophomore STEM majors will be offered summer internships as an
initial experience with potential to excite them to become STEM teachers. These
students may then later apply to become Noyce scholars during the junior and
senior year of their undergraduate STEM degree program. This project will
provide high-need school districts (HNSDs) with high-quality STEM teachers both
through an undergraduate and graduate teacher education program and support them
as beginning STEM teachers to improve student academic outcomes. Scholars will
gain significant knowledge and practices in the STEM disciplines, including the
Next Generation Science Standards, problem solving, and computational thinking.
The Noyce Scholars will bring their expertise to HNSDs across the country,
impacting STEM education in Rhode Island and beyond. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goals of the project are to recruit 20 freshmen and sophomores with STEM (e.g.,
biological sciences, chemistry, computer science, mathematics, and physics)
backgrounds into teacher education through paid summer internships and then
provide scholarship support to 16 STEM undergraduate majors and 5 STEM
professionals (STEM graduates returning to become teachers). The project staff
will mentor these 21 Noyce Scholars as beginning teachers in HNSDs. The project
will collaborate with several HNSDs (e.g., Central Falls, Cranston, and
Providence Public Schools) and the Rhode Island Environmental Education
Association. Lessons learned will enhance the knowledge base regarding (a)
factors influencing STEM majors and professionals coming into K-12 education and
their interest in working in HNSDs, and (b) the types of support strategies that
lead to successful student teaching and retention in a HNSD. The Noyce program
supports talented STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to become
effective K-12 mathematics and science teachers in high-need school districts
and experienced, exemplary K-12 STEM teachers to become STEM master teachers. It
also supports research on the persistence, retention, and effectiveness of K-12
teachers in high-need school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.