* 1852510
* Mathematical Foundation of Flexible and Soft Manufacturing Robot Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2023
* Ahmed Shabana, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Eva Kanso
* 05/31/2023
* USD 408,178.00

Advanced manufacturing robot technologies, such as soft robots, are necessary in
order to increase productivity, ensure safety, and perform difficult precision
tasks in many industry sectors including automotive, aerospace, food,
construction, and agricultural. The control and stability of flexible and soft
manufacturing robotic systems, which have complex geometries and experience
desirable and undesirable deformations, are of major concern, particularly when
lightweight softer materials are used. However, the mathematical foundation of
such flexible and soft robots has not been established and our knowledge of
their mechanics remains remarkably incomplete. The seriousness of this challenge
is evident by the lack of advanced virtual prototyping techniques that are
integral part of the design, analysis, and performance evaluation of other
physics and engineering systems. This project will conduct fundamental research
to create the mathematical foundation and new computational algorithms for
flexible and soft manufacturing robot systems in order to address virtual
prototyping challenges. The new mathematical foundation will improve the
analysis and performance evaluation methods, capture significant details that
cannot be captured by existing simplified approaches, allow for virtually
testing new and improved designs, make such systems more affordable and safer,
and accelerate the design, development, and commercialization of such machines.
The new knowledge, approaches, and numerical algorithms developed in this
research will be used in the education of undergraduate and graduate students at
University of Illinois at Chicago. The broader impact will be realized through
dissemination, training, and outreach activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
scientific challenges include the integration of the robot geometry and
analysis; implementation of general and unconventional material models and
actuation forces; use of new concepts for mechanical joint modelling; and
developing efficient and robust algorithms for virtual prototyping. This
research seeks to address these challenges by developing a new transformative
continuum-based finite element and multibody system approach based on the
absolute nodal coordinate formulation. This formulation allows modeling
arbitrarily large and coupled displacements, correctly captures complex
geometries, and allows implementing general and nonconventional material models.
In this research project, accurate definitions of conventional and non-
conventional actuation forces will be developed taking into consideration the
complexity of the geometry of the robot components, which can be systematically
captured using the finite elements of the absolute nodal coordinate
formulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.