* 1852868
* Creating Community-Based STEM Teacher Pathways
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Kevin Johnson, Pacific University
* Continuing Grant
* John Haddock
* 05/31/2024
* USD 1,436,586.00

With support from the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce), this
Track 1: Scholarships and Stipends project aims to prepare high-quality STEM
teachers for local high-need, rural school districts. This project will develop
a supported pathway into long term teaching careers for 60 undergraduate STEM
majors or STEM career changers. It will prepare these Noyce Teacher Scholars to
be highly-effective teachers who can use culturally responsive teaching methods
to support their students' success in STEM. Program participants may major in or
have STEM degrees in Physics, Chemistry, Biology, Geology, Mathematics,
Engineering, Environmental Science, or Computer Science. An important strength
is the project's emphasis on recruiting STEM teachers from Oregon's community
colleges and rural communities through both undergraduate and career-change
post-baccalaureate pathways. In partnership with Chemeketa Community College, a
regional Hispanic Serving Institution, the project will provide financial
support to 20 Pacific-Chemeketa Noyce Interns. The internship will include
focused mentoring, coursework, and field experiences in STEM teaching, which
will involve both Pacific University and Noyce Scholar Alumni. Through its
training of STEM teachers for rural areas, this project addresses the national
interest of broadening participation and success in STEM careers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to prepare culturally
responsive STEM teachers through a comprehensive approach that includes targeted
recruitment of STEM majors and STEM post-baccalaureates. Program participants
will engage in over 1200 hours of supervised clinical practice embedded in
linguistically- and culturally-diverse high-need school districts and benefit
from coursework that incorporates culturally responsive and congruent STEM
pedagogy. Noyce Scholars will have first-hand experiences leveraging cultural
knowledge to transform STEM education to increase the success of their students.
The project's leadership team will use a series of focused case studies to
explore the impact of project components on the effectiveness of Noyce Scholar
Alumni. Each case study group will consist of 4-6 Noyce Scholar Alumni who will
be interviewed and observed in classrooms in the year after program completion.
Additional data about the effectiveness of the Noyce Scholar Alumni will be
gathered from student learning results and from relevant administrators. Reports
resulting from analysis of these case studies will be shared with local partner
stakeholders, as well as the broader Noyce and professional STEM education
communities. The Noyce program supports talented STEM undergraduate majors and
professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts and experienced, exemplary K-112 STEM teachers to become STEM master
teachers. It also supports research on the persistence, retention, and
effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.