* 1852944
* Leveraging Learning Assistantships, Mentoring, and Scholarships to Develop Self-Determined Mathematics Teachers for West Texas
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* George Williams, Texas Tech University
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Ellis
* 05/31/2024
* USD 1,480,859.00

With support from the NSF Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program, this Track 1
Scholarships and Stipends project aims to serve the national interest in high-
quality STEM teaching. This proposal specifically responds to a national and
local shortage in qualified and certified mathematics teachers. Over the five-
year duration of the award, the project aims to produce 27 new, certified
mathematics teachers who will teach in high-need school districts in West Texas.
The work will be done by a partnership that includes Texas Tech University, two
community colleges (South Plains College and Midland College), and the Lubbock
Independent School District. The project will recruit first- and second-year
undergraduates and provide them with an early teaching experience through work
as Learning Assistants in college-level math classes. By providing the learning
assistant with financial support, near-peer mentoring, and direct classroom
experience, This recruitment strategy is expected to encourage students to
pursue a career in secondary mathematics teaching.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
goals of this project are to: 1) Attract high quality, diverse, STEM
undergraduate students to complete a Bachelor of Science in Multi-Disciplinary
Studies degree with secondary mathematics certification; 2) Create a pathway for
community college students to earn a STEM degree and teacher certification in
mathematics and a career in middle school or high school teaching; 3) Prepare
self-determined mathematics teachers who have a high degree of both content and
pedagogical knowledge, 4) Retain 27 recipients as mathematics teachers; and 5)
Augment research and tracking activities of recipients. In Stage I of this
project, undergraduate students will be recruited from the two community
colleges and Texas Tech University to serve as learning assistants who will
support a STEM classroom under the direct supervision of a teacher or faculty
member. In Stage II, those students who determine to pursue a teaching career
will be invited to apply for a Noyce scholarship and complete the
multidisciplinary studies degree. A self-determination rubric, which was
developed through prior awards, and specific application criteria (e.g., GPA)
will be used to inform Scholar selection. As part of Stage II, this project will
use successful activities from prior Noyce awards, including a mentorship model,
the self-determination framework, and a scholarship seminar. The project
evaluation plan includes the use of the self-determination rubric, student
demographics, student surveys, document analysis, performance tracking and
persistency tracking. The research methodology will be an outcomes comparison
between participants and non-participants. Each of the research questions will
be examined through a participant profile analysis, descriptive qualitative
comparisons, and a Multiple Level Analysis of Variance (MANOVA) on performance
outcomes. This project may benefit the nation by developing a better
understanding of how to recruit and retain highly-qualified mathematics teachers
and attract them to teach in high-need school districts. More immediately, this
project should help to fill the vacant positions in mathematics teaching in
local schools. The Noyce program supports talented STEM undergraduate majors and
professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary
K-12 STEM teachers to become STEM master teachers in high-need school districts.
It also supports research on the persistence, retention, and effectiveness of
K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.