* 1852146
* REU Site:  IUPUI REU Program in Mathematics with Applications to Medicine, Neuroscience, and Engineering
* MPS,DMS
* 02/15/2019,01/31/2024
* Jared Barber, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Tiziana Giorgi
* 01/31/2024
* USD 230,400.00

The REU Program at Indiana University-Purdue University Indianapolis (IUPUI)
will provide eight undergraduate students from across the United States with the
opportunity to conduct mathematics research applied to medicine, neuroscience,
and engineering. The students will spend seven weeks during the summer in
Indianapolis working with faculty mentors from the IUPUI Department of
Mathematical Sciences and Department of Mechanical Engineering on one of four
main projects: modeling treatment strategies for heart transplant patients,
investigating the influence of addictive drugs on the brain, simulating cancer
cell motion, and designing novel topology optimization methods for impact-
protective structures. Research in mathematics provides students with important
skills that they can use to analyze and solve problems in all disciplines and
environments. This program is extremely beneficial to undergraduate students
because it introduces students to interdisciplinary research, it connects
students with professors who will become important mentors and role models in
their lives, and it yields new results that will impact multiple scientific
disciplines, including immunology, oncology, emergency medicine, and mechanical
engineering. As the world continues to make technological advances at an
incredibly rapid pace, there is an increased need for scientists and engineers.
Exposing the IUPUI REU Program students to applied mathematics research will
encourage many of these students to pursue careers in STEM-related fields and
will ultimately provide the United States with individuals who possess a deep
knowledge of modern science and who are well equipped to have an impact on
science and technology in the public and private sectors.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The REU projects address new and open problems in applied
mathematics, and the progress that the students make on the respective projects
will advance research in transplant immunology, fluid dynamics, neuroscience,
and mechanical engineering. Students participating in the first REU project will
work closely with a mathematician and immunologist to design, analyze, and
validate a mathematical model of mouse heart transplantation and potential
adoptive transfer therapeutic approaches. The second project involves the
development of a mathematical model of cancer cell motion in microfluidic
devices and vessels in order to determine possible methods for decreasing cancer
cell metastasis. In the third project, the students will develop a mathematical
model for mesocortical representations of choices and the influence of drugs of
abuse (mainly alcohol) on them. Behavioral and in vivo electrophysiological
approaches will be combined with computational modeling to integrate data
obtained in different experimental setups to reveal mechanisms of alcohol
influence and to make and test predictions in silico. A fourth project will
focus on the analytical derivation and numerical implementation of novel
topology optimization methods and their application to the design of impact-
protective structures. Students will apply a numerical approach to determine the
most effective material distribution for synthesizing complex, high-performance
structures without any preconceived shape.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.