* 1852537
* REU Site: Engineering Applications of Extreme Ultra-Violet (EUV) Laser Light
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Stephen Leone, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 08/31/2023
* USD 371,315.00

This renewal REU Site program, hosted by the Extreme Ultraviolet Engineering
Research Center (EUV ERC), at Colorado State University is a collaboration
between a diverse group of research engineers and scientists from Center member
institutions and industry leaders. The goals of this REU Site are to offer
research opportunities to a group of diverse undergraduate students in a
technically and scientifically challenging field that is becoming critical to
industry, with a strategy that will strengthen industry involvement and will
continue expanding the program to enable broader participation. The Center
conducts research and trains engineers and scientists in the area of lasers and
photonics, focusing in particular on the generation and application of EUV
light. This laser-generated shorter wavelength light is opening new
revolutionary opportunities in science in areas including nanotechnology,
materials, chemistry and biology. Moreover, it will have an enormous economic
impact by enabling the mass production of the next generations of computer
processors and memory. The EUV ERC REU program will provide students with a
unique opportunity designed to understand EUV science and technology and to
become involved in EUV-related research projects that are technically and
scientifically challenging, and highly interdisciplinary. The Center faculty and
research labs are producing cutting-edge research and have partnerships with
industries that are leaders in the development and commercialization of products
that will be at the forefront of the next generation of technology, including
critical tools for the fabrication of all future cell phones and
computers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During a 10 week summer program the intent is to
increase the student interactions with corporate members of the Center who are
world leaders in EUV technologies and applications, and to involve the
participation of Center graduates now in industry. REU students who will
complete a first summer of research in a EUV ERC lab will have the option to
continue their research the following summer in an industry lab, with
internships funded by industry. The REU Site will further broaden participation
by joining efforts with Prof. Wesley Sims (Morehouse College) and Prof. Willie
Rockward (Morgan State Univ.), which are both Historically Black
College/University (HBCU) and Prof. Professor Edwin Fohtung (New Mexico State
Univ.), a minority serving institution. A successful REU instills confidence in
students to make educated choices about their future careers as engineers and
scientists. It enhances their competitiveness for strong graduate programs, and
prepares students for career opportunities in coveted industry positions. The
program will contribute to educating a workforce is a field of critical national
economic importance for global competitiveness in which industry is experiencing
a very significant shortage. Very few educational programs exist in the world to
train a new generation of engineers and scientists proficient in EUV science and
technology. The proposed program will be conducted in close partnership with
industry and will contribute to fill this void.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.