* 1852529
* Equal Channel Angular Extrusion (ECAE) Processing of Tau-MnAl Magnets
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Ian Baker, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Chou
* 09/30/2023
* USD 488,926.00

Demand for high-performance permanent magnets is increasing rapidly for
applications such as wind turbine generators and motors in both electric and
hybrid cars. This market is served by rare earth (RE) magnets based on
neodymium-iron-boron and samarium-cobalt. RE magnets are not without issues;
they can chip, suffer thermal shock, and can suffer grain boundary corrosion.
However, their biggest problems are: price volatility; that China largely
controls the RE metals market; and that the extraction of RE metals creates
severe environmental degradation. The compound MnAl has been of interest as a
permanent magnet since the early 1960s. It has a theoretical energy product (a
measure of its magnetic strength) between that of traditional AlNiCo magnets and
RE magnets with a value comparable to that of bonded neodymium-iron-boron
magnets. Further, it does not suffer from the issues associated with RE magnets,
and potentially has the lowest cost per unit energy product of any permanent
magnet. The magnetic properties of MnAl are affected by the numerous types of
defects present, but how these defects affect the magnetic properties and under
what conditions these defects occur is unknown. In this project, we will
determine both the conditions under which defects and second phases form during
processing of MnAl and how these control the magnetic properties. The
expectation is that superior magnetic properties can be obtained by carefully
manipulating the defect structure. While the work focuses on MnAl, understanding
the relationship between the occurrence of defects, their production and their
relationship to the magnetic properties in MnAl will be useful for understanding
similar behavior in the related compounds MnBi, MnGa, NiFe, PtFe and CoPt, all
of which are of interest as hard magnets. The project includes the training of
both a Ph.D. student and several undergraduates in state-of-the-art
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tau-MnAl is a metastable phase that transforms
from the high temperature epsilon phase, during which anti-phase boundaries
(APBs), twins, stacking faults and dislocations are created. Depending on the
processing conditions, the equilibrium beta and gamma 2 phases can also form.
The fundamental difficulty with improving the magnetic properties of tau-MnAl is
that there is no clear understanding on how they depend on the defect structure.
The grain size can also influence the magnetic properties either directly or by
affecting the beta and gamma 2 phases arrangement and defect formation. Our aim
is to understand both the conditions under which APBs, twins, stacking faults,
dislocations and second phases form during processing of tau-MnAl and how these
control the magnetic properties. The local chemistry will also be explored at
high resolution using atom probe tomography via collaboration with Dr. Baptiste
Gault, Max-Planck-Institut fur Eisenforschung, Germany. Our working hypothesis
is that we need a strong, c-axis alignment and a low density of APBs, twins and
stacking faults (which locally disorder the material) for a high saturation
magnetization, while a low density of APBs, twins and stacking faults but a high
dislocation density are required for a high coercivity. It is thought that a
fine distribution of beta and gamma 2 phases will also contribute to a high
coercivity through magnetic domain wall pinning. While the work focuses on MnAl,
understanding the relationship between the occurrence of defects, their
production and their relationship to the magnetic properties in MnAl will be
useful for understanding similar behavior in the related compounds MnBi, MnGa,
NiFe, PtFe and CoPt, all of which are of interest as hard magnets. The project
will include training of both a Ph.D. student and several undergraduates in
state-of-the-art techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.