* 1852322
* REU Site: American Student Placements and Internships in Rehabilitation Engineering (ASPIRE)
* ENG,EEC
* 04/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Rory Cooper, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 09/30/2023
* USD 419,932.00

Rehabilitation engineering employs a systematic approach to the design,
modification, customization and/or fabrication of assistive technology for
persons with disabilities. Research efforts in rehabilitation engineering are
focused on identifying and addressing problems critical to achieving and
maintaining the highest possible level of function in areas related to mobility,
communications, sensory (e.g., hearing, tactile, vision), and cognition and in
activities associated with employment, independent living, and education. With a
research focus on rehabilitation engineering, this ASPIRE REU program hosted by
the Human Engineering Research Laboratories (HERL) in the University of
Pittsburgh is to provide an exemplary mentoring and resourceful environment that
enables undergraduate students to 1) transition from dependent to independent
thinkers, 2) develop a sense of excitement about entering an engineering or
technical field and 3) be well prepared for their future careers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this REU program, recruitment initiatives emphasize
minorities and students with disabilities. Additionally, students who come from
institutions with limited research opportunities will receive special
consideration. Seminars, workshops, and field trips supplement the educational
experience outside of the laboratories. Students in this REU Site are an active
participant of a multi-disciplinary research team and acquire ownership of part
of a larger-scale or pilot research project. Improving the quality of life for
individuals with disabilities (Iw/D) is central to the mission of HERL, and this
REU offers a unique and supportive environment for developing future research
scientists and engineers. The REU experience allows participants to learn from
experienced researchers and talented clinicians. These interactions will help
them develop their own research skills and carry out future research topics that
are important to the large population of Iw/D. HERL's research development
objectives will deepen student's understanding related to rehabilitation
robotics design, human-robot interaction, and technology
transfer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.