* 1852962
* Partnering to Prepare Outstanding Mathematics Teachers
* EDU,DUE
* 05/15/2019,04/30/2024
* Imelda Basurto, California State University-Fresno Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Kimberly Tanner
* 04/30/2024
* USD 1,430,117.00

With support from the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce), this
Track 1: Scholarships &amp; Stipends project aims to serve the national need for
highly effective mathematics teachers. As are most states, California is
experiencing critical shortages of qualified mathematics teachers and these
shortages disproportionately affect high-poverty and high-minority schools. This
project will develop and implement an intensive outreach program to recruit 44
undergraduate mathematics majors with the expertise, interest, and passion to
teach. These students will receive scholarships and other supports to help them
become highly effective mathematics teachers for high-need schools throughout
the San Joaquin Valley. The Scholars will: 1) participate in seminars that will
help prepare them to meet the diverse needs of students; 2) engage in high
impact research experiences to develop their knowledge about teaching
mathematics; and 3) participate in carefully structured early field experiences
in high-need schools. By tapping talent throughout the Valley's high schools and
community colleges, this project will produce mathematics teachers who reflect
the demographics of the region. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Over its five-year
duration, the project aims to prepare 44 new mathematics teachers for high-need
schools. The project activities include a bi-weekly seminar series in which
Scholars will meet with master teachers and education researchers to learn about
best teaching practices for their future classrooms. It will also provide
scholarships and a high impact support system to facilitate the success of
undergraduate mathematics majors in a rigorous, newly-designed four-year Single
Subject Teaching Credential program at California State University, Fresno. The
new, innovative program will allow students to graduate in four years rather
than following the state's widespread fifth-year post-baccalaureate pathway to a
teaching credential. The project will also deliver single subject, content-
focused mentoring, an evidence-based approach that may help novice teachers
guide student understanding of what it means to authentically engage in
mathematics. The project will support a partnership with three high-need school
districts (Fresno, Clovis, and Sanger) and the Education Futures Project, a
collaborative of 14 local community colleges through the Valley. These partners
will collaborate on outreach activities and new teacher mentoring of new
teachers. The project will disseminate findings throughout the California State
University system, for potential adaptation of the teacher education model at
other California State University campuses. The Noyce program supports talented
STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-STEM teachers
in high-need school districts and experienced, exemplary K-12 STEM teachers to
become STEM master teachers. It also supports research on the persistence,
retention, and effectiveness of K-12 teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.