* 1852661
* Urban Teacher Partnership for Culturally Relevant STEM Education
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2026
* Jonathan FitzGerald, Rhodes College
* Continuing Grant
* Kimberly Tanner
* 05/31/2026
* USD 844,492.00

With support from the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program, this Track 1:
Scholarships and Stipends project aims to serve the national need of increasing
the number of highly qualified, culturally-responsive secondary STEM teachers in
high-need school districts. Urban areas across the nation struggle with
recruitment and retention of teachers, particularly for STEM content areas. This
Noyce project will offer undergraduate STEM students supplementary research
opportunities throughout their degree program to expand their skill set as
educators. Other project highlights include seminars with an Educational Studies
Scholar-In-Residence, as well as professional development for Noyce scholars
once they are teachers. These supports will be supplemented by training teachers
to understand the impact of culture on student learning. This training will be
analyzed as part of a research study that was designed to develop a model for
improving teaching in high-need urban school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
four project goals include: (1) recruiting 18 STEM majors to become Noyce
scholars; (2) retaining Noyce scholars in high-need school districts after
completion of the Noyce program; (3) preparing Noyce scholars to effectively
implement culturally relevant practices in their STEM instruction; and (4)
institutionalizing the supplemental (non-scholarship) project components.
Project activities and supports will span the five-year project, beginning in
each scholar's junior year and continuing through induction supports in the
first years of teaching. To broaden the project's impact, the leadership team
will research the correlation between culturally-relevant training and teacher
retention as the scholars graduate and become STEM teachers in high-need school
districts. Thus, the project's outcomes will contribute to identifying
replicable academic experiences and evidence-based models for successful STEM
teacher education that can be shared with other institutions. In turn, the
project has the potential to influence teacher education and retention for
urban, high-need districts nationwide. The Noyce program supports talented STEM
undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12 mathematics and
science teachers in high-need school districts and experienced, exemplary K-12
STEM teachers to become STEM master teachers. It also supports research on the
persistence, retention, and effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need
school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.