* 1852104
* Collaborative Research: REU: Training Diverse Undergraduate Teams of Veterans and Non-Veterans to Conduct Trauma Research with Veterans.
* SBE,SMA
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2023
* Kevin Heffernan, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 03/31/2023
* USD 273,361.00

This project is funded from the Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
Sites program in the SBE Directorate. The content and structure of this
particular REU provides both scientific and societal benefits in addition to
integrating education and research. Specifically, our society can benefit from a
better understanding of PTSD since the lifetime prevalence of PTSD among adult
Americans is relatively high, estimated at 6.8%. Our program's focus is on
training undergraduates to conduct trauma-related research to improve our
understanding of PTSD. This REU site broadens the participation of under-
represented groups by recruiting veterans (particularly minorities and women,
when possible) as participants. This inclusion of veterans provides an
opportunity for them to integrate to an undergraduate research culture in a safe
environment with appropriate supports. Moreover, veteran participation in the
design and implementation of trauma-related research with fellow veterans
constitutes a novel application of "participatory research". Beyond the direct
benefit to veteran participants, non-veteran participants appreciate the value
of conducting trauma-related research with direct input from members of the
defined population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU site is a joint effort between
Syracuse University, SUNY Oswego, and SUNY Upstate Medical University and
constitutes a well-structured program for a cohort of 8-10 students each year.
The site offers an online 2-week orientation as well as research mentoring and
coursework during a 6-week summer institute by highly qualified and productive
faculty members that have a track record of involving undergraduates in their
research. In addition to these faculty mentors, several consultants from various
military and non-military backgrounds provide a novel combination of
perspectives to address multidisciplinary research questions as part of a
speaker series. The program draws on resources including seminar rooms,
laboratories, and housing through Syracuse University, SUNY Upstate Medical
Center, and SUNY Oswego. With respect to impact on program participants, we
expect to increase students' ability to conduct trauma research and increase
their chances of admission into graduate school. With respect to scientific
merit, multiple projects involve students and address important research
questions. Current interests include research designed to gain a better
understanding of the chemical, clinical, cognitive, and family factors
associated with various trauma outcomes. Being able to better predict the
development of PTSD following trauma can support efforts at prevention and
treatment of PTSD.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.