* 1852875
* The Recruitment and Preparation of Next Generation STEM Teachers
* EDU,DUE
* 06/15/2019,05/31/2024
* David Weintraub, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* James A. M. Alvarez
* 05/31/2024
* USD 1,197,035.00

With support from the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce), this
Track 1: Scholarships and Stipends project at Vanderbilt University aims to
serve the national need of recruiting and preparing high-quality STEM teachers
for high-need school districts. The "Recruitment and Preparation of Next
Generation STEM Teachers" project aims to increase the number of diverse
candidates, particularly candidates of color, who seek secondary licensure in
science or mathematics. The PIs will work with underrepresented STEM majors,
especially focusing on students attending Fisk University, an Historically Black
College and University (HBCU) collaborating on this proposal. Among other
things, the project will include Fisk significantly in the project management
team, add an improved mentor model for the students with earlier and better
mentoring, and increase the support for these students during the induction
period. The project also plans to expand their recruitment in other
organizations which have a high percentage of minority participants. This focus
on recruiting candidates of color is important because students of color are
less likely to enroll in STEM fields of study and carry on to STEM professions.
The broader impacts of this work lie in its reach to secondary students who have
a high interest in STEM subjects, undergraduate STEM students, mentor teachers
who support Noyce Scholars in the field, and the broader learning communities
within and across Vanderbilt University, Fisk University, and Metro Nashville
Public Schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to attract, prepare and
support diverse and talented individuals who have STEM degrees. These post-
baccalaureate students will receive financial support for one year as they
complete a Master's of Education (M.Ed.) with teacher licensure. The planned
one-year practice-based pathway to licensure is intended to significantly reduce
the financial burden of a graduate degree in education. This project will
simultaneously contribute to the understanding of the hidden obstacles that
candidates of color have to overcome to make a commitment to teaching as a
profession broadly. The project leaders will partner with HBCUs and other
professionals who support teachers of color to pursue licensure. This project
will work to minimize the barriers and maximize the supports to make Vanderbilt
competitive in recruiting and retaining candidates, particularly candidates of
color into STEM teaching. It will provide stipends in the amount of over 50% of
tuition. It will also include expanded mentoring support throughout the duration
of the program and will provide two years of induction support. The project aims
to prepare a minimum of 18 new STEM teachers over three cohorts to complete
their teacher licensure program. The majors will be broadly recruited from
mathematics and science majors in any STEM field supported for licensure by the
State of Tennessee. The Noyce program supports talented STEM undergraduate
majors and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers in high-need
school districts. It also supports research on the persistence, retention, and
effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.