* 1852757
* Be Brave Teach STEM: Building a Diverse Teacher STEM Workforce in Mississippi
* EDU,DUE
* 06/15/2019,05/31/2025
* Babu Patlolla, Alcorn State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 05/31/2025
* USD 1,105,214.00

With support from the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce), this
Track 1: Scholarships and Stipends project at Alcorn State University aims to
serve the local need of preparing high-quality STEM teachers in the state of
Mississippi. Currently, in Mississippi, there are 58 districts with critical
teacher shortages where mathematics and science teacher positions are unfilled.
Districts in rural areas with little economic development have faced the biggest
challenges in hiring teachers. A high percentage of these districts are in poor
or underserved areas with a high percentage of minority students. This project
seeks to meet the demand of well trained STEM teachers by preparing and
supporting Scholars to become teachers at the elementary or secondary level in
rural Southwest Mississippi in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Be Brave Teach STEM project builds on the
conceptual framework for the School of Education and Psychology at Alcorn State
University. Over the five-year period, the project will provide 36 upperclassmen
undergraduate students earning baccalaureate degrees in biology, chemistry,
physics, or mathematics with intense support to become science and mathematics
teachers who are culturally competent and prepared with pedagogical knowledge to
teach in high-need schools. The 5E Instructional Model, which includes
Engagement, Exploration, Explanation, Elaboration, and Evaluation, and is
consistent with constructivist instructional approaches will be embedded into
the project activities. This will contribute to conceptual understanding of
science and mathematics by pre-service teachers in the service of supporting
student success in mathematics and science. Built upon the constructs of the 5E
Instructional Model, the project is comprised of four components: 1) marketing
and Scholar recruitment and selection; 2) pre-Noyce Scholars support; 3) Noyce
pre-service teacher-Scholar support; and 4) novice Noyce Scholar teacher
support. Activities will include workshops and clinics, STEM Education service
hours, pre-service teacher bootcamps, scholarships, mentoring and advising, and
Scholar recognition. After graduating, the new teachers will participate in new
teacher orientation sessions, a teacher renewal institute, professional
conferences, and receive new teacher mini-grants. Strong partnerships and
collaborative efforts include Hinds Community College - Utica Campus and six
local school districts, Natchez-Adams, Claiborne County, Jefferson County, South
Delta, Vicksburg-Warren, and Wilkinson County. The Noyce program supports
talented STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12
mathematics and science teachers in high-need school districts and experienced
and exemplary K-12 STEM teachers to become STEM master teachers. It also
supports research on the persistence, retention, and effectiveness of K-12
teachers in high-need school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.