* 1852902
* SBIR Phase II:  A Mechanical Blood Clot Removal Device for Pulmonary Embolism
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2019,01/31/2023
* Reza Mehrabi, Thermomorph LLc
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 01/31/2023
* USD 1,026,305.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase II project is about addressing pulmonary embolism as the
third most common cause of death for hospitalized patients. Current modalities
for treating pulmonary embolism are effective for most cases with the exception
of the acute massive and submassive patients (45% of patients). The company's
product is particularly suited for the massive and submassive pulmonary
embolisms, respectively 5% and 40% of PE population. Based on the approximately
150K PE patient cases per year, with an estimated $3000 per QuickFlow catheter,
the company's estimated target market at minimum 4% penetration within the first
three years is $18 million. QuickFlow addresses a severely underserved market;
hence, maximizing the value to both the patient and physicians. The value
propositions of faster (less than one-hour procedure), safer (no thrombolysis,
no vessel wall damage and whole clot removal), easy and intuitive to use
(similar mechanism of use to the existent device), and less procedure cost (1
day in ICU instead of 2-3 days), make it appropriate for several key markets,
with a global market opportunity in excess of $1.53 billion by 2022. The
implications of this device for the thrombectomy device market and healthcare
system can be significant in helping to treat underserved PE patients and
reducing cost. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is to develop a mechanical blood clot removal
device to address pulmonary embolism and restore blood flow in 30 minutes of
patient?s arrival. Reduced time of procedure, use a nonsurgical process, ease of
use, and reduced cost make this minimally invasive mechanical thrombectomy
procedure more desirable than the currently available treatment methods. The
minimally invasive QuickFlow PE, offers these unique features based on the
paradigm shifting technological innovation in Nitinol device design and
manufacturing. The super expandable Nitinol baskets completely remove blood
clots while significantly reducing the risk of complications associated with the
current methods of treatment such as internal bleeding, and clot fragmentation.
A multidisciplinary study on an advanced biomaterial and developing a new
manufacturing technology has resulted in a paradigm shifting medical device
which is being studied by a team of engineers, physicians, a sales consultant,
and a commercial advisor. The team is uniquely positioned to conduct this
multidisciplinary research. The success in commercializing QuickFlow will
significantly advance our understanding of fabricating novel Nitinol medical
devices for a wide spectrum of applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.