* 1852912
* Deciphering the Cryptic Cycling of Methane in Sediments of a Coastal Wetland
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Tina Treude, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Alberto Perez-Huerta
* 06/30/2023
* USD 448,536.00

This research project investigates the close relationship between methane
production and consumption in sediments by microbes in the oxygen-free zone of a
coastal wetland in Southern California. The direct exchange of methane between
those two closely related microbial groups, which has been named "cryptic
methane cycling", has only recently been identified and little is known about
its importance in reducing methane emissions from coastal wetlands. This
research will reveal how carbon moves between the two types of microbes, and
will identify the microbes involved. It will also reveal the important metabolic
reactions responsible and the balance between methane production and consumption
under different environmental conditions. Towards broader impacts, this project
will provide training for two undergraduate and one graduate student in
interdisciplinary wetland science and state of the art laboratory methods. A new
freshmen course on global methane emissions will bring undergraduate students
into the field to provide education on local coastal wetland environments.
Results of the project will be disseminated to public and academic groups and
will provide a better understanding of methane production and consumption in
coastal wetlands.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Concentrations of atmospheric methane
have more than doubled since the pre-industrial era, hence we urgently need to
understand the mechanisms that control the emission of this potent greenhouse
gas. Recent studies have provided the first evidence for the simultaneous
microbial production and consumption of methane in the sulfate reduction zone of
organic-rich sediments, a process named the "cryptic methane cycle." In this
process, methane is proposed to be passed directly from methylotrophic
methanogenesis to anaerobic oxidation of methane (AOM). However, little is known
about the identity of the organisms involved, the trail of carbon from one
metabolism to the other, or the environmental net result of the two processes.
Without the details of this metabolic relationship, methane budgets of sediments
remain incomplete. Coastal wetlands are of particular interest for the study of
cryptic methane cycling, because their organic and sulfate rich sediments
promote the production of methylated substrates for methylotrophic
methanogenesis and provide electron acceptors for AOM. Yet, anaerobic microbial
removal of methane from this ecosystem, particularly along the sulfate gradient
between ocean and land, is still not well understood. Towards intellectual
merit, this study elucidates the identity of methanogenic and methanotrophic
archaea involved in cryptic methane cycling in a coastal wetland as well as the
selection of electron acceptors that fuel methane removal in this metabolic
relationship. The research provides new metabolic clues to unravel the
versatility of the enzymatic machinery that drives methanogenesis and AOM. By
capturing environmental factors that control the balance between the two
processes working in close proximity, the results of this work further provide
an enhanced understanding of methane dynamics in coastal wetland sediments. This
information can be applied to biogeochemical models to improve the prediction of
methane emissions from this ecosystem, which is found throughout the global
coastal zone. Towards broader impacts, the research provides training in
innovative analytical and experimental techniques to two undergraduate and one
graduate student. The project further engages 20 undergraduates per year in a
newly developed freshman seminar, "Methane - the Other Greenhouse Problem"
including a field trip to the local wetland. The goal of the seminar will be to
educate students, including those not entering STEM fields, about global sources
and sinks of methane and its involvement in global warming now and in the
future. Results of this study will be broadly disseminated to educational and
public outreach platforms, such as high schools, community colleges, and
environmental non-profits to teach scientific methodologies, concepts of
biogeochemical cycling, and enhance the appreciation of this vital coastal
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.