* 1852939
* Recruiting, Preparing, and Retaining STEM Teachers in San Joaquin County, California
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2025
* Meixun Zheng, University of the Pacific
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 04/30/2025
* USD 1,191,063.00

With support from the NSF Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program, this Track 1
Scholarships and Stipends project aims to serve the national interest in high-
quality STEM teaching by recruiting 20 undergraduate STEM majors and preparing
them to become teachers. This project involves a partnership between the
University of the Pacific, San Joaquin Delta Community College, the San Joaquin
County Office of Education STEM Office, and several partner school districts in
San Joaquin County. The overarching goal of the project is to address an acute
shortage of STEM teachers in the county, particularly at the high school level.
The project is designed to recruit STEM undergraduates and prepare them for
long-term teaching careers in high-need school districts. In addition, the
project aims to institutionalize the project activities as components of the
University's STEM teacher preparation program. Noyce Scholars will receive up to
three years of scholarship support for their junior, senior, and master's
certification year, and will serve two years in a high-need school district for
each year of financial support. Project activities and supports for student
success will begin in each Scholar's junior year, continue through completion of
a Master of Arts in Education and the first years of teaching. Through their
interactions with exemplary classroom teachers and accomplished University
researchers, the Noyce Scholars will be integrated into a supportive network of
STEM educators. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recruitment of scholarship recipients will
primarily target students from Delta College who transfer into STEM majors at
the University of the Pacific. Upon completion of the master's program, the
Scholars will receive both a baccalaureate degree in a STEM discipline and a
master's degree in education. In addition, first- and second-year STEM majors at
the University of the Pacific will also be recruited. While they complete their
STEM degrees, Noyce Scholars will begin taking education coursework, including a
Noyce seminar that will connect them with local Master STEM teachers and include
reflective writing about their experiences throughout the program. During their
junior and senior years, the Scholars will have undergraduate research
experiences with University of the Pacific STEM faculty and will engage in
education-related service-learning activities in the local community. During
their Master of Arts in Education year, they will gain supervised student
teaching experience in high-need schools in San Joaquin County. The University
of the Pacific and the county STEM office, in collaboration with partner school
districts, will support the Noyce Scholars in their early years of teaching
through on-site mentoring relationships and school year/summer professional
development activities. The project will investigate the degree to which these
pre-service activities and induction supports help retain new STEM teachers in
the profession. This information can contribute to addressing the critical need
to prepare highly effective STEM teachers in San Joaquin County and in other
high-need schools and districts. The Noyce program supports talented STEM
undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers
and experienced, exemplary K-12 STEM teachers to become STEM master teachers in
high-need school districts. It also supports research on the persistence,
retention, and effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.