* 1852821
* Texas Leadership Initiative for Inquiry Science Teaching
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* John Hutchinson, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Patrice Waller
* 05/31/2024
* USD 3,000,000.00

With support from the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce), this
Track 3: Master Teaching Fellowships project at Rice University aims to serve
the national need of developing science teacher leaders, especially in high-need
schools. The project will support a five-year professional development program
for elementary and secondary science teachers with master's degrees who are
teaching in high-need schools in the Greater Houston area. The professional
development activities will be designed and carried out through collaborations
between education faculty from the University of Houston and Houston Community
College, the Science Teachers Association of Texas, and Houston Independent
School District. These partners will work cooperatively to provide mentoring and
other experiences that will develop the teachers' leadership abilities and
increase their scientific knowledge, as well as deepen their understanding of
and skills in inquiry learning and culturally relevant pedagogy. As part of
their professional development, the Master Teacher Fellows will design and
implement an action research project that addresses a need at their school, thus
enabling them to engage in education research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
seeks to enhance teacher self-efficacy, improve teacher retention in high-need
schools, and increase student engagement and achievement. To these ends, the
project will create a cadre of Master Teaching Fellows who can support student
success in STEM by mentoring their peers, modeling effective teaching practices,
and conducting action research. It is expected that these teacher leaders will
also contribute to state-wide changes in science teaching leadership. To support
these outcomes, the project will engage the Fellows in interdisciplinary inquiry
experiences, and provide coaching and mentoring. Groups that will be positively
affected by the project include peer teachers in the Houston Independent School
District, pre-service teachers enrolled at Houston Community College, and
teachers across Texas involved in Science Teachers Association of Texas. Plans
to disseminate project materials and results include implementing lessons in
classrooms, sharing lessons with peer teachers, mentoring pre-service teachers,
and presenting at local and statewide events of the Science Teachers Association
of Texas. This project will bring together an exemplary team of teachers who
will develop interdisciplinary curricula with societal relevance and contribute
to a better understanding of teacher leadership development. The Noyce program
supports talented STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to become
effective K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school districts and experienced,
exemplary K-12 STEM teachers to become STEM master teachers. It also supports
research on the persistence, retention, and effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers
in high-need school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.