* 1852549
* REU Site: Multidisciplinary Physics Research at the University of Memphis
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Jingbiao Cui, University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 03/31/2024
* USD 252,934.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: The Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) site
in Multidisciplinary Physics and Materials Science offers undergraduate students
a unique opportunity to engage in cutting edge research in basic and applied
physics. The ultimate goal of the scheduled activities is to provide students
with a robust platform to successfully launch their careers in all areas of
science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM). The Multidisciplinary Physics
REU Site provides a balance between formal instruction, independent research,
and professional development. In this manner, the students are taught the basic
skills needed to conduct research, while at the same time becoming aware of the
larger scientific community and their contribution within it. Activities are
tailored to enhance student research skills along with an emphasis on preparing
them for advanced careers in STEM. Activities include a technical writing
workshop, special topic lectures by experts, field trips to local industries and
research institutions, biweekly networking events, and a student-centered
seminar series. Students can choose from a variety of projects that span the
multidisciplinary nature of physics and materials science in either
computational or experimental areas. The activities and workshops that students
engage in address the challenges that students from community colleges and
minority institutions face when transitioning to four-year universities and
graduate programs in STEM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: Each
participating student will benefit from spending a summer on UofM campus
immersed in a research-intensive program in the Physics and Materials Science
Department. Under the tutelage and guidance of an experienced faculty researcher
and mentor, students conduct research in multidisciplinary areas of physics
through synthesis, characterization, modeling, and computation. Students can
choose from a variety of research projects from four main themes: Theme 1:
Nanomaterials for Energy Applications, Theme 2: Biophysics, Theme 3:
Photonics/Plasmonics, and Theme 4: Computational Physics. Students are given the
opportunity to continue their research with their appointed faculty mentor after
the REU program has finished. Following the orientation (welcome note,
laboratory safety training, library training, and campus orientation) and
appointment of a mentor, all students receive hands-on training with research-
grade instruments such as profilometer, light and electron microscopes,
spectroscopes, other materials analysis tools, and computational tools and
techniques. Students that successfully complete this research training are well-
equipped for STEM careers and graduate programs in the same field or in a
related discipline. This REU site is primarily focused on providing access and
opportunities to students in the local mid-South area, nearby HBCUs, local
community colleges, and is open to first and second year students. A sound
strategy of post-program assessment utilizing the Undergraduate Research Student
Self-Assessment (URSSA) tool, is implemented and used for and tracking of
participants post completion of the training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.