* 1852309
* REU Site: Summer Research Experience for Undergraduates in Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2023
* Peter Persans, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 03/31/2023
* USD 270,550.00

This award supports a Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site at
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute. This is a ten-week summer residential research
participation experience that engages undergraduate students in full-time active
research collaborations with faculty, research professionals, and graduate
students at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute. A selection of research projects
in Physics, Applied Physics, and Astronomy, as well as closely associated areas,
is available. Students will gain experience in presenting their results by
making oral and written presentations throughout the summer. This project
impacts the research and development competitiveness of the United States by
recruiting excellent students into STEM research fields and by training these
students to perform leading-edge research in technologically important fields.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Undergraduate students are both mentored individually by
research faculty and engage in group professional development activities.
Research projects are cutting-edge in Physics, Applied Physics, and Astronomy,
and include astronomy, astrophysics, condensed matter physics, energy
conversion, geophysics, particle physics, and biological physics. In addition to
their own research area, students will be exposed to a variety of research
topics and methodologies through a series of research seminars and student
presentations. Further breadth will be developed through visits to nearby
research facilities. To assist in their professional development, students also
participate in tutorials on ethics, applying to graduate school, scientific
writing and giving scientific presentations, as well as safety training, machine
shop training, and lab tours. These activities allow students to put their
research experience into a wider perspective, build a network of professional
contacts, and develop professional skills in a scientific
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.