* 1852725
* Recruiting and Training Community College and University Students to Become Culturally Responsive and Proficient Mathematics Teachers in Iowa
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2025
* Maggy Tomova, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 06/30/2025
* USD 1,233,606.00

With support from the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce), this
Track 1: Scholarships and Stipends project aims to serve the national for
highly-qualified secondary school mathematics teachers. Specifically, this
project aims to recruit and support 34 students to become secondary mathematics
teachers in high-need school districts. The project includes a partnership
between the University of Iowa and the Des Moines Area Community College, in
collaboration with schools in Iowa City, Des Moines, and Cedar Rapids. To
recruit scholars, the project will develop and implement new coordinated
recruitment strategies to encourage students enrolled mathematics courses at Des
Moines Area Community College and University of Iowa to consider careers in
secondary mathematics teaching. Through a comprehensive teacher preparation
program, the project aims to help Noyce Scholars develop their mathematical
content knowledge, as well as their general and culturally responsive teaching
skills. As a result, the project expects to produce skilled, credentialed
teacher who will decrease the shortage of secondary mathematics teachers in
high-need districts in Iowa.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will provide
undergraduate and graduate students with academic, social support, and financial
support as they pursue their mathematics teaching licensure. Students pursuing a
baccalaureate degree in mathematics with teacher certification will receive
scholarships in their junior and senior years. Students with baccalaureate
degrees in mathematics or who are in the University of Iowa 4+1 program will
receive one-year stipends as they pursue a Master of Arts in Mathematics
teaching. Noyce Scholars will work with and observe teachers and students in
high-need classrooms, be matched with mentors, have opportunities to teach, and
participate in summer workshops and internship opportunities. These experiences
are intended to help the Scholars develop a durable foundation in pedagogical
and mathematics content knowledge. The program will also provide Scholars with
training in culturally responsive pedagogical knowledge and skills. The project
aims to prepare the Scholars to work in high-need schools through a culturally
responsive adaptation of the Lesson Study approach. Additionally, Noyce Scholars
will attend state and national mathematics education meetings (such as the
National Council of Teachers of Mathematics) to be exposed to current teaching
practices in mathematics. A rigorous project evaluation seeks to determine which
factors best: (1) prepare Scholars to provide culturally responsive teaching;
(2) increase proficiency among pre-service mathematics teachers; and (3) attract
individuals of diverse backgrounds that are underrepresented in mathematics and
among mathematics teachers to work in high-needs schools. Findings from the
project will be shared broadly through publications and conference
presentations. The Noyce program supports talented STEM undergraduate majors and
professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts, and supports experienced, exemplary K-12 STEM teachers to become STEM
master teachers in high-need school districts. It also supports research on the
persistence, retention, and effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need
school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.