* 1852841
* Advancing Record Linkage Research: Optimal Linkage Decisions and Propagating Linkage Uncertainty
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Mauricio Sadinle Garcia-Ruiz, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 08/31/2022
* USD 150,000.00

This project will advance research on record linkage. It is increasingly common
to find complementary information on individuals scattered across multiple data
sources. To take full advantage of these data sources, researchers need to be
able to link information on the same individuals. In many applications, however,
there are no unique identifiers of the individuals in the datafiles. This makes
it difficult to recognize which records correspond to the same individuals.
Statistical methodology will be developed for creating merged datafiles and for
improving analyses of the linked data. These data linkages will allow richer
data analyses and potentially substitute for or facilitate new data collection
efforts. Researchers across disciplines will benefit from being able to use
statistically rigorous procedures to merge datasets and to carry out analyses
with linked data. The ability to create and analyze richer datasets will
facilitate understanding of policy options in important areas such as education
and health, thus furthering societal interests. A graduate student will be
trained as part of this project, and the techniques will be made available as
part of free software packages along with tutorials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will use the output of probabilistic record linkage procedures to
develop rigorous statistical methodology for creating merged datafiles. Coherent
approaches for propagating linkage uncertainty into subsequent analyses will be
explored. To create merged datasets, the investigator will derive an estimator
of the true linkage of the datafiles. A loss function will be developed through
which researchers will be able to give different weights to different types of
linkage errors. The linkage estimator will be derived by minimizing the expected
value of the researcher-defined loss function. The point estimators also will
include the option of "abstaining" from linking records for which the correct
links are highly uncertain. To perform statistical analyses with merged data,
the investigator will explore procedures in which researchers carry out the
statistical analysis they are interested in for each of several plausible
linkages of the data and then combine the output from these analyses. The
procedures will be validated theoretically, via simulation studies, and using
real data analyses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.