* 1852618
* Formal Models Of Traditional Milling Tool Design
* SBE,BCS
* 08/13/2018,09/30/2020
* Tammy Buonasera, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 09/30/2020
* USD 21,452.00

Archaeology, through reconstruction of past behaviors and how they emerge and
adapt over time, has the potential to provide insight into processes which shape
human behavior and social organization today. To accomplish this goal it is
necessary to have robust analytic tools which permit researchers to move from
objects excavated from the ground to conclusions regarding the behaviors of
people responsible for their discard. This project is important because it
assists in developing such techniques.

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Tammy Buonasera will begin a
series of experiments using replicas of prehistoric ground stone milling tools
(manos and metates and mortars and pestles) to generate empirically informed
models of ground stone processing efficiency. These models will help evaluate
relationships between ground stone technology, mobility, and resource use among
prehistoric hunter-gatherers. The significance of the project rests on its
potential to increase knowledge of economic decisions made by individuals
engaged in plant food processing. In many contexts around the world, changes in
the form and frequency of ground stone milling tools play key roles in
reconstructing sequences of resource intensification, sedentism, and plant
domestication. Despite this, there are few empirically grounded comparisons of
the relative efficiency of different milling tool-resource combinations in the
literature. Rather, links between form and function typically rest on
commonsense notions of efficiency or "suitability." This study will provide
better estimates than we now have for defining when it would be profitable to
shift between grinding technologies, and results will be widely applicable to
studies of ground stone function and resource use in many places and times.

The proposed project will begin with a series of controlled experiments
designed to measure and compare the efficiency of five different forms (three
mortar and two metate shapes), and two different raw materials (a harder and a
softer stone), for processing four resources with different physical
characteristics (acorns, small hard seeds, tule roots, and ocher). Because this
research aims to provide data for modeling tool design choices among hunters and
gatherers with varying degrees of mobility (i.e., from conditions of high
residential mobility, where food is not stored, to semi-sedentary contexts,
where food storage may be critical), experiments will also compare grinding
efficiency and use-wear patterns for fresh and dried versions of the plant
resources (acorns, small hard seeds, tule roots). Simple optimization models
will be used to compare experimental estimates of food processing labor and
costs of tool manufacture against overall productivity. Ultimately, this
research will improve knowledge about relationships between grinding tool
designs and economic decisions made by individuals engaged in food processing.
It will also contribute to improving interpretations of use-wear patterns on
ground stone tools. The project will be completed over a two-year period with
the help of community volunteers and university students who will participate in
the experimental process. The project will also produce both a physical and a
digital reference set for future use-wear analysis.