* 1852245
* REU Site:  Addressing Environmental Challenges and Proposing Sustainable Solutions at the Lake Erie Land-Lake Interface
* BIO,DBI
* 02/15/2019,07/31/2023
* Jeanine Refsnider, University of Toledo
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 07/31/2023
* USD 346,536.00

This REU Site award to the University of Toledo, in Toledo, OH, will support the
training of 30 students for 10 weeks during the summers of 2019- 2021. Research
is conducted at the University of Toledo's Lake Erie Center, Main Campus, Health
Sciences Campus, and adjacent field sites. Students will address complex
challenges at the land-lake interface to understand how natural resource use
impacts biodiversity, ecosystem functioning, and public health, with the goal of
advancing environmental sustainability. Students will be paired with faculty and
graduate student mentors from the Departments of Environmental Sciences,
Geography and Planning, Public Health, or Engineering, and will design and
conduct independent research projects in ecology, limnology, remote sensing, or
engineering. Field trips will introduce students to the diverse habitats and
ecological challenges facing Lake Erie, and students will receive training in
research ethics, experimental delesign, data analysis, writing scientific
papers, and applying to graduate school. Students will write a final report and
present their research at a public poster gala. This program targets minority
applicants, women, veterans, and first-generation college students. The PI and
co-PI will evaluate applicants based on academic excellence, letter of
reference, and demonstrated interest in environmental issues, and will match REU
fellows with an appropriate faculty mentor based on students' indicated
preference for research areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is anticipated that a
total of 30 students, primarily from schools with limited research
opportunities, will be trained in the program. Students will learn how research
is conducted, and many will present the results of their work at scientific
conferences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A common web-based assessment tool used by
all REU Site programs funded by the Division of Biological Infrastructure will
be used to determine the effectiveness of the training program. Students will be
tracked after the program to determine their career paths. Students will be
asked to respond to an automatic email sent via the NSF reporting system. More
information about the program, including an online application, is available by
visiting http://www.utoledo.edu/nsm/lec/REU/main.html, or by contacting the PI
(Dr. Jeanine Refsnider at jeanine.refsnider@utoledo.edu) or the co-PI (Dr. Kevin
Czajkowski at kevin.czajkowski@utoledo.edu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.