* 1852134
* REU Site: Vehicular Edge Computing and Security: Research Experience for Undergraduates
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2023
* Qing Yang, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Jill Denner
* 12/31/2023
* USD 379,993.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site award funds a new REU
Site at the University of North Texas. The site will recruit undergraduates from
across the nation to participate in research involving vehicular edge computing
and security. The topic is important and timely due to the high demand for
dependable, reliable, and secure autonomous cars. The students will work in
teams to develop technologies and apply them to electric cars equipped with a
variety of sensors. The students will participate in a variety of related
professional development activities. The REU experience provides students with
the foundations and inspiration to pursue computing careers and research in
areas that are rapidly evolving and essential for the technical workforce of the
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is led by an outstanding team offering
state-of-the art facilities and professional mentors to guide undergraduates in
explorations of cutting-edge problems related to vehicular edge computing and
security. Project topics include hierarchical edge computing architecture,
vehicular sensing data processing, trustworthy information dissemination, and
privacy protection of sensing data on vehicles. The site is run with a problem-
based, team-oriented approach. The goals are to expose undergraduates to real-
world and innovative research focused on vehicular edge systems and security by
system design, to motivate more undergraduates to continue their academic
careers and seek graduate degrees in computer science and engineering, and to
develop research skills and improve communication and collaboration skills. The
team will strive to attract students from groups under-represented in computing,
particularly students from small colleges with limited research opportunities.
Thus, the project has the potential to produce a new generation of computer
science graduate students and computing professionals and to advance discovery
and understanding while promoting learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.