* 1852889
* Developing STEM Professionals as Educators and Teacher Leaders
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2025
* Christine Thomas, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Mindy Capaldi
* 04/30/2025
* USD 2,617,849.00

With support from the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce), this
Track 2: Teaching Fellowships project at Georgia State University focuses on the
national shortages of STEM teachers and low retention rates in the teacher
workforce. It will recruit 30 STEM professionals, who have STEM baccalaureate
degrees, and support them to complete a 14-month Master of Arts in Teaching
degree. These graduates will become certified to teach science or mathematics in
middle or high school and will teach in high-need schools in the partnering
Fulton County Schools and Rockdale County Public Schools. These teacher leaders
are expected to have positive impacts across the districts, leading to greater
interest in STEM and STEM careers for diverse groups of students. The project
includes a research plan to examine strategies for addressing the critical
shortage of highly qualified STEM teachers in urban schools, especially Black
and Latino males.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will be grounded in a
Research-Practice Partnership framework to inform the nature of the
relationships between the university, school districts (Fulton County Schools
and Rockdale Public Schools), and the partnering local nonprofit organization,
100 Black Men of South Metro. The research plan includes a longitudinal research
component to explore the effectiveness of the Research-Practice Partnership in
meeting the needs of partnering school districts. It also includes a mixed
methods research design to explore the impact of the Research-Practice
Partnership on the recruitment and retention of STEM teachers and their
development into teacher leaders. The project will include robust mentoring of
participants, beginning in the master's program of study and continuing through
induction and teacher leadership development, and will emphasize the importance
of cultural diversity in teachers' professional development. The project's
collaborative efforts will provide opportunities to share best practices and
resources across institutions of higher education, K-12 institutions, and
nonprofit organizations, thus broadening the potential impact of the project.
The Noyce program supports talented STEM undergraduate majors and professionals
to become effective K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school districts and
experienced, exemplary K-12 STEM teachers to become STEM expert teachers. It
also supports research on the persistence, retention, and effectiveness of K-12
STEM teachers in hi-need school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.