* 1852460
* REU Site: Ocean Sciences &amp; Engineering at Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution 2019-2021 Program
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2022
* Margaret Tivey, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 03/31/2022
* USD 489,151.00

The Woods Hole Oceanographic Institute (WHOI) in Woods Hole, MA will host a
Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site that will provide ten
students with a ten-week active learning experience each summer for three years.
Each Summer Student Fellow (SSF) is matched with an advisor(s) from one of the
academic departments at WHOI. Fellows work with their advisor to complete a work
plan within their first few weeks of arriving at WHOI. During the summer, each
SSF makes two presentations: a five-minute mid-summer oral progress report, and
a final oral or poster presentation on their research. A written final project
report is required. Professional development activities include a special
lecture series, a one-day field experience on the R.V. Tioga, a half-day
Responsible Conduct of Research workshop, training by the WHOI graphics
department on how to prepare a scientific poster, and discussions about graduate
school with a panel of postdocs and graduate students. Fellows are encouraged to
publish papers in scientific journals and to present their research at
scientific meetings after the internship is completed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
WHOI REU Site will provide a total of thirty undergraduates with internships
over the three-year period. The program conducts a national search for
applicants and seeks to engage students who are from schools with limited
research opportunities. Most of the funding provided supports student stipends,
housing and travel to attend the program. The range of potential research
projects for REU students at WHOI is extensive, with high-quality research
conducted by the students in a wide range of disciplines and sub-disciplines.
WHOI is one of the largest independent oceanographic institutions and research
fleet operators in the world. Fellows use state of the art analytical
instruments, sampling devices and modeling programs for their research projects
in a wide range of disciplines, including biology, marine chemistry and
geochemistry, geology and geophysics, physical oceanography, ocean policy and
ocean engineering. Research themes that crosscut disciplines include oceans and
climate, the changing Arctic, deep-sea exploration, ocean observing systems,
biogeochemical processes and cycles, autonomous underwater vehicles and systems,
seafloor processes and evolution, and human-ocean interactions and impacts. This
project supports national goals of developing the next generation of scientists
and the scientific workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.