* 1852900
* STEM Teacher Pathways for Rural and Native American Populations: Building Capacity to Address a STEM Teacher Shortage in Montana
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2019,12/31/2020
* Thomas Raunig, University of Providence
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 12/31/2020
* USD 89,176.00

With support from the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program, this Capacity
Building project aims to address the critical shortage of qualified STEM
teachers in the state of Montana. To achieve this aim, the University of
Providence will develop or strengthen partnerships with nearby colleges and high
schools that serve rural and Native American communities. This partnership will
develop strategies to increase access to and interest in the University's STEM
teacher preparation program, a necessary step in increasing the number of STEM
majors who pursue teaching careers. To address the needs of rural Montana, the
project also intends to modify the University's STEM curricula to enhance
distance learning opportunities for rural students and to include Native
American cultural competencies. The approaches used in this project may serve as
a model for how to address teacher shortages in rural areas.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central goal of this project is to develop evidence-
based, innovative strategies for recruiting, preparing, and supporting new STEM
teachers, especially from rural and Native American populations. It also aims to
establish the necessary infrastructure for implementing a future Noyce Track 1
Scholarships and Stipends project. To accomplish these goals, the University of
Providence will partner with high-need, local education agencies (Great Falls
High School, Heart Butte Public Schools, Browning Public Schools, and Box Elder
Public Schools) as well as with nearby institutions of higher education (Stone
Child Community College, Blackfeet Community College, Flathead Valley Community
College, Aaniih Nakoda College, Fort Peck Community College, and Great Falls
College-Montana State University). The partnership will develop strategies to
recruit STEM majors from the partner institutions into the University of
Providence's STEM teacher education program, and to increase the breadth of
education and cultural opportunities available to these students. The project
will also modify the University of Providence's STEM curricula to include Native
American cultural competencies. In the short term, this Capacity Building
project will strengthen relationships between regional colleges and high-need
school districts, develop innovative distance learning programs in STEM and STEM
education, and increase access to STEM education for rural and Native American
populations. Over a longer term, this project has the potential to: (1) provide
paths to sustainable employment for teachers in economically disadvantaged
populations; (2) improve the education system by increasing the cultural
competence of STEM high school teachers; and (3) increase the number of Native
Americans who pursue STEM careers, thereby increasing STEM workforce diversity.
The Noyce program supports talented STEM undergraduate professionals to become
effective K-12 mathematics and science teachers in high-need school districts
and experienced, exemplary K-12 STEM teachers to become STEM master teachers. It
also supports research on the persistence, retention, and effectiveness of K-12
teachers in high-need school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.