* 1852130
* REU Site: Advanced Technologies for HYpersonic, Propulsive, Energetic, and Reusable Platforms (HYPER)
* ENG,EEC
* 03/15/2019,02/28/2023
* Ali Gordon, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 02/28/2023
* USD 382,371.00

The Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Site: Advanced Technologies for
Hypersonic, Propulsive, Energetic and Reusable Platforms (HYPER) at the
University of Central Florida (UCF) addresses challenges in next-generation
modes of transportation and energy generation. Realizing planned platforms for
advanced space travel and energy production can only be achieved through
multidisciplinary research. This REU site will actively recruit and partner a
diverse group of approximately 33 students over 3 years with leading faculty and
graduate students at UCF. Together, these teams will advance the fundamental
knowledge needed to overcome technical barriers limiting hypersonic flight.
Candidate REU students will be matched with individual research projects based
on their interests and skills. With the majority of their time engaged in
cutting-edge research, REU students will also benefit from research-oriented
seminars, professional development workshops, software training, and launch pad
facility tours. HYPER has several goals; most importantly, to prepare students
for PhD-level research and research-oriented
employment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;HYPER will cultivate and unite
multidisciplinary interests to study advanced structures and systems with
application to hypersonics, space, propulsion, and energy. For example,
components in launch vehicles are subjected to combined extreme environments
where fluid-structure interactions are key considerations. Also, advanced
manufacturing must be better understood to improve component performance and
reduce weight. Frameworks for modeling digital versions of systems must be
created to predict overall performance more accurately. Participants will gain
hands-on research training in contemporary challenges such as: (1) utilizing
advanced manufacturing techniques for high-value components, (2) integrating in
situ monitoring of stress- strain evolution, (3) developing novel methods for
improved internal cooling and heat transfer effectiveness, (4) mitigating
flutter through advanced rotor dynamic control, etc. Eleven modules are crafted
to engage students in PhD-level topics; these research topics rely on approaches
that cut across disciplines and techniques (e.g., experiments and simulations).
As a result, HYPER will play a key role in preparing a workforce of young
engineers and scientists for research careers in these
areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This site is supported by the Department of Defense
in partnership with the NSF REU program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.