* 1852459
* REU Site:  Genes &amp; the Environment:  Research Experiences for Undergraduates from Rural &amp; Tribal Colleges
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Van Doze, University of North Dakota Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/29/2024
* USD 931,428.00

This REU Site award to the University of North Dakota (UND), located in Grand
Forks, ND, will support the training of 12 students for 10 weeks during the
summers of 2019-2022. Research will be conducted under the mentorship of UND
faculty in the Departments of Biology and Biomedical Sciences. Mentors will work
closely with students to develop an independent research project. Examples of
projects include investigation into how environmentally determined changes in
gene expression influence learning in fish, sex-determination in turtles, stress
tolerance in nematodes, and wing patterning in moths. Students will receive
training in cell biology, development, genetics, molecular biology,
neuroscience, and systems biology. In addition to hands-on research, students
attend weekly research seminars and workshops about science writing and
presentations, responsible conduct of research, ethics and sexual harassment.
Students present their findings at a symposium. Participants are provided a
stipend, room and board, and travel funds. Subsidized child care is provided by
UND to students with dependents. Students from groups historically
underrepresented in the sciences are encouraged to apply. Selection criteria
include academic performance and educational and career goals. Applications are
evaluated by the PI and mentoring faculty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is
anticipated that a total of 48 students, primarily from rural and tribal schools
with limited research opportunities, will be trained in the program. Students
will learn how research is conducted, and many will present the results of their
work at scientific conferences. The primary mission of the program is to
encourage students to pursue graduate degrees in the sciences and enter careers
in science education, research, and literacy. This program will help strengthen
ties with rural and tribal colleges. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A common web-based
assessment tool used by all REU Site programs funded by the Division of
Biological Infrastructure will be used to determine the effectiveness of the
training program. Students will be tracked after the program in order to
determine their career paths. Students will be asked to respond to an automatic
email sent via the NSF reporting system. More information about the program is
available by visiting http://ndinbre.org/NSF-REU/, or by contacting the PI (Dr.
Van Doze at van.doze@und.edu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.