* 1852607
* STEM Teacher Education And Development Program
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2025
* Irma Santoro, Reinhardt College
* Continuing Grant
* John Haddock
* 06/30/2025
* USD 835,642.00

With support from the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce), this
Track 1: Scholarships and Stipends project aims to educate highly effective STEM
teachers for high-need school districts in the state of Georgia. This project
involves a collaboration between Reinhardt University, Cherokee County School
District, Pickens County School District, and Chattahoochee Technical College.
Through this collaboration, the project aims to attract and recruit fifteen
biology or mathematics majors to become certified secondary STEM teachers in
high-need schools. The undergraduates will receive two- to three-year
scholarships to support their pursuit of baccalaureate degrees in Biology and in
Secondary Biology Education or in Mathematics and Secondary Mathematics
Education. The scholarship support will significantly reduce the financial
burden associated with becoming a teacher and may attract exceptional students
who might not have otherwise considered a teaching career. The Scholars will
gain teaching experience by working side-by-side with certified teachers and
professors as instructors in a STEM Summer Camp. It is expected that
improvements to the teacher preparation curriculum that are developed for the
Scholars will result in improvements to the overall quality of STEM teacher
preparation at the University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During the five-year
project, the project is designed to recruit fifteen qualified undergraduates who
are majoring in Mathematics or Biology. These Noyce Scholars will receive: 1)
pedagogical instruction in content teaching methods including differentiated
instruction; 2) undergraduate research opportunities; 3) a summer camp
instructional experience; 4) teaching assistant training and experience; 5)
practical, clinical experiences thereby enhancing their skills as educators; and
6) induction support and ongoing online communities for graduates. The project
will investigate the ways in which mentored research experiences contribute to
teacher preparation with attention to potential influences on self-confidence
and the retention of STEM teachers as compared to conventional Secondary Biology
and Mathematics Education educational programs. The research opportunities and
instructional experiences are designed to improve Scholars' ability to address
diverse and changing classroom needs. The project's central goal is to produce
graduates who can bring relevant and inquiry-based instruction to classrooms at
high-needs schools. Additionally, the project has the potential to strengthen
partnerships among local high-need school districts, the Chattahoochee Technical
College, and Reinhardt University. The Noyce program supports talented STEM
undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12 mathematics and
science teachers in high-need school districts and experienced, exemplary K-12
STEM teachers to become STEM master teachers. It also supports research on the
persistence, retention, and effectiveness of K-12 teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.