* 1852125
* REU Site: Biological Materials and Processes (BioMaP)
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Monica Lamm, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 04/30/2024
* USD 351,214.00

This renewal of a Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site at Iowa
State University (ISU) entitled, Biological Materials and Processes (BioMaP),
will create novel research experiences for a talented and diverse group of
undergraduate students from traditionally underrepresented populations, with
limited access to STEM research opportunities. The cross-disciplinary nature of
BioMaP enables students to discover the exciting biology/interface and will
focus on two research themes. (1) Biological Materials - The interface between
biology and materials can be exploited to design robust materials with unique
properties. In this context, biological materials are synthetic materials that
interact with biological molecules/systems in specific ways to promote
biological function. The students will work on projects that include developing
biomaterials that allow for structural and mechanical control over the tumor
microenvironment or immune cells as well as understanding the relationship
between aptamer structure and function for synthetic biology applications. (2)
Biological Processes - A fundamental knowledge of biological processes will be
critical in the future chemical industry. Students will be exposed to this area
through projects on enhancing microbial robustness for biorenewable fuels and
chemicals, engineering probiotic organisms and modeling photobioreactors to
optimize the cultivation of algae. Students will be exposed to exciting research
experiences of working in a global environment where their research will evolve
from dependent to independent status and they will attain life-long learning
skills that will impact their contributions to engineering, science and society.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over a three-year period, this REU Site program will
engage undergraduate students in a 10-week intensive, summer research experience
focused on the two research themes of Biological Materials and Biological
Processes. The students will be active members of multidisciplinary groups and
will interact with a faculty team that is diverse, has broad research interests
and an outstanding record of mentoring undergraduate students. The REU students
will participate in cohort experiences such as short courses, joint
seminars/meetings and workshops on a variety of topics including research
ethics, graduate school preparation and professional social media.Formalized
written reports and poster presentations will be used to develop communication
skills and a BioMaP alumni LinkedIn page will insure that the participants have
access to a built-in professional network that can help them to decide how to
apply their Chemical and Biological Engineering background in their careers. At
the end of the summer program, the students will participate in a joint poster
symposium together with students from other ISU undergraduate research
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.