* 1852207
* IRES Track-1: Nanofiber Materials and Structures: Advancing Science and Technology
* O/D,OISE
* 03/15/2019,02/29/2024
* Andrei Stanishevsky, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 02/29/2024
* USD 399,840.00

This project is co-funded by OISE, Engineering (CMMI, EEC) and MPS (XC and
OMA)Directorates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 1&lt;br/&gt;Nanofibers exhibit
unique properties that have stimulated a massive effort in nanofibers research
to address key challenges in high performance filtration, battery separators,
wound healing, composites, blood vessel and tissue engineering, electrochemical
sensing, smart textiles, drug delivery, and catalysis. Some recent examples
include: Dermtreat's nanofibrous Rivelin patch for innovative treatment of
mucosal diseases and DuPont's nanofiber-based EnergainT battery separator, which
boosts up to 30% power of Li-ion batteries, just to name a few. The global
market for nanofibers is expected to reach ~$2 billion by 2021, but its growth
potential is hindered by limited ability of sizeable production of nanofibrous
materials with predictable complex, macroscopic architectures, and desirable
properties.&lt;br/&gt;Undergraduate and graduate trainees with diverse
backgrounds from the University of Alabama at Birmingham, University of South
Alabama, Troy University, and University of Montevallo will tackle the
challenges in the nanofiber science and technology through intense real-life
research on fabrication of nanofibers by an uncommon, high-yield alternating-
current electrospinning (ACES) process. ACES unveils several new physical
phenomena and features that significantly reduce or eliminate many disadvantages
of traditional techniques while greatly increasing the productivity and
simplifying material handling. All IRES trainees will gain critical
international research, industry, and cultural sensitivity experiences expanding
beyond each participant?s institution through the collaborative work at a number
of high-profile labs and related industries in three European countries, joint
presentations/publications, social activities, and interactions with diverse
international student population at TUL, UT-Lodz and Aalto. The goals of this
project are to accelerate innovation and increase outcomes in the nanofiber
materials domain and to develop future leaders and experts capable of operating
at a high level of advanced research and competence in global
collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2&lt;br/&gt;This project brings the
ongoing collaborations to a higher level and establishes new collaborations in
the emerging area of fabrication and application of nanofiber materials and
structures with Technical University of Liberec (TUL, Czech Republic, a leading
academic center in nanofiber research), Lodz U of Technology (UT-Lodz, Poland, a
regional leader in heterogeneous catalysis), and Aalto University (Finland, the
#1 Finnish University with strong idea-to-industry programs in nanoscience and
engineering). At least 27 students from the University of Alabama at Birmingham
(UAB), University of South Alabama, Troy University, and University of
Montevallo will engage in the hands-on pre-trip training at UAB and a 8 week-
long cutting-edge research at the forefront of nanofibers science and technology
at those premier European institutions, followed by the long-term post trip
research and outcomes dissemination activities. &lt;br/&gt;IRES trainees will
fabricate nanofibers using a high-yield Alternating Current Electrospinning
(ACES) process, which unveils several physical phenomena that significantly
reduce or eliminate major disadvantages of traditional DC-techniques, while
greatly increasing the productivity. Trainees will apply the fabricated
materials to biomedical scaffolds and smart fabrics at TUL, heterogeneous
catalysts at UT-Lodz, and novel electrochemical sensors at Aalto. Students will
have broad options to immerse in quickly evolving research ecosystem at foreign
sites that stimulates breakthroughs and discoveries, as well as multiple
opportunities to develop passion for exploration and innovation, and courage to
influence and excel. Through the team and individual research projects,
professional and soft skills-building exercises, this IRES will: (i) advance the
theory and practice of ACES, (ii) help to design a better equipment for sizeable
production of nanofiber materials and structures, (iii) develop new nanofiber-
based materials and structures with desired properties and performance in
controlled and predictable manner, and (iv) foster the training of globally-
engaged experts, visionaries, leaders, and team builders for the fast-growing
nanofibers research and manufacturing domain, and for the relevant
fields.&lt;br/&gt;IRES trainees will regularly reach out to the public, other
college and school kids, e.g., through a new annual IRES student-led
Nanomaterials Workshop at TUL, research immersion high school workshop at UAB,
and broadcasts by JagTV, USA's student-run TV station. All participants will
mutually benefit through a growing network of advanced research and training
facilities. This project will enable, in a long-term perspective, a broader
synergistic coupling between domestic and international research groups by
bringing new collaborators and catalyzing the continuation of international
student exchanges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.