* 1852157
* REU Site: Nanoscale Materials Science and Engineering at Vanderbilt University
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Joshua Caldwell, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 09/30/2023
* USD 369,933.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: The Vanderbilt Institute for Nanoscale Science and
Engineering (VINSE) summer research experiences for undergraduates (REU) site
offers science and engineering undergraduate students the opportunity to work
closely with faculty on forefront research projects in the field of nanoscale
science and engineering. The overarching theme of the research projects are
nanomaterials innovation and fabrication. The projects are designed to build a
sense of community among the students and the participating faculty, as well as
expose the REU students broadly to research at the leading edge of nanoscale
science and engineering. REU students are also offered the opportunity for
training in the integration of research with education and outreach through
participation in the Vanderbilt Summer Academy for high school students.
Additionally, to facilitate the continued mentoring of the REU students after
the research experience and enhance the probability of the student continuing in
research, 'home mentors' are invited to visit Vanderbilt to participate in the
capstone events. Historical data shows that following an REU summer, students
have a heightened desire for graduate studies, with 88% remaining in science and
engineering and 69% entering graduate school, primarily at other institutions
ensuring students obtain the richest experience. Long term, the REU site
contributes to building a workforce educated in and motivated towards science
and engineering disciplines and specifically, interdisciplinary research in
nanoscience and nanotechnology. The program places strong emphasis on recruiting
students from underrepresented minority groups and schools with limited research
opportunities; the REU program and the VINSE faculty have collaborators at
several institutions, including nearby HBCU Fisk University that are committed
to helping us identify potential REU students. Furthermore, visits from home
institution mentors also enables these partnerships to be strengthened and
relationships with new institutions developed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
DESCRIPTION: The promise of nanoscience and nanotechnology to revolutionize our
lives in multiple ways has captured the imagination of scientists, the attention
of the media, and the general public. Nanoscience and nanotechnology are based
on the ability to synthesize, organize, characterize, and manipulate matter
systematically at the nanoscale, creating uniquely functional materials that can
be inorganic, organic or biological, or a hybrid of any two or more of these.
Thus, nanoscience and nanotechnology pose formidable challenges that cut across
traditionally distinct disciplines; to meet these challenges, interdisciplinary
training of future scientists and engineers in the broad field of nanotechnology
is of paramount importance. To achieve this goal the VINSE summer REU site
offers science and engineering undergraduate students the opportunity to work
closely with faculty on forefront research projects in the field of nanoscale
science and engineering. VINSE faculty provide REU students with a true
interdisciplinary research experience in an environment where physicists,
chemists, biologists, and all engineers collaboratively solve problems and
create new scientific understanding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.