* 1852908
* Increasing the Number and Quality of Secondary Mathematics Teachers in Nebraska
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Patrick Rault, University of Nebraska at Omaha
* Continuing Grant
* Julio Soto
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,369,600.00

With support from the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce), this
Track 1: Scholarships and Stipends project aims to serve the local and national
need for highly-skilled secondary mathematics teachers who are committed to
teaching in high-needs school districts. The project will expand upon the
existing Omaha Noyce Partnership that includes the University of Nebraska Omaha,
Omaha's Metropolitan Community College, and the Omaha Public Schools. It will
provide scholarship support for 24 students to earn a BS in mathematics and
become certified secondary mathematics teachers. These Scholars will be selected
from students already enrolled in the University's Bachelor of Science in
Mathematics program or students who transfer into the University from the pre-
math track in Metropolitan Community College. To facilitate transfer of students
from Metropolitan Community College to the University program, an articulation
agreement was developed via close collaboration among project partners. All
students selected as Noyce Scholars will be enrolled in the University's BS in
Mathematics specialization, which enables students to earn both a mathematics
degree and secondary teacher certification while in the College of Arts and
Sciences. The project will provide focused training to prepare students for
teaching careers in high need schools, including instruction in inquiry-based
learning and other culturally responsive pedagogies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Omaha Noyce Partnership aims to inform and advance ongoing collaborative
research initiatives related to the project's structured student mentorship and
support model, as well as its use of inquiry-based mathematics teaching
strategies. A major area of investigation is understanding how active-learning
strategies, such as inquiry-based learning, affect the recruitment and success
of pre-service secondary mathematics teachers. In addition, the project aims to
explore how interdisciplinary and well-focused community outreach and engagement
activities affect students' social capital and STEM identity. Finally, the
project will examine how a formal partnership between a four-year metropolitan
university and a public community college affects the recruitment pipeline for
future secondary mathematics teachers and mathematicians. An interesting aspect
of this project will be the inclusion of instructional coaching, a form of
professional development that enables pre-service and in-service teachers to
improve their practice based on classroom activity. The project will also
include innovative Math Teacher's Circles and Cool Math Talks, which are
expected to promote a sense of community among students, mathematics faculty
members, and mathematics education faculty members. These talks will focus on
problem solving with significant, but accessible, mathematics content. In
addition to enhancing the quality, quantity, and diversity of certified
mathematics teachers in the Omaha area, the Omaha Noyce Partnership aims to
further strengthen collaborative relationships among the partner institutions,
thereby strengthening the foundation for sustainable efforts to educate
culturally responsive mathematics teachers who are prepared to succeed in high-
need schools. The Noyce program supports talented STEM undergraduate majors and
professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary
K-12 STEM teachers to become STEM master teachers in high-need school districts.
It also supports research on the persistence, retention, and effectiveness of
K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.