* 1852724
* Preparing Teachers to Integrate Science, Technology, Engineering, and Math in Elementary Classrooms
* EDU,DUE
* 05/15/2019,04/30/2024
* Mark Beekey, Sacred Heart University
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 04/30/2024
* USD 1,199,945.00

With support from the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce), this
Track 1: Scholarships and Stipends project aims to develop highly-qualified
teachers to fill shortages of STEM teachers in high-need elementary schools in
Connecticut. Specifically, the project will educate, graduate, and place 18 new,
certified teachers into high-need schools in Bridgeport, Norwalk, and Stratford
school districts. The Scholars will earn a Bachelor of Science degree in STEM
and a Master of Arts in Teaching, to prepare them to be highly effective
teachers of science-, math-, and technology-related subjects to elementary
students. In addition to scholarship support, the project will provide Scholars
with service learning opportunities in high-need elementary schools to promote
community engagement, and early and ongoing mentoring and professional
development to promote retention. By emphasizing recruitment of students from
diverse backgrounds, the project has the potential to broaden participation
within the Connecticut teacher workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has
three goals: 1) to increase the number of highly qualified STEM teachers who are
teaching in a high-need elementary school; 2) to retain the Noyce scholars until
graduation and certification; 3) to support the Noyce scholars to meet their
teaching commitment in a high-need district; 4) and to increase the
effectiveness of these STEM teachers through a revised education curriculum and
engagement in service learning and inquiry-based research experiences. To meet
these goals, the project has developed a strong collaboration between the
University and the Bridgeport, Norwalk, and Stratford School Districts. The
Scholars will be recruited from prospective and matriculated first-year and
transfer students, with an emphasis on including underrepresented minority
students, first-generation college students, lower-income students, and
veterans. The Scholars will benefit from a revised education curriculum,
targeted STEM workshops, and engagement in service learning and inquiry-based
research experiences. In addition, the Scholars will participate in a nine-month
Graduate Teacher Internship at a high-need elementary school in Bridgeport,
Norwalk, or Stratford school districts. In each of their participating years,
Scholars will be paired with a STEM mentor teacher in a partnering high-need
elementary school. Through publications and regional and national meetings, the
project PIs will disseminate evidence collected about the effectiveness of the
developed curriculum; the efficacy of preparing preservice teachers for high-
need classrooms through topic integration in STEM; the value of service
learning, STEM research, and emphasis on professional identity; and the success
of early and ongoing mentorship for novice teachers. The Noyce Program supports
talented STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12
mathematics and science teachers in high-need school districts and experienced
and exemplary K-12 STEM teachers to become STEM master teachers. It also
supports research on the persistence, retention, and effectiveness of K-12
teachers in high-need school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.