* 1852817
* The El Paso Partnership for the Preparation of STEM Teachers to Implement Project-based Learning
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Amy Wagler, University of Texas at El Paso
* Continuing Grant
* Julio Soto
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,199,692.00

With support from the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program, this Track 1
project at The University of Texas at El Paso (UTEP) aims to serve the national
need of preparing high-quality STEM teachers. UTEP is partnering with the El
Paso Independent School District (EPISD), a high-need district with a majority
of its population classified as Hispanic and at-risk. The partnership will
establish an innovative and transformative teacher preparation program,
integrating Noyce Scholars into school sites currently implementing project-
based learning (PBL) with support from the New Tech Network (NTN), a national,
non-profit network for comprehensive pedagogical and cultural change in public
school settings. Specifically, the partnership will establish professional
development school sites where pre-service STEM teachers learn theory and
practice alongside university- and school-based faculty to innovatively prepare
and graduate knowledgeable STEM teachers, who understand how learning theories
inform meaningful and valuable instructional practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Noyce@UTEP program goals are to: (1) recruit, certify, and retain Noyce
Scholars, who are science, technology, engineering or mathematics (STEM)
undergraduate majors; (2) design and refine coursework and field-based teaching
experiences to prepare Noyce Scholars to be effective teachers; and (3) create
and disseminate knowledge on how best to prepare STEM teachers. Thirty-six (36)
Noyce Scholars are expected to graduate with a baccalaureate degree in a STEM
discipline and secondary STEM teaching certification and be fully prepared to
teach in high-need school districts. Science and Education faculty will co-
design a senior-level required course for STEM majors with a secondary education
minor, which will expose students to (1) novel methods for teaching students
STEM concepts using PBL; (2) sheltered English instruction; and (3) special
education in immersion programs. Other required education courses will integrate
field experiences at school sites where PBL is implemented. Two of these courses
will be held on an NTN high school campus where Noyce Scholars will meaningfully
interact with in-service teachers and university faculty while being immersed in
authentic PBL teaching and learning experiences. This will contribute to the
formation of a community of practice, an integral component of the program. A
research investigation will generate knowledge to understand the effect of
social networks and support structures in preparing Noyce Scholars to teach in
high-need schools with a predominantly Hispanic student population. Knowledge of
best practices in preparing effective STEM teachers will be disseminated across
various venues to include school administrator meetings and annual conferences,
such as the New Tech Network Conference; National Council of Teachers of
Mathematics; National Science Teachers Association; American Educational
Research Association; Conference for the Advancement of Science Teaching (CAST),
sponsored by the Science Teachers Association of Texas; Conference for the
Advancement of Mathematics Teaching; and TODOS (Mathematics for All: Excellence
and Equity in Mathematics). The Noyce program supports talented STEM
undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12 mathematics and
science teachers in high-need school districts and experienced and exemplary
K-12 STEM teachers to become master teachers. It also supports research on the
persistence, retention, and effectiveness of K-12 teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.