* 1852735
* Integrated Mathematics and Science Teacher Recruitment, Preparation, and Induction Pathway for the Central California Coastal Region
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Debra Lewis, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 03/31/2024
* USD 1,449,982.00

With support from the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce), this
Track 1: Scholarships and Stipends project aims to serve the national need of
recruiting, preparing, and retaining exemplary mathematics and science teachers.
The project's overarching goal is to strengthen mathematics and science
education in high schools that serve educationally and economically
disadvantaged students. Through offering Noyce scholarships, the institution's
teacher credential program can provide extended student teaching and coursework,
which research indicates can support long-term, successful teaching careers.
Scholarship support is expected to enable prospective teachers to complete the
one-year teacher preparation program at the University of California (UC), Santa
Cruz. The project will pair prospective teachers with experienced teacher-
mentors, who will work together on projects to improve student teaching and
learning in the teacher's school. Additionally, the project will offer science
and engineering professionals a one-week, intensive internship in middle and
high schools. This internship is expected to increase their interest in pursuing
a teaching career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The five-year project involves five
regional high-need school districts, three California community colleges
(Hartnell College in Salinas, Cabrillo College in Santa Cruz County, and San
Jose City College in San Jose), and science and education faculty from UC Santa
Cruz. The project team will refine and align teacher recruitment, preparation,
induction, and retention processes to improve teacher effectiveness and
retention in high-need school districts in the central California coastal
region. The project intends to provide scholarships to 33 new college STEM
graduates or experienced STEM professionals. The scholarships will support the
Scholar's completion of the combined MA/teaching credential program at UC Santa
Cruz. Prospective teachers will develop professional skills and confidence
through summer teaching internships at partner community colleges. The project's
research results will contribute to understanding how to prepare teachers of all
backgrounds for success and satisfaction in schools that serve students with
diverse backgrounds, including race/culture, language, and learning preferences.
The Noyce program supports talented STEM undergraduate majors and professionals
to become effective K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school districts and
experienced, exemplary K-12 STEM teachers to become STEM master teachers. It
also supports research on the persistence, retention, and effectiveness of K-12
teachers in high-need school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.