* 1852336
* Collaborative Research: REU Site: Security Printing and Anti-Counterfeiting Technology
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2024
* Jon Kellar, South Dakota School of Mines and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 04/30/2024
* USD 321,117.00

The South Dakota School of Mines and Technology, along with partner
organizations, South Dakota State University, and the University of South Dakota
will offer an innovative Research Experiences for Undergraduate (REU) Site
focused on interdisciplinary research dedicated to Security Printing and Anti-
Counterfeiting Technology (SPACT), to a diverse cohort of undergraduate
students. Counterfeiting is a growing issue in the U.S., posing serious
economic, safety and national security concerns and impacting a wide variety of
industries (e.g. pharmaceutics, semiconductors). REU participants will engage in
interdisciplinary collaborative research that pairs physical scientists and
engineers with social and behavioral scientists. This convergent approach is
crucial for addressing and disrupting the complexity inherent to modern illicit
supply networks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During this 10-week summer research
experience, 10 REU students will conduct research on transformative anti-
counterfeiting technology. SPACT is a field which demands development in four
key areas: (i) advanced materials, (ii) advanced manufacturing and patterning,
(ii) detection and encryption, and (iv) social/behavior science and systems
engineering. The key objectives of the program are to (1) conduct transformative
research in a collaborative, interdisciplinary environment, and (2) provide STEM
professional development opportunities to a diverse group of undergraduate
students, with a focus on Tribal Colleges and other institutions with limited
STEM research opportunities. A talented team of faculty mentors from a variety
of STEM disciplines, with a wide spectrum of experience and backgrounds, will
implement a program in SPACT by engaging REU participants in interdisciplinary
collaborative research that pairs physical scientists and engineers with social
and behavioral scientists. Students will also participate in a highly integrated
professional development and technical communications program designed to
stimulate professional development and the development of research skills
necessary to succeed in the 21st century. The faculty, alongside industry
leaders, will deliver training seminars to broaden the students' existing
academic training in the relevant SPACT areas. The long-term goal is to provide
a diverse group of STEM researchers with the training and skills needed to
pursue graduate studies at the highest levels and to advance the developing
field of SPACT.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.