* 1852288
* REU Site: Research Training for Undergraduates in Mathematical Analysis with Applications in Allied Fields
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2023
* Jin Wang, University of Tennessee Chattanooga
* Standard Grant
* Tiziana Giorgi
* 04/30/2023
* USD 282,659.00

The REU program "Research Training for Undergraduates in Mathematical Analysis
with Applications in Allied Fields," run by faculty members of the Department of
Mathematics at the University of Tennessee at Chattanooga, provides an eight-
week summer research experience for ten undergraduate students during each year
of its operation. This program employs research methods training, hands-on
research projects, and group activities that will lead participants to effective
independent research. The program aims to increase participation in the
mathematical sciences by recruiting and encouraging women, minorities from
underrepresented groups, first-generation college students, and students from
institutions with limited research opportunities. To contribute to the
excitement and development of undergraduate research in mathematics, we
incorporate elements of pure and applied mathematics as well as computational
modeling, with a special focus on number theory, probability theory, and
dynamical systems. This program is designed to introduce students to the power
and applicability of mathematics and to encourage them to pursue careers in the
mathematical sciences. Its success will provide a national model for
undergraduate research in mathematics at a regional metropolitan
university.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The program will include a poster session and
presentations by students, a colloquium series, interdisciplinary use of
mathematics led by world-class researchers, and workshops on mathematical
writing, applying to graduate school, and career opportunities in academia and
industry. The students will be divided into groups supervised individually by
the faculty mentors. Each student will belong to two different teams, so that he
or she will delve deeply into two research problems. The projects are of current
interest in their respective areas and inherently multidisciplinary. The mentors
will introduce the topics and provide background and initial exercises as
necessary. The goal will be to shift the focus to the students, who will pose
and investigate questions according to their levels of interest and abilities.
The mentors will serve as catalysts and advisors in the process and ensure the
quality and progress of the research activities. Successful completion of these
projects will advance the current state of mathematical knowledge and
undergraduate research in mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.