* 1852123
* REU Site: Understanding Coastal Ecosystems - From the Everglades to the Coral Reefs
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Todd Crowl, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 03/31/2024
* USD 395,538.00

This REU Site award (Understanding Coastal Ecosystems - From the Everglades
to&lt;br/&gt;the Coral Reefs) to Florida International University, located in
Miami, FL, will support the training of 10 students per year for 10 weeks during
the summers of 2019-2021. The research theme is coastal ecosystems ecology and
environmental aquatic chemistry. Specifically, this research looks at the
connectivity among the Everglades wetlands, coastal mangrove forests, seagrass
beds and shallow water coral reefs. The overall goal is to detect the sources,
transport and transformation of environmental stressors and the ecosystem
responses under rapidly changing climate and land use. The program integrates
researchers across 10 departments and 4 colleges university-wide, to build
interdisciplinary projects and convergent research experiences. REU students
will be co-mentored by teams comprised of faculty, graduate students and
postdoctoral researchers. The program will provide professional development
activities, including workshops on research methods, responsible conduct of
research, communicating science and others, as well as field experiences and
career pathways panels. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is anticipated that this REU
Site will train a total of 30 students recruited from a nationwide pool,
primarily from schools with limited research opportunities, and with a majority
of those from groups traditionally underrepresented in science. Students will
learn how to develop an independent research project, the various research
analysis methodologies, and how to communicate science to multiple audiences.
Students will present their results at a final research symposium, and will have
the opportunity to present their work subsequently at scientific
conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A common web-based assessment tool used by all
REU Site programs funded by the Division of Biological Infrastructure will be
used to determine the effectiveness of the training program. Students will join
a LinkedIn group dedicated to the program and will be contacted annually after
the program to determine their career paths. Students will be asked to respond
to an automatic email sent via the NSF reporting system. More information about
the program is available by visiting
https://crestcache.fiu.edu/opportunities/index.html or by contacting the PI (Dr.
Rita Teutonico at rteutoni@fiu.edu) or the co-PI (Dr. Crowl at
tcrowl@fiu.edu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.