* 1852870
* Preparation of STEM Teachers for Professional Growth and Effectiveness
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2026
* Michael Haaf, Ithaca College
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 06/30/2026
* USD 752,331.00

With support from the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program, this Track 1
project at Ithaca College aims to serve the national need of increasing the
number of highly-qualified mathematics and science teachers who remain in the
teaching profession. Summer internships, an alternative spring break teaching
institute, and collaborative partners will aid in recruiting scholars, including
those from underrepresented groups. The project will provide opportunities for
the scholars to participate in enhanced professional development activities such
as teaching conferences, workshops on teaching in high need schools, and a
summer teaching workshop. Project goals include expanding recruitment efforts,
improving instruction with a focus on inquiry-based pedagogy, fostering a
culture of continuous professional growth, and conducting a detailed evaluation
of teacher retention and success.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will
provide stipend support for 49 individuals who possess bachelor's degrees in a
STEM discipline as they complete a 13-month master's level teacher certification
program. The master's program includes the Master of Arts in Teaching in
Adolescence Education for grades 7-12 and the Master of Science in Childhood
Education for grades 1-6. Scholars, with undergraduate STEM degrees, will
complete the requirements for teacher licensure in biology, chemistry, earth
science, mathematics, physics, or childhood education. School partners include
Elmira, NYC District #5, Horseheads, and Watkins Glen, as well as Cornell
University, SUNY Cobleskill, RIT, Sciencenter, Lime Hollow Center, and
Paleontological Research Institution. The project will conduct a multi-year
research study to examine the impact of a preservice culture of continuous
learning, growth, and professional development on future teacher engagement,
confidence in handling challenges, participation in leadership activities, and
teacher retention. This study seeks to add new knowledge to inform other teacher
preparation programs across the nation about strategies for improving retention
of new teachers. The Noyce program supports talented STEM undergraduate majors
and professionals to become effective K-12 mathematics and science teachers in
high-need school districts and experienced and exemplary K-12 STEM teachers to
become STEM master teachers. It also supports research on the persistence,
retention, and effectiveness of K-12 teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.