* 1852754
* Collaborative Research: Manganese(III)-driven carbon oxidation at oxic-anoxic interfaces
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2024
* Kristen DeAngelis, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Richard Yuretich
* 04/30/2024
* USD 448,328.00

Soils are a large and dynamic terrestrial of carbon on earth. How fast microbes
oxidize carbon determines how much either stays in soils or is emitted as carbon
dioxide. Even a small increase in soil carbon oxidation rate could increase the
amount of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere, impacting global climate. Manganese
(Mn) is an abundant and potent oxidizer, but its impact on the rate of soil
carbon oxidation is not known. This project will provide new understanding of
how manganese compounds change how fast carbon is oxidized in soils. This new
scientific knowledge will help improve our predictions of future carbon dioxide
emissions and will help society develop new strategies to limit emissions. This
project will work with diversity programs on campus and in the local community
to empower women and minority students to pursue STEM careers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The formation of Mn-based oxidants is emerging as a key
regulator of C oxidation rates, and thus CO2 emissions, in soils. Although
dissolved Mn(III) species are among the most potent oxidants in environmental
systems, the controls on Mn(III)-driven carbon oxidation are virtually unknown.
The overall objective of this project is to identify fundamental geochemical and
microbial factors controlling the rate of Mn(III)-mediated carbon oxidation in
soils. Our central hypothesis is that oxic-anoxic interfaces are "hotspots" for
the enzymatic formation of dissolved Mn(III), which subsequently depolymerizes
and solubilizes otherwise resistant organic matter, and so enhances microbial
CO2 production. The proposed research integrates microsensor, spectroscopic, and
multi-omics approaches to resolve coupled Mn and carbon cycles across fine-scale
gradients in soils. To accomplish the overall objective, the specific aims are
to (i) define the geochemical controls on Mn(III) formation along oxic-, (ii)
identify the microbial drivers of Mn(III) formation, and (iii) assess the impact
of Mn(III) formation on C oxidation at oxic-anoxic interfaces in soils.
Disseminating the resulting dataset will support efforts to incorporate the
coupling of Mn and C redox cycles into biogeochemical models. Integrating the
highly significant Mn-dependence of C oxidation into models for the first time
is expected to vastly improve accuracy in predicting environmental and human
impacts on soil CO2 emissions. The project team will work to incorporate this
multidisciplinary research effort into strategies to empower women and minority
graduate, undergraduate and high school students to pursue STEM careers. A
three-point plan integrates this research with direct interdisciplinary
education and public outreach, which includes: (i) graduate training in
biogeochemistry for one minority PhD student, (ii) opportunities for independent
research for three minority undergraduate students in partnership with the
Harvard Forest REU program, and (iii) multi-day workshops for a total of 45
female minority students from a local high school hosted in collaboration with
Girls Inc. Holyoke, Massachusetts. Educational materials developed for the
workshops will be disseminated through participation in the annual Massachusetts
Envirothon. A thorough evaluation plan was developed in collaboration with
Harvard Forest and Girls Inc. staff to measure the success of the proposed
Broader Impacts activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.