* 1852651
* Collaborative Research: The dynamic iron curtain surrounding fluctuating rivers and its impacts on arsenic fate and transport
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/2019,08/31/2019
* Saugata Datta, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Boyer
* 08/31/2019
* USD 293,482.00

Dissolved arsenic in groundwater is a global threat to millions of people. This
arsenic is released from minerals within groundwater aquifers. People that
regularly drink toxic levels of dissolved arsenic are at risk of getting deadly
diseases. Some rocks and sediments contain enough arsenic to contaminate
groundwater under certain conditions. This project aims to understand the
conditions under which arsenic is trapped or released. One setting in which
great quantities of arsenic is trapped is in riverbank sediments. Rivers
continue to flow during dry periods by contributions from groundwater.
Groundwater that has lots of iron and arsenic carries huge amounts of these
elements to the riverbank sediments. It is important to understand the fate of
this trapped arsenic and iron. The goal of this study is to develop a theory on
the growth and fate of these iron-arsenic deposits. This project accomplishes
this goal by observing which minerals the arsenic is bound to within sediments
on the edge of the Meghna River in Bangladesh. Bangladesh has some of the
highest naturally occurring levels of arsenic in aquifers in the world.
Laboratory experiments will test the impact of tidal fluctuations on the nature
of these iron-arsenic deposits. The movement of water and elements will be
measured in the field between aquifers and the Meghna River. This project
supports the research of U.S.-based undergraduate and graduate students and
prepares the next generation of U.S. and Bangladeshi scientists to understand
the movement of toxic elements between aquifers and rivers.

Arsenic-contaminated water resources are prevalent in fluvio-deltaic aquifers
whose sediment are the geogenic source. The fate of As in groundwater
discharging to rivers, however, remains unknown despite advances in
understanding the origin and transport of As in groundwater. A few observations
have suggested that As is stored within shallow, permeable, riverbank sediment
through sorption on iron-oxide surfaces, referred to herein as Permeable Natural
Reactive Barriers (PNRB). These accumulations threaten the communities along
rivers should there be a reversal in groundwater flow induced by pumping, or
should this high-As sediment be scoured and then re-deposited along a segment of
the river where infiltration occurs. In deltaic regions, aquifers are connected
to large rivers subject to periodic forcing driven by tides and seasonal
flooding. Thus, the dynamics of groundwater-borne As transported to and from
rivers should also be driven by similar periodic forcing. The amplitude and
period of these fluctuations will uniquely determine the properties of these
PNRBs, and knowing this, combined with knowledge of the iron (Fe) and As
concentrations of the aquifers, should allow regional prediction of the
accumulation of As in riverbank sediment. This project investigates the dynamics
of a Fe-oxide PNRB through complementary detailed field characterization of
sites along the Meghna River in Bangladesh along with laboratory experimentation
and advanced coupled flow and reactive transport simulations. The data-driven
modeling is used to assess the occurrence of PNRBs in similar tidal river-
aquifer settings through sensitivity analysis. The anticipated findings will
advance the understanding of the cycling of geogenic As in shallow, reducing
alluvial aquifers connected with rivers in Asia. Critical knowledge on coupled
hydrologic and biogeochemical processes for the protection and management of
water resources will be provided to both the local communities dealing with As
contamination and the broader scientific body. Local stakeholders will be
directly involved in the research and project findings will be translated for
policy makers to reach affected communities. This study funds the research
projects of undergraduate and graduate students, and post-doctoral investigators
and expands the infrastructure for studying groundwater-river water exchange
along the Meghna River in Bangladesh.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.