* 1852609
* REU Site: Engineered Materials for Tissue Engineering and Drug Delivery
* ENG,EEC
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2023
* Adam Engler, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 03/31/2023
* USD 351,601.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site focuses on the expanding
research opportunities in biomaterials as the community discovers new
applications of and regulation by biomaterials. Hosted by the Jacobs School of
Engineering at the University of California-San Diego, this site will provide
research opportunities and professional development for a diverse cohort of
talented undergraduates from traditionally under-represented backgrounds for
whom research and further graduate training is not often obtainable.
Participants will make contributions to our fundamental understanding of the
interactions between cells and tissues and their surrounding natural or
synthetic environment or between drug carriers and their target cells. This Site
will specifically investigate the benefit of this training for rising junior
undergraduate students from traditionally underrepresented groups with limited
research opportunities. The Site will assess the impact of hands-on biomaterials
research, faculty and near-peer mentoring, research presentations at local and
national meetings, and professional development activities on continued training
in biomaterials at the graduate level. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over a three-year
period, this REU Site will focus on providing research experiences at the
interface of materials science, biological science, and bioengineering via 2
themes: (1) building and testing how bio-inspired niche influence cell behaviors
and (2) fabrication of novel drug delivery vehicles to improve delivery of a
wide class of drugs. Through a combination of research, biomaterials "boot
camp," weekly research skills workshops, professional activities, state-of-the-
art facilities, and social functions, the participant cohort will be exposed to
graduate education and the ethos of the biotechnology sector present in San
Diego. Participants will be matched with one of a dozen participating faculty
members and tracked via Individualized Development Plans tailored for each
participant to ensure the best possible outcomes for their training and
development. Given the breadth and depth of Site faculty, research will appeal
to a wide range of students, particularly those entering their junior year who
are beginning the in-depth portion of their academic engineering training.
Attendance and participation in research conferences and professional meetings
will serve as capstone activities of this REU Site to improve awareness of
career paths and the value of graduate education. As a result of this Site, we
aim to show that the activities listed above, especially when targeted at
juniors, can result in higher academic performance in subsequent years in school
and in higher entry into graduate training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.