* 1852516
* REU Site: Research Experience for Undergraduates in Immersive Media Computing
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2023
* Ying Zhu, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Brass
* 01/31/2023
* USD 332,794.00

This project establishes a new Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
Site that is jointly hosted by the Department of Computer Science and the
Creative Media Industries Institute at Georgia State University. Undergraduate
students across the nation will work with a group of experienced faculty members
and conduct cutting-edge research in immersive media computing during each
summer. Immersive media computing is an emerging computing paradigm that aims to
create the sensation of 3D immersion in a real or virtual environment. The
recent development of immersive media computing has enabled a host of compelling
technologies such as 360-degree videos, Augmented Reality, and Virtual Reality,
potentially transforming a wide spectrum of sectors in healthcare, training,
education, entertainment, tourism, etc. The REU site will train undergraduate
students in this emerging computing paradigm and benefit their graduate
application and job hunting. Through various activities such as seminars, demos,
presentations, field trips, and other professional development opportunities,
undergraduate students will also enhance their professional skills. This REU
site aims to broaden the participation of underrepresented groups in research
activities, especially in the neighboring regions with numerous Historically
Black Colleges and Universities and Women Colleges. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
emerging nature of immersive media computing leads to the strong intellectual
merit of this project. Despite the rich history of research on regular images
and videos, the computing of immersive content poses significant research
challenges. New algorithms will be developed to address five research problems
across the end-to-end immersive media computing system: (1) immersive content
must be compressed to reduce the amount of data transported while maintaining
the fidelity of the content; (2) the compressed immersive content needs to be
streamed to the remote display in a bandwidth-efficient way; (3) the received
immersive content should be quickly rendered based on the user head orientation
using parallel computing in CPUs/GPUs; (4) the raw immersive content must be
further analyzed to extract the events of interest; and (5) additional
information needs to be overlaid over the immersive content to enhance the
immersive visualization experience. In addition to algorithm and model designs,
real-world systems will be built to demonstrate the effectiveness of the
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.