* 1852790
* Building the Capacity for Community-engaged STEM Teacher Preparation
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/2019,02/28/2021
* Cherie McCollough, Texas A&M University Corpus Christi
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Lewis
* 02/28/2021
* USD 74,999.00

With support from the NSF Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program, this project
aims to serve the national interest in high quality STEM teaching by building
capacity to prepare highly-qualified middle and high school STEM teachers for
high-need Texas schools. Through collaborations between Texas A&amp;M
University, Corpus Christi, and the West Oso Independent School District, the
project will develop an infrastructure for recruiting, preparing, and supporting
new middle school and high school STEM teachers. The project will engage
community partners in designing and delivering meaningful activities for teacher
candidates, thus strengthening connections between schools and their
communities. Long-term goals of this project include increasing student
achievement in STEM fields and helping to address the national shortage of
highly-qualified STEM teachers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will begin by
conducting an assessment to define teacher shortage areas and to prioritize
teacher training needs. The results of the assessment will inform the design of
a new licensure program for middle and high school STEM teachers. STEM faculty,
Education faculty, school personnel, and community partners collaborate to
develop a community-engaged teacher preparation curriculum. This work will
strengthen the partnerships among these groups. The resulting new courses, field
experiences, and community mentoring activities will be pilot tested and
assessed. The project will also develop and pilot test strategies for recruiting
talented STEM undergraduates from diverse groups into teaching careers. The NSF
Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program supports talented STEM undergraduate
majors and professionals to become K-12 mathematics and science teachers in
high-need school districts and in-service teachers to become STEM master
teachers. It also supports research on the persistence, retention, and
effectiveness of K-12 teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.