* 1852795
* Implementing Novel STEM Practices in Rural Education (INSPIRE)
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Jing Chen, University of West Alabama
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Lewis
* 05/31/2024
* USD 1,138,822.00

With support from the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce) this
Track 1: Scholarships and Stipends project at the University of West Alabama
(UWA), aims to prepare high-quality teachers for high-need school districts both
locally and nationally. Through a collaboration among UWA's College of Natural
Sciences and Mathematics and College of Education, two local community colleges,
an area public school, and a charter school, INSPIRE will recruit and prepare
STEM teachers for positions in high-need school districts in the geographic area
of western Alabama and eastern Mississippi. The project will provide a strong
undergraduate teaching program that focuses on developing subject matter
comprehension and skill in proven pedagogical practices. It will also develop a
strong mentoring environment between scholars and practicing teachers in the
school district during the induction years. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the
course of a five year period, the project seeks to fund a total of 15
undergraduate junior and senior STEM majors with scholarships and 10 area STEM
professionals with stipends to become licensed science and mathematics teachers.
The leaders at the University of West Alabama will work with Bevill State
Community College, Coastal Alabama Community College, the Demopolis City
Schools, and the University Charter School to recruit and train scholars from
both community colleges and the university. The foci of the training includes
cultural competencies and pedagogical knowledge. Three goals guide the project.
First, to increase the number and quality of certified STEM teachers entering
the workforce. Second, to develop a collaborative mentoring environment among
program participants and clinical master teachers. Third, to create an induction
program for INSPIRE graduates to continue developing subject matter expertise
and improved pedagogical practices after graduation and certification. By
recruiting from a specific geographical area and then placing the new teachers
in the same area, the project will contribute to the educational community in
western Alabama and eastern Mississippi. In addition the project holds promise
to serve as a national model. The Noyce program supports talented STEM
undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12 mathematics and
science teachers in high-need school districts and experienced, exemplary K-12
STEM teachers to become STEM master teachers. It also supports research on the
persistence, retention, and effectiveness of K-12 teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.