* 1852441
* Collaborative Research: REU Site: Past and Present Human-Environment Dynamics
* SBE,SMA
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2024
* David Braun, George Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 08/31/2024
* USD 97,025.00

The project is jointly funded by the Research Experiences for Undergraduates
(REU) Sites program. It has both scientific and societal benefits and integrates
research with education. The collaborative Research Experience for
Undergraduates: Past, Present and Human-Environment Dynamics program builds on
the success of the Koobi Fora Research and Training Program (KFRTP) and will
develop a new framework for integrated training and research in anthropology,
archaeology, geology, human biology and ethnoarchaeology. Humans have been
interacting with changing environments for thousands of years. For communities
that live in remote and resource poor ecosystems, environmental changes present
life-threatening challenges. Changes in subsistence practices in the past have
allowed humans to adapt to environmental changes. These subsistence changes have
also had a dramatic impact on the ecosystems that humans lived in with
consequences for the health of communities that live in remote habitats. This
project will train 3 cohorts of 8 students from diverse backgrounds (including
in service teachers) that will learn a variety of transferable STEM skills to
investigate the intersection of human behavior and environmental change.
Multiple mentorship contexts will allow students to learn skills in a supportive
and collaborative environment. This project will focus on student support and
the development of cohorts who will investigate critical components of the
interaction of humans and their environments. Each student will: 1) generate new
knowledge by designing and conducting an original research project with leading
international human biologists and archaeologists, 2) collect and analyze data
using state-of-the-art methods, 3) synthesize and present the findings at
follow-up workshops and professional development seminars in the U.S., and 4)
engage in training on the public understanding of science with outreach
coordinators at the American Museum of Natural History (New York).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU project will recruit at least 24 US-undergraduate
students nationwide- focusing on students underrepresented in STEM fields. A
portion of our students will be involved in a Research Experience for Teachers
and use this experience to develop school curricula. Our project will focus the
interaction between humans and shifting ecosystem dynamics in the past and
present. Specifically, we will investigate the following questions: How do
present and past populations react to changing ecological pressures? 2)What was
the impact of different subsistence strategies on the ecosystem? 3) How do
current communities interact with their environment to meet their water and food
needs and what are the impacts of this on nutritional status, hydration status,
and health outcomes? 4) How have different populations used shifting patterns of
mobility and land use to address these ecological and subsistence challenges?
Investigating these questions will form the basis of interdisciplinary training.
Trainees will gain a series of widely applicable skills as they gain a holistic
perspective on the interface between changing environmental parameters and human
adaptations in a tropical arid region. Student research will be incorporated
into ongoing public outreach and youth initiative programs at the AMNH. The
associated RET component will help develop learning modules for K-12 students
that emphasize the time transgressive nature of behavioral and biological
adaptations to rapidly changing habitats. This project will help document the
health and water issues of ~12,000 community members who are currently under-
served and present results to county and national level organizations. This
project will provide undergraduate students with a unique, holistic training
opportunity on a collaborative field research project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.