* 1852102
* REU Site: High Performance Computing with Engineering Applications
* CSE,OAC
* 02/15/2019,01/31/2023
* Daqing Hou, Clarkson University
* Standard Grant
* Juan Li
* 01/31/2023
* USD 379,931.00

This award provides support for a three-year REU Site at Clarkson University,
Potsdam, New York, in High Performance Computing (HPC), a field critical to
national security, scientific discovery, and technological innovation. The goal
of this project is to encourage 30 talented undergraduate students to pursue
graduate study and careers in HPC by engaging them in exciting, ongoing research
projects and by cultivating their talents during ten-week summer research
experiences and beyond. Sixteen ongoing research projects available for students
are innovative and share the common theme of societally relevant engineering
applications that originate from disciplines as diverse as aeronautical
engineering, chemical engineering, civil engineering, electrical and computer
engineering, software engineering, and applied mathematics. The project thus
serves the national interest, as stated by NSF's mission: to promote the
progress of science; to advance the national health, prosperity and welfare; or
to secure the national defense.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students are
recruited from targeted institutions that offer limited or no research
opportunities in HPC, such as historically minority colleges and universities.
Emphasis is placed on attracting underrepresented minority and female students.
Faculty with expertise in HPC applications mentor the students to be researchers
and provide them with specialized training in the design and development of HPC
applications that are rooted in and motivated by engaging engineering
innovations. This specialized training provides the students with technical and
analytical skills in mathematical modeling, algorithmic development, and
parallel and distributed programming, which benefit them in future pursuits such
as graduate study or industry work. The quality of this training is further
reinforced by additional professional development activities, including an HPC
crash course, field trips, invited speakers, weekly group meetings, and a mentor
training workshop for faculty. Seminars in career development, literature
search, technical writing, and graduate school advisement, are also integrated
into the program, and all student participants are given the opportunity to
attend and present in professional conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.