* 1852382
* REU site in Mechanical Engineering: Energy and the Environment (ME3)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Alyssa Burger, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 05/31/2024
* USD 377,296.00

The REU Site in Mechanical Engineering: Energy and the Environment (ME3) hosted
by the University of Minnesota (UMN) Department of Mechanical Engineering will
provide a diverse cohort of undergraduate students opportunities to engage in
engineering research with a focus on energy and the environment complimented by
ambitious intergenerational mentoring and professional development
opportunities. Due to the Department's multidisciplinary areas, student research
projects are focused on these topics: air quality, water quality, or energy
generation, storage, and transmission. Each project has valuable societal
benefit and contributions, for example: clean water through materials
development, reduced air pollution through studies of combustion and gas
turbines, and energy savings through hybrid wind technology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 10-week summer research program will host 10 college
sophomores and juniors with a focus on recruiting from traditionally under-
represented segments of the engineering population including women, racial and
ethnic minorities, persons with disabilities, and those from colleges without
traditional research opportunities. The ME3 program objectives are to: offer
hands-on research experience in state-of-the-art laboratory and computing
facilities related to energy and the environment, articulate the relationship
between research and how it impacts daily life, expose students to mechanical
engineering research and student life at a major research university, establish
a team mentoring relationship between REU students, graduate students, and
faculty, and encourage students to consider graduate school in engineering. The
program emphasis on mentoring can lead to a more diverse workforce, not just for
the immediate REU participants, but the impact of those participants as future
mentors in their own careers. Students will review technical literature, use
computer-aided design software, mathematical modeling, fabrication, and
experimental testing. The research and professional development activities will
help students develop lifelong skills including critical thinking, teamwork, and
effective communication. REU students will also give regular project updates to
their research teams through weekly progress reports. At the end of the summer,
students participate in a campus-wide REU Research Symposium coordinated by the
UMN's Office for Equity and Diversity. REU alumni will be surveyed annually to
obtain post-experience impact related to their academic progress and
professional pathway. A LinkedIn network will be established to maintain contact
with REU alumni.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.