* 1852372
* REU Site: Chemistry 360 degrees: A Comprehensive Research and Career Development Experience @UBChemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2023
* Jason Benedict, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 03/31/2023
* USD 343,231.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site award to the State
University of New York (SUNY) at Buffalo, located in Buffalo, NY, supports the
training of 10 students for 10 weeks during the summers of 2019-2021. In this
program, funded by the Division of Chemistry in the Mathematical and Physical
Science Directorate, Professors Jason B. Benedict, Timothy R. Cook and
colleagues host an REU site covering a broad range of chemical research and
career development with a focus on the leveraging of digital platforms.
Participants engage in research encompassing core chemical science areas
including inorganic, analytical, biomedical or polymeric chemistry. Alongside
chemical research, the program includes industrial site visits to local chemical
and biochemical companies, seminars to develop and improve 'soft skills', and
training on the use of digital platforms to advance research and career
development. In total, these activities prepare UB Chem360 REU participants for
graduate school and beyond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Individual participants'
research projects include synthesis of porous nanomaterials, development of new
enantioselective reactions, metal ion complex binding to nucleic acids, photo-
responsive crystalline materials, catalysis of ene-yne reactions, ligand-driven
enzyme catalysis, charge transfer at semi-conductor interfaces, and structure
prediction of novel materials. Other areas of research include studying the role
of lipids in cell processes, physicochemical characteristics of novel
chromatographic materials, imaging of hydrogel and polymer surfaces and self-
assembly of nanoscopic metallacycles. These independent and interdisciplinary
research projects, facilitated by SUNY at Buffalo faculty and graduate student
mentors, provide participants with experiences in problem solving and scientific
discovery. This site puts an emphasis on recruiting students from two-year
colleges and students who are underrepresented in chemistry. Combined with 'soft
skills' and digital platform training, this program prepares participants to
pursue advanced degrees and enter the chemistry
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.