* 1852426
* REU Site: Bioarchaeology of Bronze Age Social Systems
* SBE,SMA
* 03/15/2019,02/29/2024
* Lesley Gregoricka, University of South Alabama
* Standard Grant
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 02/29/2024
* USD 293,914.00

This project is funded from the Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
Sites program in the Directorate for Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences
(SBE). It has both scientific and societal benefits, and it integrates research
and education. The Bioarchaeology of Bronze Age Social Systems REU program
supports a diverse pool of nationally recruited undergraduates engaged in the
entire research process from hypothesis formation to data collection, analysis,
public outreach, and publication. Teams of students collaborate with an
interdisciplinary group of dynamic scientists and professionals while conducting
original research on two Bronze Age skeletal collections, examining how
alternative pathways to social complexity during an increasingly globalized
Bronze Age were embodied in the human skeleton and reflected in mortuary
practices. Many of these bioarchaeological methods have applications to forensic
anthropology as well, and by illustrating their utility and accuracy, students
may contribute to advancing the use of more accurate demographic techniques in
contemporary criminal cases involving commingled remains. Students also receive
training on how to effectively disseminate their research results to both
academics and the broader public all while engaging in discussions surrounding
the ethics of working with human remains. Participants similarly receive
mentorship in professional development via guest scientists and with established
summer undergraduate research workshops at the University of South Alabama.
Prior to conference presentations, students engage with members of the local
community to share their project findings using weekly blogs, social media
posts, posters, and digital stories. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses
on two large skeletal collections dating to 2700-2000 BCE. These Bronze Age
communities did not develop highly stratified social systems, but instead
maintained tribal, kin-based systems of social organization. Subsequently, an
analysis of these skeletons presents a unique opportunity for an in-depth
examination of the socioeconomic, political, and environmental circumstances in
which so-called peripheral populations resisted stratification, adapted to
environmental change, and negotiated their own identities. Students collaborate
with top scholars and use innovative techniques well-suited to the challenges of
working with commingled collections to answer questions about changing mortuary
practices and human lifeways in this region, but also to more broadly compare
these social trajectories to paths of complexity taken
elsewhere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.