* 1852158
* REU Site: Vanderbilt University Research Experiences for Undergraduates in Physics &amp; Astronomy
* MPS,PHY
* 03/15/2019,02/28/2023
* David Ernst, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 02/28/2023
* USD 422,055.00

American competitiveness in basic science research and technology development
depends crucially on a highly skilled, trained physics workforce. Physics is
foundational to much of the fundamental research activity of US research and
development efforts. The Vanderbilt University Summer REU program offers
undergraduate physics and astronomy students the opportunity to work closely
with faculty on forefront research projects in a variety of subfields of
physics. The areas include astronomy, biological physics, condensed matter
physics including nanoscience, laser physics, nuclear physics, and particle
physics. The research mentors are all well funded researchers and all have
committed to personally directing the students. An extensive research
infrastructure, including the facilities of several large interdisciplinary
centers, will be available to the students. Physics students will also have the
opportunity to visit major facilities at government laboratories, both domestic
and international, including FermiLab, Brookhaven, Oak Ridge, and CERN.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As part of the program's emphasis on leadership
development, the program includes training in ethical conduct of research, and,
as part of the program's emphasis on developing the future workforce, includes a
focus on broadening participation of underrepresented groups in physics. The REU
program will achieve broad impact. In particular, the track record of the
program over the past six years shows that a high percentage of the new
participants will be underrepresented minority students, and the track record
moreover shows that more than half of those participants will be from
institutions with limited research opportunities. To achieve sustained impact,
the program is designed to build ties between the Vanderbilt mentors, all of
whom are supported with appropriate salary, and faculty at the student's home
institution. This builds a larger community, provides for continued support for
the student, and enhances the ability for continued mentoring and research
participation of the student beyond the REU site experience. Students also have
the opportunity to participate in mini and short courses in entrepreneurship,
computing, and data science while at Vanderbilt, as well as participating in the
Fisk-Vanderbilt Physics and Astronomy Roadshow outreach program. This site is
supported by the Department of Defense in partnership with the NSF REU program,
and by the Division of Physics and the Division of Astronomical Sciences within
NSF's Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.