* 1852593
* Data Science and Image Analysis Conference of the Pacific Northwest
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2020
* Charles Moore, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 03/31/2020
* USD 20,520.00

This award will provide funding for sixty students and junior researchers, with
a focus on recruiting and funding women and members of underrepresented groups,
to attend the Data Science and Image Analysis Conference of the Pacific
Northwest at Washington State University in Pullman, Washington, February 29th
and March 1st, 2020. The conference will promote close collaborations on current
and ongoing areas of research through a highly interactive and open format, with
discussions taking place in both larger and smaller groups. The first day will
have professionals from industry, government, and academia in the fields of data
science and image analysis come together, along with students and post-doctoral
researchers, to collaborate on open problems through short talks, in-depth group
discussions, and breakout sessions. The second day will consist of professional
development activities for students and junior researchers, and will feature
presentations from members of this group, with direct feedback provided from
professionals. The conference will provide a unique opportunity for students and
junior researchers to participate and will encourage future collaborations among
all levels of researchers.

The ever-increasing demand for managing and analyzing "big data"in nearly every
sector of society, from finance and security to health care and social media,
has led to a wide range of applications across numerous fields of research.
Similarly, image analysis techniques have continued to be developed and
incorporated into a multitude of disciplines, such as biomedical imaging,
machine learning, and computer vision. Since many important societal outcomes
are dependent on these fields, the conference can make a broad impact on society
by widely sharing the progress made on the open problems discussed, which has
the potential to lead to even further progress in data science and image
analysis and thus to advance scientific discovery. With the demand for experts
in these areas growing rapidly, the conference will also serve to increase the
number of researchers entering STEM fields, especially women and members of
underrepresented groups. Discussion topics will include topological data
analysis, bioinformatics, learning from remote sensing data, financial &
economic prediction, image segmentation and filtering in biomedical imaging,
hyperspectral imaging, pattern recognition, shape analysis, and image
reconstruction. More information can be found at
datascienceandimageanalysis.com.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.