* 1852253
* REU Site: Research Experience for Student Veterans in Advanced Manufacturing and EntrePreneurship (REVAMP)
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2023
* Chun Zhang, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 04/30/2023
* USD 360,000.00

The three year renewal Research Experience for Student Veterans in Advanced
Manufacturing and EntrePreneurship (REVAMP) program at Georgia Institute of
Technology will continue to train a diverse cohort of undergraduate students in
the fundamental principles of (1) advanced manufacturing science and technology;
and (2) the transition of basic discoveries in manufacturing science into
innovative commercial products. This enhanced REU program will focus on training
of veterans and underrepresented minority students and annually will engage 10
undergraduate students who will perform hands-on fundamental manufacturing
research in several critical areas including additive manufacturing, bio-/cell-
manufacturing, composites/nanocomposites manufacturing, applications of AI and
robotics in manufacturing. The REVAMP REU site focuses on the critical national
need of manufacturing, and more specifically, advanced manufacturing research
and technology, which will play a crucial role in positioning the U.S.
manufacturing sector as a continued world leader. By leveraging the Georgia Tech
Manufacturing Institute (GTMI)'s world-class facilities, diverse technical
expertise, and inspiring interdisciplinary research environment, the REU
activities will give students the opportunity to improve knowledge in the
critically important advanced manufacturing technology topic areas noted above.
Training in research methodology, performance of scientific manufacturing
research, tours of manufacturing facilities, and completion of technical
seminars provided by GTMI faculty will significantly expand each student's
manufacturing knowledge base, preparing them for future careers in advanced
manufacturing. The research experience will be enhanced by entrepreneurship
training including specialized customer discovery experiential learning,
seminars focused on the fundamentals of evidenced-based entrepreneurship, and
case studies presented by startup company leaders offered by the GT Enterprise
Innovation Institute (EI2). Through entrepreneurship training, students will
also have a transformative opportunity to develop critical leadership skills for
transitioning basic research discoveries into commercially-viable innovations.
NSF I-Corps South programs and veteran-faculty mentorship opportunities provided
by the Georgia Tech Research Institute (GTRI) will be incorporated into this
renewal REVAMP REU site program. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;A unique feature of this
REU site is its focus on training of veterans and underrepresented minority
students. To accomplish this goal, GTMI will target its recruiting efforts on
the top universities/colleges in the nation for veteran enrollment and several
HBCU's and institutions with high female enrollment. This REU site will combine
advanced manufacturing research training with the principles of
entrepreneurship, encouraging students to become leaders in innovation. This
will help to fill the current void between fundamental research and technology
commercialization in the U.S. It is expected that the site will serve as a new
educational model for educating veterans and 21st century engineers in STEM and
entrepreneurship that can be replicated by other colleges and universities
throughout the nation. In addition, the REU site will support and encourage
strong participation by women and underrepresented minorities in manufacturing-
related STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.