* 1852620
* Cultural Competency and Universal Design Focus in Preparing STEM Teachers
* EDU,DUE
* 05/15/2019,04/30/2025
* Anne Witzky, Ohio Dominican University
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Ellis
* 04/30/2025
* USD 993,870.00

With support from the NSF Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program, this Track 1
Scholarships and Stipends project aims to serve the national interest in high-
quality STEM teaching. This project specifically responds to a national and
local shortage in qualified and certified secondary mathematics and science
teachers. This project has two main goals. One is to increase the number of
chemistry, life science, and mathematics secondary teachers by increasing the
number of STEM majors who successfully complete teacher licensure in these
majors. The second is to increase the effectiveness of Noyce Scholars as
educators and teacher leaders in high-need classrooms. In addition to their
coursework, Noyce Scholars will participate in diverse field experiences,
mentoring from STEM and education faculty, and professional development
activities. It is expected that these Noyce Scholars will distinguish themselves
from other teachers through engagement in a curriculum focused on Universal
Design for Learning and culturally sustaining pedagogy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project aims to produce 30 secondary mathematics or science teachers who are
equipped with pedagogies based in Universal Design for Learning principles and
cultural competency. Undergraduate students majoring in mathematics or science
will earn both a teacher certification and a STEM degree (as warranted by the
Ohio Dominican University's Vice-Provost for Academic Affairs). These students
will receive up to two years of Noyce financial support beginning in their
junior year. Students who have already achieved a baccalaureate degree in a STEM
field and wish to pursue teacher certification will receive one year of support.
Scholars will be prepared to work with students across different cultures and
ability levels through exposure to culturally sustaining pedagogy and the tenets
of Universal Design for Learning. The University has cultivated partnerships
with local high-need school districts, South-Western City Schools and Whitehall
City Schools, to ensure field experiences that allow Scholars to apply Universal
Design for Learning principles and cultural sustaining pedagogy practices. This
project will investigate the impact of Universal Design for Learning and
cultural competency instruction on Scholars' teacher self-efficacy. It will also
examine the impact of changes in methods courses on student teaching skills and
at what stage these interventions have the most impact on teacher effectiveness.
An increase in highly qualified STEM educators in high-need schools has the
potential to positively affect the entire greater Columbus area. Publications
and presentations about the project will provide insights about the potential
benefits of equipping pre-service STEM teachers to use Universal Design for
Learning and cultural sustaining pedagogy. The Noyce program supports talented
STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM
teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 STEM teachers to become STEM master
teachers in high-need school districts. It also supports research on the
persistence, retention, and effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need
school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.