* 1852393
* REU Site: The Lamat Summer Research Program on High Performance Computing in Astrophysics
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2019,02/28/2023
* Jason Prochaska, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* James Higdon
* 02/28/2023
* USD 388,081.00

This award supports the renewal of an REU Site in computational astrophysics at
the University of California-Santa Cruz (UCSC). Students will principally be
recruited from regional community colleges, where the main selection criteria
will be outstanding academic accomplishments and promise of future achievement.
Each year, ten selected interns will work closely with mentors at UCSC and will
take part in an intensive eight-week introduction to astrophysical research
methods and tools with an emphasis on cosmological simulations. The overall goal
of the program is not to solely train astrophysicists but to use astrophysical
simulations as an exciting medium for imparting a broad array of scientific
skills to the participants. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The REU Site will increase the
retention and graduation rates for students enrolled in two-year colleges
through inquiry-based learning of concepts related to astronomy and planetary
sciences, using state-of-art astrophysical simulations as a common pillar.
Through a comprehensive program of research instruction, mentoring, workshops,
and support programs at UCSC, students will develop additional skills to advance
their educations and careers. The REU Site has developed a Family Astronomy
Night lecture series at the partnering diversity-serving institutions, with the
dual aims of communicating astronomy to a wide audience, and ensuring that
parents of REU students can support their child's academic
success.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.