* 1852932
* The Utah Collaborative to Build Capacity for a Streamlined Science Teacher Preparation Program
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2020
* Mary Burbank, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 06/30/2020
* USD 117,266.00

With support from the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program, this Capacity
Building project will lay a foundation for increasing the number of qualified
science teachers in Utah. Thus, it will contribute to the need for high-quality
STEM teachers to meet the nation's ever-growing need for a highly trained STEM
workforce. A central challenge to this goal is recruiting teachers who remain in
the profession to become leaders and mentors in all aspects of STEM education,
including working with a diversifying population. One approach to enhancing
teacher recruitment would be to simplify the process for STEM undergraduates to
obtain their teaching certification while pursuing STEM degrees. Likewise,
ensuring that aspiring teachers receive adequate training and support is a
primary means to improve teacher retention. Recognizing these opportunities,
this project aims to develop a high-quality, accelerated 5-year BS/MEd program
at the University of Utah that integrates learning of STEM content knowledge and
STEM teaching methods, as well as pre-service training. This strategy has the
potential to prepare future STEM teachers who can meet the needs of diverse
learners and contribute to the national priorities for STEM learning.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Through this effort, the University of Utah will work closely with
Salt Lake Community College, the source of almost 1,000 of the University's STEM
undergraduates. These two key partners, together with Salt Lake City School
District, master teachers, community leaders, and experts in high-need
environments, will form the "Utah Collaborative." The goals of the Utah
Collaborative are to: 1) conduct a detailed needs assessment that determines the
number of teachers needed and also the attributes such as soft-skills and
dispositions that enable teachers to thrive in high-need environments; 2) create
a compact five-year degree program that results in a STEM bachelor of science
degree and a Master of Education, with licensure; 3) develop a direct pathway
from Salt Lake Community College to completion of the BS/MEd program at the
University of Utah; 4) develop unique student teaching opportunities and
internships that will allow participants to gain extensive exposure to teaching
in high-need schools; 5) develop a network of school and community-based mentors
to help support new and continuing teachers; and 6) develop a strategic
dissemination and advising plan that will enable the recruitment and support of
STEM students from different backgrounds. Ultimately, the project aims to
provide the infrastructure for a future Noyce Track 1 proposal that has the
potential to transform science education in Utah. The Noyce program supports
talented STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12
STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 STEM teachers to become STEM
master teachers in high-need school districts. It also supports research on the
persistence, retention, and effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need
school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.