* 1852987
* Infrastructure, Planning, and Uncertainty on Urban Coastlines
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2024
* Nikhil Anand, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 04/30/2024
* USD 237,137.00

Coastal cities in the United States are particularly vulnerable to flooding from
rising sea levels and extreme weather events. Traditional urban planning and
management approaches (land reclamation, sea walls, etc.), and even newer
initiatives (restoration science and other initiatives oriented toward making
cities resilient) have tended to rely on models that assume adequate
provisioning of public financial and infrastructural investment necessary to
return coastal cities to a durable and dry equilibrium state. This project
explores the diverse approaches urban administrators use to stabilize urban
environments, where models forecast persistent uncertainties in public
infrastructural planning and increased reliance on stakeholder inputs. The data
will be important for American municipalities searching for alternatives in
urban infrastructural planning around uncertain futures. Findings will be
disseminated to various governmental, non-governmental, and other organizations
concerned with evaluating the limits and opportunities associated with water and
sewage infrastructure, and coastline management. The project also provides
training for undergraduate and graduate students in methods of rigorous,
scientific data collection and analysis, and broadens participation through the
inclusion of underrepresented students and scholars in scientific research. This
project will also build scientific capacity and infrastructure through
collaboration and increasing understanding of the causes, consequences, and
complexities of human social and cultural variability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr.
Nikhil Anand of the University of Pennsylvania will explore how stakeholders and
scientists in an urban coastline engage quotidian uncertainty in managing
livelihoods and maintaining durable infrastructures. The research will take
place in an urban community in Mumbai, which proves an ideal laboratory for
exploring these questions because of the density of this urban area, the long
tradition of coastal management by local stakeholders, and the existence of
several major infrastructural projects along this coastline. This creates a rich
environment for comparative analysis within the same urban context. The
researcher will test the hypothesis that the habitation and management practices
employed by these coastal communities inhibit environmental uncertainties.
Seventeen months of fieldwork will be conducted through a range of ethnographic
data collection and analytical techniques, including participant observation and
interviews with stakeholders in the fishing industry, environmental scientists,
and municipal officials. The project will make important contributes to debates
in anthropology, science and technology studies, and social science more broadly
about water and resource management, urban environments, and the production and
circulation of environmental knowledge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.