* 1852044
* REU Site: Science and Engineering in Nanomaterials
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2023
* David Blank, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 03/31/2023
* USD 230,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: The goal of the REU/RET Site in nanomaterials is to
train the next generation of science and engineering professionals while
increasing participation of traditionally underrepresented groups. The REU Site
brings talented undergraduates from a nationwide pool of applicants to the UMN
campus for an intensive 10-week research experience that includes extensive
training and development of career-building skills. Each participant pursues an
independent research project within an interdisciplinary research group. The
interdisciplinary nature of the Site makes it an ideal opportunity for students
in Materials Science, Chemical Engineering, Chemistry, Physics, Electrical
Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, and other related majors enrolled in two-
or four-year academic institutions. In addition to conducting research and
engaging in career development workshops, participants deliver a poster and a
formal oral presentation at the program's conclusion. The RET component draws
six teachers annually from the greater Twin Cities for a six-week research
experience and 25 additional teachers for a three day RET-led workshop. RET
participants have their own research projects, and work to develop and
disseminate standards-based engineering laboratory activities for middle and
high school classrooms. Teachers participate for two consecutive summers and are
encouraged to apply to the program as teams (two teachers from the same school
or district); participating in consecutive summers allows for revision and
improvement of developed classroom activities, while participating in teams
reduces institutional resistance to new materials. The REU and RET programs are
continually evaluated both formally through repeated measure surveys and
informally through individual interviews and group discussions in order to
improve the program each year, and to inform changes during the program to meet
the needs of each unique cohort. The combined elements of the REU/RET site seek
to enhance K-12 education in science, engineering and technology in general, and
Materials Science in particular, in order to increase interest in K-12 students
while also preparing undergraduates for graduate and professional
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: The REU Site in nanomaterials
is an intensive 10-week research experience that exposes undergraduates to
interdisciplinary materials research. Projects available to participants address
a wide range of 'hard' to 'soft' materials: Electrostatic Control of Materials;
Sustainable Nanocrystal Materials; and Hierarchical Multifunctional
Macromolecular Materials. Each research group integrates the six basic elements
of materials science and engineering - synthesis, theory, structural
characterization, property evaluation, processing, and applications - required
for effective innovation in materials research and development. In addition to
being assigned an independent research project, students participate in a
comprehensive collection of activities designed to offer in-depth, stimulating
research experiences; foster mentoring relationships with faculty, graduate
students, and postdoctoral fellows; and enhance student skills in preparation
for graduate school and research careers. Participants in the RET component of
the Site gain hands-on laboratory experiences to help them better understand the
practice of science and engineering and subsequently communicate it to their
students. Teachers work with faculty, postdoctoral fellows, and graduate
students with distinguished track records in research and education, emphasizing
a rich array of interdisciplinary research topics that are then developed into
curriculum elements and laboratory activities for use in K-12 classrooms. Both
the REU and RET components are designed to promote and assure inclusion of
women, underrepresented minorities, and people with disabilities in the
preparation of the next generation of scientists and
engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.