* 1852678
* Performance-Based Wind Engineering: Stochastic Approximation Algorithms for Wind-Induced Dynamics of Next-Generation Tall Buildings and Tower Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2024
* Luca Caracoglia, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 04/30/2024
* USD 257,777.00

The progressive increment of structural complexity and sensitivity to wind-
induced vibration and damage in building structures leads to the need for more
accurate and more efficient methods for structural analysis and estimation of
structural response. Performance-based wind engineering (PBWE) has received
considerable attention in recent years, especially for the study of building
structures. PBWE is necessary to advance the analysis of the next-generation,
super-tall buildings and tower structures, in which a core lateral resisting
system is combined with a three-dimensional system of lateral bracings through
stay-cables. The three-dimensional arrangement of the stays, which may reach
unprecedented lengths, makes this type of structure particularly complex. One of
the technological challenges is the need for forming a cable network by
connecting the stays using transverse restrainers that can reduce sensitivity to
wind-induced vibration. This unique structural configuration is particularly
interesting for future building construction, but the wind-induced dynamics of
this configuration is not fully understood. Understanding the performance of
tall structures in the setting of PBWE can lead to better structural
configurations for a given set of loading conditions, consistent with desired
levels of safety and affordable cost, thus promoting national welfare and
prosperity. Research results will be incorporated into teaching modules at
Northeastern University for an existing graduate course in wind engineering and
a new special topics course on the computational mechanics of random structural
systems. Project data will be archived and made publicly available in the NSF-
supported Natural Hazards Engineering Research Infrastructure (NHERI) Data Depot
(https://www.DesignSafe-ci.org). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will examine the dynamic response of tall buildings and tall towers under the
effect of turbulent wind loads within the setting of PBWE. A benchmark building
structure with appropriate parametric modifications of configuration will be
considered. The research will explore the implementation of computationally
efficient, scalable algorithms for studying the aeroelasticity of tall
structures. The numerical procedures will also use state-of-the-art software for
grid and cloud computing through collaboration with experts from international
academic institutions and a software research company. Stochastic numerical
solvers will be employed to extract natural frequencies and principal vibration
modes from an initial random eigenvalue problem (with partially unknown or
random properties due to structural complexity), and subsequently evaluate the
wind-induced dynamic response in the frequency domain. The project will examine
the structural performance under the influence of estimation errors in the
aerodynamic loads and the derivation of structural fragility curves or surfaces,
needed for estimation of either structural failure or loss of functionality
within PBWE. Research outcomes will include the identification of key parameters
characterizing safe structural operations by efficient computation of fragility
(e.g., displacements and accelerations). Parametric studies will also unfold
relevant details on the wind-induced dynamics of tall buildings and towers,
which will assist engineers in the design of these
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.