* 1852846
* Transforming Mathematics Teaching Through Making, Modeling and Mentoring
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2019,12/31/2021
* Laila Richman, Towson University
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 12/31/2021
* USD 74,958.00

With support from the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program, this Capacity
Building project at Towson University (TU) aims to transform mathematics
teaching using the practice of mathematical modeling and the emerging technology
of makerspaces. Mathematical models are important because they can be used to
explain systems and predict behavior. Makerspaces, workspaces that encourage
creative design using tools such as 3D printers, are becoming more common in
K-12 schools. Makerspaces can improve the mathematical learning of students
because the students gain a better understanding of systems by experimenting,
building, and tinkering. However, professional development for teachers is
critical for both makerspace technology and mathematical modeling to fulfill
their promise of improving learning. To address this need, this project plans to
establish the foundation to develop teacher leaders who can use making and
modeling in their schools and mentor their colleagues in adopting them. Through
this effort, this project plans to develop new graduate courses to train its
students in making, modeling, and mentoring. There are also plans to create a
regional network of partners to engage the community and ensure that the
progress made through this project is sustained. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project aspires to build partnerships across the Baltimore region, bringing
together TU faculty with stakeholders from Baltimore City Public Schools and
Baltimore County Public Schools as well as mathematics teacher organizations and
non-profit makerspaces. The primary goals of the Capacity Building project are
to: (a) develop a coherent and connected sequence of courses to improve teacher
knowledge and instructional practice in making, modeling and mentoring and (b)
build and strengthen partnerships with local school districts and non-profit
partners. The project will include a needs assessment which focuses on
understanding what makerspace technology currently exists in these school
districts, how it is being utilized, and the critical professional development
needs of mathematics teachers. This needs assessment should inform course
development as well as future plans for a Noyce Track 3 Master Teaching
Fellowship program. Through a pilot implementation of the making and modeling
graduate courses, this project plans to train teachers to effectively use
makerspaces, iteratively improve the courses and add to the research base on
technology education and mathematical modeling. This project is important
because it has the potential to serve as a national model for mathematics
teacher education in makerspace technology and mathematical modeling. The Noyce
program supports talented STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to become
effective K-12 mathematics and science teachers in high-need school districts
and experienced and exemplary K-12 STEM teachers to become STEM master teachers.
It also supports research on persistence, retention and effectiveness of K-12
teachers in high-need school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.