* 1852579
* REU Site: Design, Create, and Innovate 3-Dimensional User Interfaces to Improve  Human Sensory and Motor Performance in Virtual Environments (HUMANS MOVE)
* CSE,IIS
* 02/15/2019,01/31/2023
* Amy Banic, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 01/31/2023
* USD 380,000.00

The HUMANS MOVE project at the University of Wyoming is a 10-week
interdisciplinary summer Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site
program to design, create, and innovate 3-Dimensional User Interfaces (3D UIs)
to improve human sensory and motor performances in Virtual Environments.
Students will be recruited from diverse backgrounds, disciplines, and
underrepresented populations, especially in rural areas or where opportunities
in Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) are limited. The
HUMANS MOVE REU Site will host ten students and provide positive research
experiences, training, mentorship, state-of-the-art facilities and equipment,
experiential learning activities, tailored resources, and networking connections
that will continue to foster students' growth and success in research, graduate
studies, and career development. The broader impact of this REU Site is to
broaden the participation of underrepresented populations in computing, increase
enrollment and retention of those students in graduate studies, and further
enhance innovation through increased diverse thinking and
creativity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The selected projects for the HUMANS MOVE REU
Site focus on conducting state-of-the-art computing research in 3-Dimensional
User Interfaces for Immersive Environments, such as Virtual/Augmented/Mixed
Reality or Immersive Visualizations. The application areas focus on improving
human sensory and motor performance in spatial environments, motor
rehabilitation, collaboration and cooperation, and other 3D spatial tasks. The
REU site students will collaborate with talented multidisciplinary teams of
faculty, students, and staff in areas of computer science, electrical and
computer engineering, kinesiology, visualization, art, and design to foster
creativity and innovation. Student researchers will evaluate human physical,
cognitive, or sensory challenges to inform the design and development of new
interaction techniques, input devices, or methods of training, rehabilitation,
or augmentation. In addition to collaborating with the research team, students
will work together with users or patients to evaluate their proposed solutions.
The HUMANS MOVE REU Site will engage students in impactful research projects
that will advance technical achievements in 3D User Interfaces,
Virtual/Augmented/Mixed Reality applications, training, or rehabilitation as
well as broader outcomes to improve 3D tasks, scientific workflow, human health,
or the community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.