* 1852575
* REU Site: Multidisciplinary Underground Science at the Sanford Underground Research Facility
* MPS,PHY
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2023
* Brianna Mount, Black Hills State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 04/30/2023
* USD 255,237.00

Black Hills State University (BHSU) will host a 10-week Research Experience for
Undergraduates (REU) program centered on underground science at the Sanford
Underground Research Facility (SURF). This program will recruit 6-8
undergraduate students each year to participate in exciting underground research
projects as well as professional development, social and outreach activities.
Underground science offers possibilities for research across a variety of
disciplines including physics, chemistry and biology. Recruitment efforts of the
BHSU REU site will be especially focused on American Indian, female and
community college students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Some of the most important
physics experiments of our time are currently in operation at SURF, searching
for dark matter and investigating properties of the neutrino. Students will be
offered the opportunity to engage in research related to these experiments by
assaying materials for radiopurity measurements, using Monte Carlo simulations
to investigate the effect of these materials on detectors and testing the
chemical purity of noble gases. Additionally, research at SURF is being carried
out in the study of life deep underground, with applications to medicine and
astrobiology, in particular in the diversity of microbial environments and in
the isolation of novel microbes. Complementary chemistry research will also be
performed to determine the local environment in which these microbes
live.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.