* 1852715
* SuperMAG: New Science Capabilities and Continued Operation
* GEO,AGS
* 05/15/2019,04/30/2024
* Robin Barnes, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Mangala Sharma
* 04/30/2024
* USD 971,725.00

This project seeks to (1) ensure the continued operation of SuperMAG, a
worldwide collaboration between organizations and national agencies that operate
more than 300 ground-based magnetometers; and (2) expand the current service to
incorporate additional data, enhance the magnetic storm and substorms event
lists, and produce new data products. The expansion to SuperMAG will enable the
SuperMAG data holdings to be constantly updated. These updates will include
adding new data, as well as additional error correcting, bug fixes, and enhanced
support in the form of advice and data access. SuperMAG provides users easy
access to an extensive dataset that would otherwise be prohibitively difficult
to obtain and use in a meaningful way. The project will provide educational
opportunities for early career scientists and students and engage high school
teachers in research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SuperMag is a holding of fully
processed data from 300 ground-based magnetometers worldwide. Through a user-
friendly website, SuperMAG provides to the research community measurements of
magnetic field perturbations from all available stations rotated in a common
coordinate system, with identical time resolution and a common baseline removal
approach. Continued funding of SuperMAG will enable uninterrupted support to the
community for effective and efficient utilization of ground magnetometer data in
research studies related to the global ionospheric current system and its
coupling to the magnetosphere. For studies requiring clean observations of the
magnetic effects of local currents in the magnetosphere and ionosphere system
SuperMAG is very valuable. As such, SuperMAG provides a useful service to the
scientific community. The ready access to magnetometer data provided by SuperMAG
is not just only critical for the magnetospheric community but the general
geospace community. The data provided by SuperMAG are clearly important for
space weather applications. The project will provide educational opportunities
for early career scientists and students and engage high school teachers in
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.