* 1852457
* REU Site: Computational Social Science
* SBE,SMA
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2022
* Paul Brenner, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 03/31/2022
* USD 370,791.00

This project is funded from the Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
Sites program in the Directorate for Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences
(SBE) and is co-funded by SBE's Science of Science and Innovation (SciSIP)
program. The project has both scientific and societal benefits and integrates
research and education. This award promotes the progress of social science
discoveries through the application of advanced computational (computer)
applications to solve problems of national interest such as personality analysis
(psychology), interpersonal networks (sociology), family savings (economics) and
interdisciplinary perspectives on equality and diversity. Broader impacts will
include the critical advancement of education in computational social science as
identified in the Presidential Information Technology Advisory Committee report
and development of the nation's future social scientists. The program's
engagement of underrepresented groups and the opportunities for interaction with
high school students and international research peers will have a broad impact
in their professional STEM development. The program will involve 10 students
every summer, and each will spend 10 weeks at the University of Notre Dame
working alongside faculty mentors from the University of Notre Dame and nearby
Saint Mary's College. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award renews an REU Site at the
Center for Research Computing (CRC) at the University of Notre Dame; an ideal
setting for the REU student to become familiar with interdisciplinary
computational social science research. The CRC provides access to research
groups working across a diverse range of social science problems including (a)
Data Mining Large-scale Educational Assessment Data, (b) Explorations on the
Effects of Pervasive Networking on Social Relationships, (c) Effectiveness
Analysis for Economic Opportunity Programs, and (d) Computational Modeling and
Analysis of Global Social Dynamics. The social science students will learn how
to use the most current cyberinfrastructure tools and receive training on
fundamental scientific computing skills and techniques. Intellectual merit is
grounded in four core areas of expertise: computational psychology,
computational sociology, computational economics, and cyberinfrastructure
development for the social sciences. The program will give students and faculty
participants a chance to carry out collaborative, interdisciplinary research in
the computational sciences. Students will become part of an interdisciplinary
team and will experience the rewards of scientific collaboration. For faculty,
the REU program offers an opportunity to explore novel research areas and form
new collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.