* 1852587
* Belmont Forum Collaborative Research: Farmer-led Agroecological Research in Malawi using Scenarios for Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services
* GEO,RISE
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Rachel Bezner Kerr, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 03/31/2024
* USD 180,000.00

Innovative research on the complex interaction of socio-economic and global
environmental trends on biodiversity and ecosystem services is needed to help
develop more informative scenarios for addressing environmental and human
development challenges. To overcome these challenges coupled natural-human
systems approaches and analyses are needed. These provide improved scenarios of
biodiversity and ecosystem services that couple the outputs of direct and
indirect drivers such as land use, invasive species, overexploitation,
biodiversity, environmental change, and pollution. The resulting models provide
a methodological state-of-the art that results in more accurate quantitative
assessments, better land use, and more effective ecosystem services. Employing
this methodology, this research, which involves an international collaboration
of scientists, develops a community-based, co-development approach to altering
farming practices in sub -Saharan Africa that are often linked to high rates of
soil erosion, decreasing soil quality, and increasing use of agrochemicals, all
of which have negative impacts on humans and the environment through increased
pollution and decreased biodiversity and water quality, using farming in Malawi
as a test case. Previous research has shown that, when combined with
participatory education, agroecological farming methods result in improved food
security, nutrition, soil, and human health. Such practices include legume
intercropping, composting, and mulching. However, little is known how these
practices influence biodiversity and ecosystem services in Africa and if the
practices simultaneously enhance agroecosystem and community resilience. This
research addresses knowledge gaps in this topic area and engages decision-makers
in participatory research that has the potential to shape agricultural policies
at various scales. In this project, teams of farmer-researchers and research
scientists explore how agroecological and different land use practices impact
biodiversity (bees, birds, and natural enemies), ecosystem services, and farmer
livelihoods. Resulting empirical data are used to parameterize scenarios of
potential land use and gauge whether agroecological practices buffer loss of
biodiversity. Broader impacts of the work include international collaboration
between US scientists and those in 5 other countries, two of which are in sub-
Saharan Africa (Malawi, Kenya, Germany, Norway, and Canada). For this project,
each country funds the scientific component carried out by its own scientists.
Impacts also include significant public outreach on the results of this research
to stakeholders from sectors such as government, industry, and farmer
cooperatives. In addition, there is student and postdoc training in
international transdisciplinary research and support of an investigator whose
gender is underrepresented in the sciences. Other impacts include societal
impacts such as increasing and improving food security and ecosystems services
in countries with large and growing, low-income, agrarian, populations
experiencing serious environmental changes due to global warming and problematic
agricultural and cultural land-use practices, each of which can result in
political instability. The work also promotes a more sustainable environment via
improved agricultural practices and awareness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
supports US researchers participating in a project competitively selected by a
coalition of 26 funding agencies from 23 countries through the Belmont Forum
call for proposals on "Scenarios of Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services". The
call was a multilateral initiative designed to support research projects that
contribute to the development of scenarios, models, and decision-support tools
for understanding and solving critical issues facing our planet. The goal of the
competition was to improve and apply participatory scenario methods to enhance
research relevance and its acceptance and to address gaps in methods for
modelling impact drivers and policy interventions. It was also to develop and
communicate levels of uncertainty associated with the models, to improve data
accessibility and fill gaps in knowledge. Using this methodology, the research
addresses biodiversity conservation, ecosystem services, and improvements in
food security under scenarios of land-use change in the Global South, using
farming in Malawi as a case study. Research questions include: (1) can
agroecological practices at multiple spatial scales buffer the loss of
biodiversity and ecosystem services under current and future land use scenarios
in Malawi; (2) are there breakpoints of landscape-level agroecological adoption
above which biodiversity and ecosystem services are maximally retained; (3) do
social roles (e.g., class, gender, health status) and/or key macro social forces
(e.g., agricultural policies, extension services, international agreements)
influence agroecological use and related measures of household and community
resilience under low-income smallholder farmer conditions; (4) can participatory
scenario planning approaches enhance long-term community resilience and
biodiversity under different land use scenarios and anticipated climate change
impacts; and (5) do new institutional and policy frameworks enable the use of
agroecological practices to reduce biodiversity loss, sustain ecosystem services
and improve climate change adaptation. These issues are addressed by coupling
socio-economic and biodiversity dynamics via engaging farmer-researchers who
directly measure biodiversity and ecosystem services. Work is done in close
collaboration with an interdisciplinary team of research scientists including
ecologists, sociologists, public health professionals, geographers,
entomologists, and economists. Resulting empirical findings are used to craft
and model multiple scenarios of future land use and land use changes to
determine impacts on biodiversity, ecosystem services, food security and farmer
livelihoods. These finding are then used to determine how impacts vary, based on
the degree of agroecological practices used, across the region. Components of
the work include participatory geographic information system (GIS) and scenario
planning to determine future ecological behavior and projected and desired
outcomes of land use. Project goals are to minimize the need for fossil-fuel
based agricultural inputs; mimic, as much as possible, natural systems and their
resilience; and integrate social priorities into behavior practices to address
income, human nutrition, food security and human
health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.