* 1852132
* REU Site: Rose-Hulman Undergraduate Research Experience in Mathematics
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2019,05/31/2023
* Dennis Tarrant, Rose-Hulman Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Tiziana Giorgi
* 05/31/2023
* USD 243,983.00

The "REU Site: Rose-Hulman Undergraduate Research Experience in Mathematics"
builds on the successes of the REU program at Rose-Hulman Institute of
Technology, with a greater emphasis on providing a strong research experience
for students who would otherwise not have access to similar opportunities. More
specifically, this REU program will concentrate in recruiting locally to
cultivate talent in the Midwest region, especially from underrepresented
minority groups. Each summer, eight or nine undergraduate students will work on
research projects in various areas of mathematics. After completion of the
eight-week program, the students will have had a taste of mathematical research,
in terms of successes and frustrations, and will be well-poised to decide
whether to pursue further study and a career as a research mathematician or in
other STEM professions. Students will also gain training in necessary
professional skills, such as mathematical writing and oral presentation skills
through workshops offered throughout the summer. Participants will be encouraged
to maintain contact with faculty members for mentorship as they continue along
their professional careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Each summer, two or three
faculty members will each mentor a group of three or four undergraduate students
in mathematical research. The teams will work on problems from areas including
mathematical biology, financial mathematics, cryptography, and topology. The
problems are accessible without a need for extensive background, and many use
computational software to generate examples and conjectures, then follow up with
analysis, proof, and generalization. Participants complete a technical report,
give several formal presentations, and most give one or more presentations at
conferences or their home institutions after the program ends. Specific topics
will vary year-to-year, but may include 1) predicting and understanding RNA
structures from context-free grammars, 2) discrete logarithms and security, 3)
topological properties of spatial embeddings of graphs, 4) RNA secondary
structure matching models, 5) data analysis on utilizing mobile payments data in
developing countries to enhance social mobility. The website for the program is
available at: http://www.rose-hulman.edu/mathREU/.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.