* 1852946
* Methane isotopologue fractionation during microbial methanogenesis and methonotrophy by pure and mixed laboratory cultures
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Shuhei Ono, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 07/31/2024
* USD 302,538.00

Methane is both an alternative energy source and a strong greenhouse gas. It is
important to understand its sources and sinks for the future of our energy and
environment. A group of microbes, called methanogens, is the major source of
methane to the atmosphere as well as to methane hydrates in deep sediments.
Methane is composed of one C and four H atoms. Each has two isotopes, 13C/12C
and D/H, respectively. Microbial methane is often depleted in heavy isotopes of
carbon and hydrogen as well as a doubly substituted isotopologue (13CH3D)
because of the different reactivity of isotopologues (isotope substituted
molecules). In this project, investigators will carry out a series of laboratory
experiments, including bioelectrochemical systems and co-cultures, to examine
the major control of methane isotopologue fractionations by methanogenic
microbes. The goal is to construct a unified model that links isotopologue
ratios of microbial methane to environmental and physiological parameters, in
order to develop methane isotopologue ratios as a diagnostic tool for its
source. The project will support a graduate student, and promotes partnership
between the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Aerodyne Research Inc. The
laboratory of the investigator will participate in K-12 outreach programs to
demonstrate microbial fuel cells and the use of isotopes in biogeochemistry.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Carbon and hydrogen isotope ratios have been widely used
to trace the origin of methane in the environment. In addition to bulk isotope
ratios, the abundance of doubly substituted methane isotopologues (13CH3D) has
been proposed as a gauge of methane formation temperature. While these proxies
are used as a tool to fingerprint the source(s) of methane, they often yield
data that are inconsistent with other geochemical parameters. This proposed
research aims to identify the major control(s) of methane isotopologue
fractionation during microbial methanogenesis and methanotrophy from a series of
controlled laboratory culture experiments using 1) bioelectrochemical systems
under well-defined redox potentials, 2) co-cultures of sulfate reducing bacteria
and methanogens, and 3) cultures of aerobic and anaerobic methanotrophs. Four
isotopologue compositions of methane (12CH4, 13CH4, 12CH3D, &amp; 13CH3D) will
be measured by a novel tunable infrared laser direct absorption spectroscopy
(TILDAS) instrument. Investigators will test the hypotheses that the rate of
methanogenesis or methanotrophy and the redox potential of the environment,
rather than the pathway, impart the major control on isotopologue fractionation,
and whether isotopologue equilibrium requires anaerobic oxidation of methane or
other specific microbial community structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.