* 1852511
* REU Site: Chemistry Function, Application, Structure and Theory (FAST): Research Experiences for Undergraduates in Chemistry and Biochemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Stefan France, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 08/31/2023
* USD 346,545.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site award to Georgia
Institute of Technology, located in Atlanta, GA, supports the training of 10
undergraduate students for 10 weeks during the summers of 2020-2022. This
program, funded by the Division of Chemistry engages participants in chemistry
research related to Function, Application, Structure, and Theory (FAST). Each
undergraduate participant works with an individual faculty member who has an
active research group in a thematic area of interest. Other components of the
program include team-building activities, regular group meetings, a
seminar/workshop series, research symposia, an emphasis on developing a
professional social media presence, and field trips to industrial and/or
government laboratories. These activities serve to acquaint participants with a
broad array of projects, provide them with the opportunity to enhance their
presentation skills, and provide a perspective on chemical research in a
scholarly, entrepreneurial, economic, and ethical framework. Ultimately, this
site promotes the growth of a diverse, well-trained chemistry
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research projects available for participants
span the chemical sciences space. Some of the projects include the study of
mechanisms of heme trafficking and signaling, click chemistry in the development
of functional materials, electronic structure theory, and mass spectrometry-
based protein analysis. The non-research activities provide participants with
professional development and training on a variety of topics, including ethics,
presentation skills, and research frontiers. This site emphasizes recruitment of
students from underrepresented groups in chemistry and provides them with the
skills and motivation to embark upon careers in
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.