* 1852220
* REU Site: Ocean Coastal Zone Sustainability through University of Southern California Wrigley Institute for Environmental Studies
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Karla Heidelberg, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 02/29/2024
* USD 397,916.00

The University of Southern California's Wrigley Institute of Environmental
Science will host a Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site that will
provide eight students with a ten-week active learning experience each summer
for three years. Students will spend several days at the start of the summer at
the USC University Park Campus (UPC) in Los Angeles for orientation, training
and project development, then will move to the USC Wrigley Marine Science Center
(WMSC) on Catalina Island where they will conduct a summer research project in
collaboration with faculty, other students and staff. They will then return to
the UPC campus at the end of the summer to participate in a joint undergraduate
research symposium. In addition to research training, students will participate
in targeted professional development including training in science
communication, research ethics, the graduate school and job application process,
and networking in the marine sciences. Students will also have opportunities to
take on leadership roles in large-scale outreach activities for other
undergraduates, high school students, and the general public conducted by the
USC Wrigley Institute on Catalina Island.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The WMSC REU Site
will provide a total of twenty-four undergraduates with internships over the
three-year period. The program conducts a national search for applicants and
seeks to engage students who are from schools with limited research
opportunities. Most of the funding provided supports student stipends, housing
and travel to attend the program. The range of potential research projects for
REU students at WMSC is highly varied with a general focus on ocean environments
at the land-ocean interface. Prior REU projects have been centered around
organismal biology, marine ecology, biogeochemical cycling, marine microbial
ecology, biology of invasive species, fisheries population ecology, trace
element chemistry, land use impacts, predator/prey studies, population genetics,
environmental contamination, and organism toxicity. Through these types of
research experiences paired with specific skills training sessions, students
will gain an understanding of interactions between land and coastal oceans
processes. This project supports national goals of developing the next
generation of scientists and the scientific workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.