* 1852447
* REU Site:  Developing a Clean Energy Future with Underserved Students
* ENG,EEC
* 04/15/2019,03/31/2024
* Nathaniel Deskins, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 03/31/2024
* USD 347,826.00

The transition from fossil fuels to sustainable energy is needed to address
environmental problems facing the world and generate significant economic
growth. It requires training a new generation of scientists and engineers well
versed in renewable energy science and technology. This REU Site: Developing a
Clean Energy Future with Underserved Students at Worcester Polytechnic Institute
(WPI) will support training of ten students per year for three years in clean
energy science and technology, and introduce them to future careers in the
renewable energy industry, non-for-profits and government sector, academic
research and STEM education. Strong emphasis will be placed on recruiting
students from traditionally disadvantaged groups: racial and ethnic minorities,
women, and students from low socioeconomic status communities. REU participants
will pursue independent research projects in biomass conversion to fuels, solar
energy, and energy efficient devices for high bandwidth communications. They
will join interdisciplinary research teams in the WPI Energy Research Group. In
addition to research, the REU will focus on professional development of the
participants, through weekly career development seminars and company visits.
Participating students will also take on mentorship roles and develop teaching
modules on renewable energy for high school students from Worcester Girls Inc.,
an organization empowering young women for success in STEM careers. This
experience will increase both REU and Girls, Inc. students' awareness of the
broader societal impacts of clean energy technology and of their potential for
bringing about positive change in their communities and society overall.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU Site will provide ten undergraduate students per
year research experiences in various aspects clean energy. The proposed projects
address current problems in areas such as biomass conversion, solar energy,
energy efficiency and photonic devices for reducing the energy consumption by
data centers and communications. A diverse cohort of participants with majority
coming from traditionally disadvantaged groups will be recruited with the help
of partner institutions: Central Massachusetts community colleges and several
minority-serving universities across the United States. In addition to research
opportunities, participants will benefit from mentorship and professional
development activities aimed at helping them explore careers in research,
industry and STEM education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.