* 1852312
* The 2019 Gordon Conference on Chloroplast Biotechnology
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/2019,06/30/2019
* Maureen Hanson, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 06/30/2019
* USD 8,000.00

This award supports partial funding of the third Gordon Research Conference on
Chloroplast Biotechnology. This conference would bring together an international
group to discuss scientific areas pertinent to chloroplast genetic engineering,
biotechnology and synthetic biology. The meeting is focused on investigations
and applications of plastid transformation and has four focal areas associated
with plastid engineering as follows: (1) expression of recombinant proteins for
industrial and pharmaceutical applications; (2) engineering the plastid genome
to improve photosynthetic efficiency and plant productivity; (3) engineering
novel pathways and structures into chloroplasts; (4) engineering novel agronomic
traits into chloroplasts with transgene containment. Th conference accommodates
a diverse group of graduate students, postdoctoral scientists, new investigators
and a high quality of experts from the US and abroad. This conference has a
reputation for attracting a good mix of young investigators and senior
scientists and there is a good record of attendance by graduate students and
postdoctoral scientists. The GRC on Chloroplast Biotechnology will be held in
January 2019 at Ventura Beach Marriott, Ventura, CA, USA.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Gordon Research Conference on Chloroplast
Biotechnology is particularly timely in bringing together a growing community of
scientists combining fundamental studies on chloroplast molecular biology with
applications in agriculture, industrial biotechnology and healthcare. GRC
fosters an open spirit of sharing and actively promotes the dissemination of new
information. All speakers convey unpublished and cutting-edge information to
their colleagues with the objective that this disclosure will stimulate
extensive discussion among all attendees and progressively advance the
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This conference is co-funded by the Systems and
Synthetic Biology cluster in the Division of Molecular and Cellular Bioscience
and the Plant Genome Research Program in the Division of Integrative Organismal
Systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.