* 1852088
* The Importance of the Size and Distribution of Mantle Heterogeneities to the Interpretation of Isotope Ratios and Trace Element Abundances in Basalts
* GEO,OCE
* 04/15/2019,03/31/2023
* Yan Liang, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 03/31/2023
* USD 357,436.00

Oceanic islands such as Hawaii are formed by volcanic eruptions. Magmas that
feed the volcanos are produced by partial melting in the interior of the Earth.
Oceanic basalts, which are sampled at oceanic islands and along mid-ocean ridges
on the seafloor, provide important clues to understanding the composition of the
inaccessible Earth and the processes and time scales of magma generation and
transport in the mantle. A fundamental observation in geochemistry is that the
source regions of oceanic basalts in the mantle are heterogeneous and consist of
chemically and lithologically distinct domains of variable size and
distribution. Partial melting of such heterogeneous mantle sources gives rise to
a diverse range of basaltic magmas erupted on the surface. The size and
distribution of mantle heterogeneities are unknown, but may have played an
important role in controlling chemical variations observed in basalts. One of
the long-standing problems of geochemistry is the mapping of heterogeneities
observed in basalts into the chemical and lithological heterogeneities in the
mantle source. Such a mapping is nonlinear and its mathematical expression is
unknown. The thesis of this project is to investigate how the size and
distribution of mantle heterogeneities affect the isotope ratios and trace
element abundances in oceanic basalts. Results from this project will enable
geochemists to establish the nonlinear mapping between basalts and their mantle
sources. The project would advance STEM education by providing research
opportunities for undergraduate students and by developing of a competitive STEM
workforce through training of graduate students and postdoc scholar.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary objectives of this proposed study are (1) to
find the functional forms for the nonlinear mapping between basalts and their
mantle sources; (2) to develop a framework for understanding and interpreting
variations in isotope ratios and trace element abundances in spatially and
temporally associated oceanic basalts; and (3) to test the new models through
selected case studies where temporal or spatial geochemical data are available.
To establish the nonlinear mapping, one needs to know the nature of
heterogeneity (chemical vs. lithological, size and distribution), the style of
melting (batch vs. fractional), the process of melt migration (channelized vs.
grain-scale porous flow), and the extent of chemical disequilibrium between
residual minerals and the percolating melt. Time and spatial variables will be
added to the widely used melting models in the geochemical literature. These
time-dependent melting models will enable geochemists to systematically study
the roles of the size and distribution of heterogeneities in the mantle source
in controlling the variations of isotope ratios and incompatible trace element
abundances in extracted melts. Two-dimensional models will be constructed using
the one-dimensional time-dependent melting models. These physically more
realistic models will be used to examine variations of Sr-Nd-Hf-Pb isotope and
selected incompatible trace element ratios in mid-ocean ridge basalts and ocean
island basalts. An important outcome of the proposed work is a set of new
interpretation tools to petrologists and geochemists in their studies of
spatially and temporally correlated mantle and mantle-derived
samples.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.