* 1852133
* REU Site:  Raptor Research 'Soaring Higher'
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2023
* James Belthoff, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 03/31/2023
* USD 231,707.00

This REU Site award to Boise State University, located in Boise, ID, will
support the training of 9 students per year for 10 weeks during the summers of
2019 - 2020. This award is supported by the Department of Defense in partnership
with NSF and the NSF Division of Biological Infrastructure. Research is
conducted in study sites throughout southern Idaho including in the Morley
Nelson Snake River Birds of Prey National Conservation Area. The REU-Raptor
Research Site partners faculty from Boise State University's Raptor Research
Center with scientists from the Peregrine Fund, Intermountain Bird Observatory,
US Geological Survey and other agencies with expertise in the study of birds of
prey. Students focus research on hawks, falcons, eagles, and owls to investigate
biological questions related to species interactions, behavior, physiology,
population dynamics, ecosystem function, and potential effects of climate change
and anthropogenic influences on animal systems. Under the guidance of
experienced mentors, students have the choice of field or laboratory projects
and may focus on basic or applied aspects of raptor biology. Students also
participate in a core program focused on responsible conduct of research and
animal handling. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is anticipated that 18 students,
primarily from schools with limited research opportunities, will be trained in
the program. Focus is also on broadening participation in STEM by engaging
members of underrepresented groups, veterans, and first generation college
students. Students will learn how research is conducted, and most will present
the results of their work at scientific conferences. Participants also benefit
from workshops focused on the publication process, scientific communication, and
applying to graduate school and fellowships. The REU program culminates with
participation at a statewide undergraduate research conference, providing for
networking with other undergraduate researchers and university, government, and
STEM industry professionals. A common web-based assessment tool used by all REU
Site programs funded by the Division of Biological Infrastructure will be used
to determine the effectiveness of the training program. Students will be tracked
after the program to determine their career paths. Students will be asked to
respond to an automatic email sent via the NSF reporting system. More
information about REU-Raptor Research is available by visiting
https://biology.boisestate.edu/reu/ or by contacting the PI (Dr. Jim Belthoff at
jbeltho@boisestate.edu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.