* 1852213
* REU Site: Research for Undergraduates Summer Institute of Statistics at Oregon State University -- RUSIS@OSU
* MPS,DMS
* 05/15/2019,02/28/2022
* Javier Rojo, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Tiziana Giorgi
* 02/28/2022
* USD 380,001.00

The Research for Undergraduates Summer Institute of Statistics at Oregon State
University (RUSIS@OSU) is the continuation of a successful (AMS award-winning)
summer REU site. The underlying motivation for the Institute is to attract more
students into graduate work in the Mathematical and Statistical Sciences, and
facilitate their transition into research work at a time when demand for human
resources with data analytic skills easily exceeds the supply. RUSIS @OSU will
recruit selected underrepresented minority students and students with no easy
access to a research experience at their institutions, including students from
Community Colleges, Tribal Colleges, Historically Black Colleges (HBCUs) and
Hispanic Serving Institutions (HSIs), with the specific goal of mentoring and
training them for careers in research in the mathematical sciences and more
specifically in Statistics. RUSIS@OSU will prepare students to compete globally
in a vibrant world where data-driven decisions are becoming more prominent in
all human endeavors. While the program has been successful in motivating and
enticing students to pursue graduate careers in the statistical sciences, it
also provides the necessary tools for students to join the workforce in a wide
range of professional positions. From academic jobs, to jobs in the
pharmaceutical companies, private industry, government agencies and national
laboratories, professional sports as data analysts, and climate scientists, the
job outlook for statisticians and data scientists is excellent.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of the summer at RUSIS@OSU are accomplished
through the following mechanisms: (1) an intensive short course in probability
and statistics and an intensive seminar in computation. In addition, topics in
stochastic processes, and statistical inference, with special emphasis on areas
of current interest will be discussed; (2) engaging the students in research
projects from areas of current interest. Statistical thinking is ubiquitous in
every aspect of modern life. Data Mining, Big Data, Data Analytics, Knowledge
Discovery are terms that have been coined in the past to denote essentially the
same thing: activities related to the extraction of information from data to
advance science, technology, and society. Through mentoring and supervision by
faculty, the students develop skills that will help them during graduate school
and their graduate research stages; (3) the students, motivated by current
interest in the development of new methodologies to respond to needs in high
dimensional data analyses, will engage in research projects that will be
selected from areas of current applied and theoretical interest (e.g. multiple
comparisons, dimension reduction, random matrices, extreme value theory,
multivariate survival analysis, statistical genetics, massive data
methodologies, and modeling of the power grid and other complex urban
infrastructures). Autonomous systems (e.g. autonomous cars) that make use of
statistical techniques such as pattern recognition, statistical learning, and
dimension reduction methodologies provide interesting problems; (4) students
will present their results at national meetings and they will be mentored in the
preparation and presentation of their talks. Short courses in LaTeX, and
software used for research purposes (Mathematica, MatLab, R) will be taught; (5)
visits to scientific facilities (e.g., Linus Pauling Institute @ OSU) will be
organized; (6) the progress of students for seven years (expected time for them
to finish graduate school) after their participation will be monitored and
annual evaluation of the program by the participating students and an external
advisory committee will take place.&lt;br/&gt;More details about the REU Site
are avaialble at
https://stat.oregonstate.edu/rusis@OSU&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.