* 1852303
* REU Site: Program in Nanotechnology for Biology and Bioengineering
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Denis Wirtz, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/29/2024
* USD 502,328.00

This REU Site award to Johns Hopkins University, located in Baltimore, Maryland,
will support training of 14 students for 10 weeks during the summers of
2019-2021. This award is supported by the Department of Defense in partnership
with the NSF REU program and the Division of Biological Infrastructure (DBI) in
the Directorate for Biological Sciences and the Division of Engineering
Education and Centers (EEC) in the Directorate for Engineering. The REU program
will provide undergraduate students with a challenging research experience in
the rapidly growing area of nanobiotechnology, a discipline at the interface of
biology, chemistry, physics, materials science, and engineering. REU research
focuses on engineering for cancer therapies, stem cells and regenerative
engineering, and diagnostic tools engineered for early detection. In addition to
research, the REU program includes oral and poster presentations, scientific
seminars, journal club, communication seminars, field trips to
industry/government partners, and multiple social activities. Students are
required to complete Responsible Conduct of Research training and lab safety
training before starting research. Underrepresented minorities, students from
institutions with limited research opportunities, first generation students,
students from families with a low to moderate income, and students with
disabilities are encouraged to apply. Students apply online and are selected by
an admissions committee of faculty reviewers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is
anticipated that a total of 42 students, primarily from schools with limited
research opportunities, will be trained in the program. The overall objective of
this program is to provide REU students with a truly unique educational
experience, with the research experience at the core, while at the same time
serving as an ideal foundation for future graduate
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A common web-based assessment tool, SALG URSSA,
used by all REU Site programs funded by the Division of Biological
Infrastructure will be used to determine the effectiveness of the training
program. Students will be tracked after the program to determine their career
paths. Students will be asked to respond to an automatic email sent via the NSF
reporting system. More information about the program is available by visiting
https://inbt.jhu.edu/education/undergraduate/nanobio-reu/, or by contacting the
PI (Dr. Denis Wirtz at wirtz@jhu.edu) or the co-PI (Dr. Efrosini Kokkoli at
kokkoli@jhu.edu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.