* 1852680
* Collaborative Research: Melange-peridotite Interactions In The Source of Arc Magmas
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2023
* Mark Behn, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 03/31/2023
* USD 79,579.00

Subduction zones are tectonic boundaries where water-rich oceanic plates sink
back into the Earth's deep interior. This process is associated with a large
array of geological hazards such as magnitude 9 megathrust earthquakes and
explosive arc volcanism. Today, millions of people live in areas that are
potentially exposed to subduction zone hazards, including large regions of
Cascadia and Alaska. However, the mechanisms by which water-rich rocks are
transferred from the down-going plate (slab) into the Earth's interior, and the
consequences of this transfer process on geological hazards, remain largely
unknown. The best rock samples to study material transfer in subduction zones
are unique rocks called melanges ('mixed' rocks) that come from the top of the
slab. Although largely overlooked in most subduction zone models, these rocks
may play a significant role in the generation of arc lavas, and strongly
influence the geodynamics of subduction zones. This project will combine high-
pressure, high-temperature laboratory experiments on melange materials with
numerical modeling to quantify this transfer process in the Earth's interior.
This transformative and interdisciplinary approach will provide novel
constraints on the role of melanges in the development of subduction zone
hazards, as well as training opportunities for graduate, undergraduate, and K-12
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Conventional models of subduction zones predict
that trace element fractionations observed in arc magmas occur during two
distinct events: (a) dehydration and release of fluids from altered oceanic
crust, and (b) partial melting of sediments at the slab-mantle interface.
However, no previous experimental studies have reproduced the chemistry of arc
magmas by simulating this conventional model. By contrast, other studies argue
that fluids, sediments, and serpentinized wedge mix together at the slab-mantle
interface to form melanges, which are hybrid rocks composed of blocks of altered
oceanic crust and sediments, mixed with serpentinized peridotite. As the slab
descends, melanges formed at the top of the slab may partially melt and produce
trace element fractionation typical of arc magmas directly at the slab-mantle
interface. Alternatively, melanges may rise from the slab-mantle interface as
solid diapirs and partially melt during their ascent, delaying the onset of
trace element fractionation. In both scenarios, melange melts would react with
the peridotite mantle wedge on their way to the surface, combining their
chemical characteristics with that of the mantle. This project will combine a
series of high-pressure, high-temperature experiments with numerical modeling to
investigate the chemical and physical behavior of natural melange rocks in
subduction zones. The combined experimental and modeling results will provide a
transformative approach to assess the role of melanges in subduction zone
magmatism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.