* 1852351
* Collaborative Research: REU Site: Solar and Alternative Technologies
* ENG,EEC
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Jennifer Cribbs, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 02/29/2024
* USD 13,464.00

The Collaborative Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site: Solar and
Alternative Technologies (SALT) will be hosted by the University of Tulsa to
encourage undergraduate students to pursue further studies in alternative energy
technologies. Among the many issues with fossil fuels are the exhaustion of
conventional sources, pollution and water consumption during production, and
greenhouse gases formed during burning. Although new sources of fossil fuels are
being found and cleaner extraction techniques are being developed, alternatives
to fossil fuels are needed that produce fewer greenhouse gases. The overarching
goal of the REU's research projects is to advance knowledge and understanding of
alternative technologies while reducing dependence on fossil fuels for the
production of energy, fuel, clean water, and/or materials. This REU supports the
education of students from institutions with few research opportunities,
particularly for under-represented groups and first-generation college students.
Students will be actively recruited from 2- and 4-year regional institutions in
the EPSCOR states Arkansas, Kansas, Missouri, and Oklahoma, as well as through
the national networks of the Oklahoma Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority
Participation and American Indian Science and Engineering Society chapters. The
students will be mentored throughout their summer research to encourage them to
continue their studies in graduate work, with a goal of broadening their
representation in academic research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Solar and
Alternative Technologies Research Experiences for Undergraduates Site will
involve undergraduate students in summer research projects for 10 weeks
developing fuel, catalysts, power, clean water, and plastics from renewable
sources or using renewable energy. The projects include water desalination and
the production of microalgal biofuel, biocatalysts, and nanoellipsoids. More
than half of the projects focus on solar energy, ranging from a new way to
produce silicon, to the effects of fluid flow patterns on energy production, to
the matching of energy resources and needs to create a micro-grid for local
energy needs. The undergraduate students will learn about responsible conduct of
research, environmental ethics, technical communication through journal articles
and oral presentations, and posting about research on social media. Students
will give two progress presentations and a final oral report and prepare a final
written formal report, similar to a journal article. Tours will include local
hydroelectric, solar, wind, geothermal, and waste-to-energy facilities. The goal
of the REU is to encourage under-represented groups in the pursuit of graduate
studies by mentoring them in undergraduate research. The University of Tulsa
will collaborate with Oklahoma State University to evaluate the REU student
experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.