* 1852543
* REU Site: Chemical Research Using X-Ray Characterization (CRUX)
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Andrienne Friedli, Middle Tennessee State University
* Continuing Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 08/31/2023
* USD 254,339.00

This REU site award to Middle Tennessee State University, located in
Murfreesboro, TN, supports the training of 8 students for 9 weeks during the
summers of 2020-2022. This program, funded by the Divisions of Chemistry and
Materials Research, engages undergraduate participants in research projects
centered around X-ray characterization methods. X-ray crystallography is a
technique that is used to identifying the atomic and molecular structure of a
crystal. The X-rays change direction on interacting with the atoms in the
molecules. By measuring the angles and intensities of these "diffracted" x-ray
beams, the researchers produce three-dimensional pictures of the molecules in
the crystal. While performing research under the guidance of faculty-mentors,
participants interact during twice weekly activities that include technical
workshops, professional development, social events, and field trips. Ultimately,
the CRUX REU site advances chemical research while preparing a diverse group of
participants for graduate school or STEM careers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Participants pursue fundamental chemical research projects
requiring synthesis of new materials and their characterization with analytical
tools, including X-ray diffraction methods. Participants study materials
including organic heterocycles with biological activity; non-precious metal
organometallic catalysts; new semiconductor nanocrystals formed upon cation
exchange; highly polar liquid crystals with boron cluster cores; and Clp
proteins and their complexes. This site places an emphasis on recruiting
underrepresented minority students and enhancing diversity in the STEM
workforce. The associated workshops feature the theoretical basis for and
practical aspects of X-ray data analysis. Students also learn technical, data
analysis, career-building and scientific communication
skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.