* 1852890
* STEM Pre-Service Teacher Scholars Program with Special Training to Support English  Language Learners
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Thomas Smith, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* John Haddock
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,449,943.00

With support from the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce), this
Track 1: Scholarships and Stipends project at the University of California,
Riverside aims to address the local need for high-quality STEM teachers in high-
need school districts. This project plans to recruit, support, and prepare 53
undergraduates to become certified teachers in highly needed STEM areas such as
chemistry and physics. These Noyce Scholars will be able to speak both English
and Spanish and will be trained in effective teaching practices for English
language learners. It will also measure the self-efficacy and motivation of new
STEM Teacher Scholars, as well as their teaching quality, placement, and
retention in high need school districts/classrooms. This STEM Teacher Scholar
recruitment and training project is designed to meet the needs of the local
community. Results of the project will inform national models for improving STEM
teaching and learning, especially for English language learners, addressing a
vital need to serve the growing national population of underserved
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is designed to achieve the following
goals: recruit, educated, and credential 53 Scholars, including five who have
transferred to the University from community colleges; prepare teachers from
STEM disciplines for which there is an acute need for teachers; create a
pipeline of undergraduate STEM teachers from the University and regional
community colleges; and prepare teachers to effectively deliver 21st century
STEM instruction in high-need school district classrooms with a large proportion
of English Language Learners. This project creates strong collaborations between
the University of California, Riverside, and three regional community colleges:
Riverside City College, Norco College, and Moreno Valley College, to recruit and
train STEM students to become teachers. Recruitment of Scholars will focus on
the following STEM majors: life sciences, mathematical sciences, physical
sciences, and engineering, with a preference for chemistry and physics majors
(content areas of greatest shortage in the region). Undergraduate Scholars will
participate in Val Verde Unified School District's English language learners
professional development program. The project has the potential to serve as a
national model for producing STEM teachers with expertise in STEM subject matter
and pedagogy, and who are fully responsive to the needs of students who are
English language learners. The Noyce Program supports talented STEM
undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers
and experienced, exemplary K-12 STEM teachers to become STEM master teachers in
high-need school districts. It also supports research on the persistence,
retention, and effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.