* 1852060
* Belmont Forum Collaborative Research: Understanding and managing the Impacts of Invasive alien species on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services
* GEO,RISE
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2024
* Cascade Sorte, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 04/30/2024
* USD 90,000.00

Innovative research on the complex interaction of socio-economic and global
environmental trends on biodiversity and ecosystem services is needed to help
develop more informative scenarios for addressing environmental and human
development challenges. To overcome these challenges coupled natural-human
systems approaches and analyses are needed. These provide improved scenarios of
biodiversity and ecosystem services that couple the outputs of direct and
indirect drivers such as land use, invasive species, overexploitation,
biodiversity, environmental change, and pollution. The resulting models provide
a methodological state-of-the art that results in more accurate quantitative
assessments, better land use, and more effective ecosystem services. Employing
this methodology, this research, which is an international coalition between US
scientists and those from four European nations, seeks to predict new invasions
of terrestrial plants and marine organisms that are linked to climate change in
North America and Europe ecosystems. This is important because invasive alien
species are significant drivers of species extinction and ecosystem degradation.
Thus, their introduction into a new environment, almost always, negatively
impacts ecosystem services and human well-being. This research targets climate
change as a driver because there is now significant documentation that a large
number of species' ranges are shifting in response to warming temperatures. This
creates a type of invasion that is different from that caused by physical
transportation via anthropological or other means. Prevention and/or containment
of new species invasions is the first and most effective stage of invasive
species management. However, it is only effective if potential invaders can be
identified and prioritized for management before they arrive. Goals of this
research are to identify likely terrestrial plan and marine organism species
invasions and develop scenarios to prevent them via a participatory process that
brings together scientists and stakeholders. Results of the work will include a
searchable database of potential invaders and their probable ecological and
socio-economic impacts to help managers and policymakers to prioritize high-risk
species for intervention. Broader impacts of the work include research that
supports proactive regulation and management of problematic alien invasive
species, particularly those expected to invade and spread across the United
States and Europe, as the climate changes. Broader impacts of the work include
international collaboration between the US and France, Germany, Spain, and
Switzerland. Each country will fund the component of the work carried out by its
scientists. The project has strong societal benefits because invasive species
have serious impacts economically and environmentally, as well as in terms of
ecosystems and different regions maintaining beneficial biodiversity. Results of
the project will help policy makers, industry, and other interested parties
better understand possible implications of such invasions and more effectively
and efficiently explore possible mitigation practices and policies. The Program
notes the project is attentive to gender issues and the impact it has on
broadening participation by having a gender-balanced team (4 female and 4 male
PIs). It also has a strong transdisciplinary student training
component.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports US researchers participating
in a project competitively selected by a coalition of 26 funding agencies from
23 countries through the Belmont Forum call for proposals on "Scenarios of
Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services". The call was a multilateral initiative
designed to support research projects that contribute to the development of
scenarios, models, and decision-support tools for understanding and solving
critical issues facing our planet. The goal of the competition was to improve
and apply participatory scenario methods to enhance research relevance and its
acceptance and to address gaps in methods for modelling impact drivers and
policy interventions. It was also to develop and communicate levels of
uncertainty associated with the models, to improve data accessibility and fill
gaps in knowledge. Using this methodology, this research seeks to understand and
anticipate the multi-faceted impacts of invasive alien species on biodiversity
and ecosystem services and to provide tools for their management. The US
component of this international collaboration focuses on predicting impacts of
alien invasive and native range-shifting species. Tasks include the creation of
a database of the ecological and socio-economic impacts of 100 terrestrial
plants and 250 marine species. Data will be supplemented with additional
empirical data from field experiments of high priority, yet presently
understudied, invasive aquatic species. The resulting data will be used, in
conjunction with an existing international protocol (the Environmental Impact
Classification of Alien Taxa; EICAT), to examine the potential impacts of
invasive terrestrial plants and marine organisms on native communities,
agricultural systems, and human health. The assessment protocol will be adapted
to consider both detrimental and beneficial impacts. Spatial planning tools will
be used to evaluate the costs and benefits of different management and policy
scenarios for preventing and mitigating invasions. Results of the analysis will
be used to develop scenarios and models of biodiversity and ecosystem services
to inform resource managers and policy makers about possible management of
invasive species across multiple ecosystems and geographic
scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.