* 1852783
* Developing Effective Mathematical Sciences School Teachers for High-Need Middle Schools
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2025
* Allen Pelley, Bethune-Cookman University
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Ellis
* 06/30/2025
* USD 939,804.00

With support from the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce), this
Track 1: Scholarships and Stipends project aims to serve the national need to
increase the number of highly effective mathematics teachers. This project will
be led by Bethune-Cookman University, one of the private Historically Black
Colleges and Universities in Florida, in partnership with Volusia and Flagler
County School Districts and the Boys &amp; Girls Club of Volusia County. The
overall goal of this five-year project is to support talented STEM undergraduate
majors to pursue mathematics middle school teaching careers at high-need schools
in the Daytona Beach area. To achieve this goal, the project plans to recruit 25
STEM majors and support them as they obtain dual degrees in a STEM discipline
and in mathematics education. To support robust recruitment, the project will
fund summer internships to enhance the interest of STEM majors in middle school
teaching. During their undergraduate years, the Scholars will receive financial
support, as well as have access to research experiences, mentoring and
advisement, and supplemental instruction and workshops. Following certification,
the Noyce Scholar Alumni will have access to supports such as in-service
workshops, mentoring, and field trips from Bethune-Cookman University, while
they participate in the Volusia or Flagler School District induction programs.
This project has the potential to serve as a model for recruitment, preparation,
and retention of middle school STEM teachers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
aims to improve the quality, quantity, and diversity of mathematics teachers in
Volusia County and Flagler County School Districts, and to build sustainable
models to address the teacher shortage by recruiting, preparing, and retaining
mathematics teachers. To achieve these goals, the project will award 20 two-year
scholarships and 5 one-year scholarships to STEM undergraduate majors who
demonstrate commitment to become middle school teachers of mathematics. STEM
majors supported by the project include mathematics, biology, chemistry,
computer engineering, computer science, and integrated environmental science.
Additionally, to stimulate the interest of first- and second-year STEM students
in K-12 teaching careers, the project will award forty internships to STEM
students. These 14-week internships will be organized in partnership with
Volusia and Flagler County School Districts and the Boys &amp; Girls Club of
Volusia County, and serve as a "preparatory academy" for recruiting students
into the scholarship component of the project. The internship will provide
students with instructional experiences in informal learning settings and help
students understand the competencies and skills required for highly qualified
teachers. The Noyce program supports talented STEM undergraduate majors and
professionals to become effective K-12 mathematics and science teachers in high-
need school districts and experienced, exemplary K-12 STEM teachers to become
STEM master teachers. It also supports research on the persistence, retention,
and effectiveness of K-12 teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.