* 1852438
* REU SITE:  Integrative approaches to studying recognition systems
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2022
* Philip Starks, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 03/31/2022
* USD 403,183.00

This REU (Research Experiences for Undergraduates) Site award to Tufts
University, located in Medford, MA, will support the training of 12 students for
10 weeks during the summers of 2019- 2021. The REU program, focused on
integrative approaches to studying recognition systems in cells, organisms, and
populations, will provide students the opportunity to work closely on
collaborative, interdisciplinary projects combining faculty expertise in
biochemistry, genetics, development, endocrinology, neurobiology, behavior,
ecology, and conservation. Students will work with two mentors to design and
conduct independent projects. In addition to research, the program includes
weekly discussions, seminars, field trips, and two student symposia. The goals
of this summer program are to increase student proficiency in biological
research and collaborative skills, to educate and inspire students toward future
research careers, and to develop student ability to effectively communicate
scientific results. Accordingly, seminars are focused on proficiency in
science/communication of results, scientific ethics and the responsible conduct
of research, and career development. Participants are selected from a broad
undergraduate applicant pool, and preference is given to students from
underrepresented groups and those who might not have research opportunities at
their home institution (e.g., community college
students).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is anticipated that a total of 36 students,
primarily from schools with limited research opportunities, will be trained in
the program. The Department of Biology has a long-standing commitment to
mentoring undergraduates in research, and a strong track record of highly
productive interdisciplinary research collaborations. Student-mentor
relationships typically extend long beyond the research experience and are
facilitated via electronic networking tools. Students will learn how research is
conducted, and many will present the results of their work at scientific
conferences and/or in scientific papers. A common web-based assessment tool used
by all REU programs funded by the Division of Biological Infrastructure
(Directorate for Biological Sciences) will be used to determine the
effectiveness of the training program. Students will be tracked after the
program in order to determine their career paths. Students will be asked to
respond to an automatic email sent via the NSF reporting system. More
information about the program is available by visiting
http://ase.tufts.edu/biology/undergraduate/research/reu.htm, or by contacting
Dr. Phil Starks at REU@tufts.edu.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.