* 1852285
* Unveiling the Role of Interstitial Flow in Angiogenesis through Phase-Field Simulations
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/15/2019,04/30/2024
* Hector Gomez, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 04/30/2024
* USD 322,107.00

The circulatory system has the daunting task of distributing oxygen and
nutrients to every cell in the body. The distribution of blood within the cells
of a tissue occurs in capillaries, the smallest vessels in the body. The
capillary beds usually remain stable, but they can be locally remodeled when
there are special needs for oxygen. The process whereby new blood vessels are
created from pre-existing ones is called angiogenesis. In humans, angiogenesis
happens during would healing, which is beneficial, as well as during the growth
of cancerous tumors. In cancer, malignant cells proliferate quickly, which
creates local hypoxia (low oxygen concentration). Under hypoxic conditions,
cancer cells release growth factors that reach the nearby vessels and trigger
angiogenesis. By recruiting new blood vessels, tumors can continue their growth.
Tumor-induced angiogenesis is governed by intertwined molecular mechanisms based
on the movement of molecules, known as tumor angiogenic factors, within the
tissue. While the biochemical signaling pathways that regulate angiogenesis have
been widely investigated, the role of biophysical cues remains poorly
understood. By introducing a unique computational method, this project will
study the impact of fluid flow on the transport of tumor angiogenic factors and
how the combined diffusion and flow-based movement of these molecules changes
angiogenesis. The impact of this work, which occurs at the interface of
engineering and biology, will be seen in applications to tumor drug delivery,
understanding tumor metastasis, and even the development of capillaries to
supply blood in tissue engineered structures for regenerative medicine. The
research broader impacts will be complemented by outreach and educational
activities, including the development of virtual reality animations that
simulate blood flow in capillaries that can be shown to younger students to
excite them about scientific computing as well as
physiology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is designed to develop a novel,
phase-field model of angiogenesis that will be coupled with high-fidelity fluid
flow theory that accounts for intravascular, transvascular and extravascular
flow on a time-evolving capillary network. This will be accomplished through 3
focuses for the simulations. First, the role of soluble as compared to matrix-
bound VEGF (vascular endothelial growth factor) will be explored to explain the
contradictory experimental evidence regarding the relationship between VEGF
transport and capillary development. Second, in vivo-like interstitial flow will
be modeled to elucidate the mechanisms involved with two-way coupled dynamics of
angiogenesis and interstitial flow. Finally, the effect of in vivo-like
interstitial flow on tumor angiogenesis will be modeled and compared to
previously determined experimental results. The scientific work will be
accompanied by the introduction of biofluid modules into a mechanical
engineering undergraduate course in fluid mechanics as well as the integration
of undergraduate students into the computational modeling research. In addition
to particpating directly in the research, the undergrads will be involved with
developing 3D virtual reality simulations using Oculus
Rift(TM).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.