* 1852488
* REU Site: Early research experience for undergraduates in coastal biology on Florida's first coast
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2019,06/30/2023
* James Gelsleichter, University of North Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 06/30/2023
* USD 366,773.00

The University of North Florida (UNF), located in Jacksonville, FL, will host a
Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site that will provide ten
students with a 10-week active learning experience each summer for three years.
The overall goal of the program is to enhance the training and career
development of early stage (rising Sophomores and Juniors) undergraduate
students who have not had prior research experience by engaging them in research
on coastal biology. The program includes a one-week orientation and one-on-one
mentoring for research projects. Students will also participate in professional
development activities, complete a formal writing assignment and give both an
oral and a poster presentation. Students will be encouraged to present their
research findings at professional conferences and/or in manuscripts submitted to
professional journals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The UNF REU Site will provide a
total of thirty undergraduates with research internships over the three-year
period. The program conducts a national search for applicants and seeks to
engage students who are from schools with limited research opportunities. Most
of the funding provided supports student stipends, housing and travel to attend
the program. The focus of potential research projects for REU students at UNF
includes growing threats to coastal ecosystems in Florida, such as anthropogenic
pollution, invasive species, harmful algal blooms, impacts to fisheries, and
habitat alteration. Students may also study basic physiology (e.g., ion exchange
mechanisms, patterns of gene expression) and/or ecology (e.g., food web
interactions, range shifts, hybridization) of coastal organisms in an effort to
understand, among other things, how anthropogenic changes to coastal habitats
alter these factors and influence coastal wildlife populations. Through their
mentored research experiences paired with specific skills training sessions,
students will gain an understanding of important issues in coastal biology and
coastal environmental system. This project supports national goals of developing
the next generation of scientists and the scientific
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.