* 1852269
* REU Site: Applied Physics at the University of South Florida
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2019,09/30/2023
* David Rabson, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 09/30/2023
* USD 388,312.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: The Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
site in Applied Physics offers a unique opportunity for undergraduate physics
majors nationwide to engage in research projects on the boundaries of physics,
mathematics, chemistry, biology, and materials science. The main objectives are:
(1) to involve the REU students in meaningful research, producing peer-reviewed
publications and presentations at (inter)national scientific conferences; (2) to
provide research opportunities, especially to students from underrepresented
groups; (3) to target students from institutions with limited research
opportunities (four- and two-year colleges); (4) to make a major impact on the
REU students' professional careers by helping them gain laboratory and computing
skills, familiarity with state-of-the-art research methods, critical thinking,
and oral and written presentation experience; (5) to enhance participants'
interest in and likelihood of admission to graduate school; (6) to engage
students in team-work through mentoring from faculty, post-doctoral scholars,
and graduate students; (7) to prepare undergraduate students for
scientific/engineering careers through workshops and seminars. Among these are a
participatory ethics workshop at the start of the summer and a seminar in
entrepreneurship led by a scientist with small-business experience. Many
participants in the Applied-Physics REU site continue with post-graduate study
in a science, technology, engineering, or mathematics field or find employment
in such an area directly after their bachelor's
degrees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Each participant spends the
summer embedded in a research group working with one of 14 participating faculty
mentors. Projects include the following: (1) ultrafast dynamical properties in
magnetic materials; (2) laser spectroscopy of biomaterials; (3) new materials
for energy-related applications; (4) hybrid magnetic nanoparticles for
nanomedicine applications; (5) fabrication of low-dimensional functional
electronic materials ; (6) theory of the electrocaloric effect in relaxor
ferroelectrics; (7) THz photonic phase modulation by polymeric micro-actuator
arrays; (8) control of cell-membrane shape by protein modules; (9) theory and
simulation of plastic avalanches in ductile polymer glasses; (10) data-driven
modeling of ion dynamics in neurological disorders; (11) real-time optical
metrology by direct measurement; (12) molecular-dynamics simulations of phase
transitions in diamond under extreme conditions; (13) smart-sensor technologies
for space research and aerospace applications; and (14) simulation of novel
magnetic ordering in quasiperiodic tilings. Students participate in weekly
scientific and career-development seminars and present their scientific findings
at mid-summer and again at the end.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.