* 1852141
* REU Site: Microbial Friends and Foes: Towards a Synthesis of Interspecific Interactions
* BIO,DBI
* 02/15/2019,09/30/2023
* Teresa Pawlowska, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 09/30/2023
* USD 548,215.00

This REU Site award to Cornell University, located in Ithaca, NY, will support
the training of 12 students for 10 weeks during the summers of 2019-2021. The
program focuses on host-microbe interactions and is hosted by the Cornell
Institute of Host-Microbe Interactions and Disease. Students will be trained in
concepts, research questions, and experimental approaches central to
understanding microbial interactions with eukaryotic hosts. REU participants
will obtain an immersive research experience through development, implementation
and analysis of an independent research project, weekly seminars, and peer group
discussions. Strong emphasis will be placed on the synthesis of concepts
explaining microbial interactions across diverse systems. Orientation activities
will include workshops devoted to research ethics, electronic database literacy,
use of science citation software, and building science communication skills.
Participants will receive mentoring in professional development focused on
planning for graduate school. Recruitment will focus on students with limited
access to research opportunities, and undergraduates from groups
underrepresented in science are encouraged to apply. Applications will be
collected through a web portal and participants will be selected in a two-step
review process by the program selection committee and potential mentors.
Acceptance will be based on academic record, research performance, and
motivation for future outstanding research in biology. Assessment measures will
include entry and exit interviews, student self-assesment, and the REU common
assessment tool. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is anticipated that a total of 36
students, primarily from schools with limited research opportunities, will be
trained. Students will learn how research is conducted by performing research
which can be presented at scientific conferences or contribute to publications.
Participants will gain knowledge and skills for applying to graduate school and
careers in science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A common web-based assessment tool used
by all REU Site programs funded by the Division of Biological Infrastructure
will be used to determine the effectiveness of the training program. Career
paths of participants will be tracked after the program. Students will be asked
to respond to an automatic email sent via the NSF reporting system. More
information about the program is available by visiting cihmid.cornell.edu/reu-
mff, or by contacting the PIs (Dr. Teresa Pawlowska at tep8@cornell.edu and Dr.
Tory Hendry at th572@cornell.edu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.