* 1852002
* REU Site: Research Experiences for Undergraduates Site on Internet of Things (IoT)
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2024
* Damla Turgut, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Jill Denner
* 04/30/2024
* USD 399,808.00

This funding renews the Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site on
Internet of Things (IoT) at the University of Central Florida. The
interdisciplinary field of IoT has the potential to revolutionize businesses,
improve human lives, and benefit society. Smart cities may solve problems of
rapid urban expansion; smart grids may increase the reliability of electrical
power delivery; and smart healthcare systems/devices may improve the quality and
longevity of human lives. The site will (1) broaden the participation of under-
represented groups; (2) provide opportunities for early career undergraduates
starting at the sophomore level; (3) train undergraduates from schools where
opportunities for research in IoT are limited, and (4) contribute to the
diversity of the future workforce. By directly interacting with faculty and
graduate students as well as with other professionals through the industry panel
and site visits, the students will have a better understanding of their future
careers in academia or in industry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The students will
conduct research in the applications of IoT in smart healthcare, smart cities,
smart grids, smart sensors, and data analytics. Each interdisciplinary research
project has two faculty mentors, of which at least one is a computer science
faculty. The curriculum includes presentations about the field of IoT as well as
the relevant tools of AI and machine learning, topic-specific research seminars
by the participating faculty, workshops on professional development and research
career opportunities. Each year, the program will conclude with a symposium and
poster presentation to highlight the research achievements of the
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.