* 1852010
* REU Site:  Research Experience for Undergraduates in Physics at Lehigh University
* MPS,PHY
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Volkmar Dierolf, Lehigh University
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 02/29/2024
* USD 438,714.00

This award supports the Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site at
Lehigh University, which will provide fourteen undergraduate students each
summer the opportunity to participate in ten weeks of research on topics in
astrophysics, atomic and molecular physics, biophysics, condensed matter
physics, optics, nanotechnology, plasma physics, and statistical physics. The
program involves research, weekly faculty seminars and lab tours, a student
symposium at the end of the summer, other professional development
opportunities, and various social functions that foster the interaction of
undergraduate students with faculty and graduate students. A group housing
arrangement greatly enhances both the academic and social experiences of the
participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Program participants gain research experience
at a critical point in their undergraduate careers, as well as an excellent
preview of graduate school. The students make significant contributions to a
wide range of research projects during their summer work. Over the past 25
years, more than two-thirds of the participants in Lehigh's program have gone on
to graduate studies in science and engineering, and most of the remaining
students obtained jobs in fields of science and technology. The program has an
important impact in enabling promising students to pursue careers in science and
other technical disciplines, and is informed by an on-going
evaluation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.