* 1852289
* REU Site: Wyoming Astronomy
* MPS,AST
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2023
* Henry Kobulnicky, University of Wyoming
* Continuing Grant
* James Higdon
* 03/31/2023
* USD 272,306.00

This award will support a renewal of the summer REU (Research Experiences for
Undergraduates) site in Astronomy at the University of Wyoming. Each summer,
eight students will work together on the same research project, mentored by the
entire astronomy faculty. In addition to the research experience, this will
promote teamwork, leadership, and peer teaching skills. They will also attend
presentations or short courses on research techniques and results, preparing for
graduate school, writing and speaking in science, exploring ethical issues in
science. Students will develop broadly-applicable skills in computer programming
and image analysis. This program will benefit society by enhancing the education
of undergraduates through research and professional development programs and by
extending these opportunities to students from institutions otherwise unable to
offer such experiences. Recruiting will focus on students with little to no
research experience, mainly freshmen and sophomores from liberal arts colleges
and smaller public institutions, including community colleges.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students will have full access to the 2.3-meter and the
0.6-meter telescopes. The specific project and lead faculty member will rotate
each summer. Other faculty will play supporting roles and conduct professional
development programs for the students. REU students will have an opportunity to
gain valuable outreach experience by assisting with AstroCamp, a 10-day
residence camp for middle-school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.