* 1852403
* REU Site: Engineers for Exploration
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2023
* Ryan Kastner, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 03/31/2023
* USD 453,463.00

The Engineers for Exploration (E4E) Research Experiences for Undergraduates
(REU) site engages undergraduate students from a broad range of disciplines in
computer systems research motivated by real world challenges in exploration and
scientific discovery. The site provides an intimate mentored research
environment at the University of California San Diego and a structured
collaboration with scientists, explorers, and engineers at our partner
organizations. Past and present projects include collaborations with the San
Diego Zoo Global, the Scripps Institution of Oceanography, Mexican Comision
Nacional de Areas Naturales Protegidas, Belize Foundation for Research and
Environmental Education, US Department of Agriculture, National Geographic
Society, Hubbs SeaWorld Research Institute, National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration, and the California Wolf Center. The participants create
technology for conservation, cultural heritage, and exploration and are deployed
around the world by site participants, scientists, and explorers for research
expeditions in Belize, Cayman Islands, Dominican Republic, Guatemala, Mexico,
and Mongolia. The site targets participants from diverse backgrounds who do not
have the opportunity to participate in this type of research. The participants
work in a multi-tiered mentoring program interacting with faculty, scientists,
postdoctoral scholars, and graduate students. When coupled with the community
building activities, this makes a positive and memorable experience, encouraging
participants to pursue further research training. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During
the ten week summer program, Engineers for Exploration (E4E) site participants
work closely with scientists, explorers, and engineers to develop technology
that generally focuses on remote sensing with elements in robotics, computer
vision, data analytics, machine learning, and visualization. For example,
previous participants designed, prototyped and deployed systems to create large
scale visualizations of the Maya archaeological site El Zotz in Guatemala, track
endangered iguana hatchlings across different Caribbean Islands, and document
ecological characteristics of mangroves in Baja California, Mexico. The primary
goal of this REU site is to expose the undergraduate participants to real-world,
hands-on research projects. The participants work full-time during the summer to
build technology that will ultimately be deployed in the field by scientists,
researchers, and explorers. The development of this technology brings together
the techniques and skills from the participants' undergraduate classes with
real-world problems, and thus provides a sound connection between theory and
practice. The hope is that exposure to cutting-edge, applied research will
motivate them to consider graduate school and become the next generation of
researchers. To accomplish this overall goal, the REU site has four specific
objectives: 1) Involve participants in intellectually stimulating,
multidisciplinary projects, 2) Provide real-world projects with mentorship from
scientists and explorers, 3) Recruit and attract a diverse population of top
quality students from a variety of backgrounds in engineering, and 4) Develop
mentorship, leadership, and teamwork skills amongst the post-doctoral scholars,
graduate students, and REU participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.