* 1852430
* REU Site:Wellman-HST Summer Institute for Biomedical Optics
* ENG,EEC
* 06/01/2019,11/30/2023
* Walfre Franco, Massachusetts General Hospital
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 11/30/2023
* USD 367,353.00

The objectives of the REU Site: Wellman-HST Summer Institute for Biomedical
Optics, are to provide a diverse cohort of undergraduate students with a unique
opportunity to explore biomedical optics in a multidisciplinary environment at
the interface of laboratory innovations and real-world applications, and to
inspire them to pursue advanced research, education, and careers in science and
engineering. The REU site admits eight undergraduate students to pursue full-
time laboratory research for ten weeks from June to August at the Wellman Center
for Photomedicine at Massachusetts General Hospital. This REU site values
diversity in participants' ethnicity, home institution, and academic background,
and place emphasis on recruiting underrepresented groups in STEM fields. Eight
faculty members with backgrounds in physics, chemistry, and engineering serve as
mentors and offer a variety of research projects in diverse, yet cohesive,
themes in the field of biomedical optics with emphasis on multidisciplinary
approaches that integrate optical physics and engineering to address important
biological questions and medical problems. The research program will enhance the
ability of students to undertake interdisciplinary research on a broad range of
cutting-edge topics including optical coherence tomography, implantable and
wearable photonic devices, cell lasers, biomechanics, and light-activated
nanomedicine. Students who make important research contributions will be fully
supported to travel to professional conferences to showcase their engineering
and scientific achievements. In addition to research, students will attend
lectures, seminars, and professional development workshops on science
communication, ethics, and innovation. Participants will enjoy various social
activities and stay in a dormitory at the MIT campus, which is in close
proximity to laboratories and lecture halls. This organized, cohesive, and
vibrant summer program will make their summer experience go way beyond what
could be provided by a typical research experience in a single
lab.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biomedical optics is a rapidly growing field, well
poised to impact biological sciences and human health. This REU site is geared
towards making a significant difference in the future career paths of student
participants by providing a positive experience in cutting-edge research, a
sense of accomplishment, and the joy of scientifically interacting with peers
and professionals. Students will witness how innovative research in the lab can
help solve real-world problems and thus provide tangible benefits to the society
we live in. This experience will help students gain a broader and deeper
perspective on research and further motivate them to pursue careers in
multidisciplinary science and engineering. Interactions with mentors provide
role models to the students while helping them evaluate their own future career
paths. The REU site will also have a positive impact on faculty mentors by
fostering active interactions and collaborations. Students will interact with
overseas summer students in other ongoing international programs, building
global networks. In turn, by providing positive experiences, this interaction
can increase the international recognition of science and engineering in the
U.S. by attracting talented undergraduates from overseas to the U.S. for higher
education. The REU site is well positioned to become a national and
international model for highly interdisciplinary and innovative summer research
experiences for undergraduates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.