* 1852096
* REU SITE : Integrative Biology and Ecology of Marine Organisms and Their Environment
* BIO,DBI
* 02/15/2019,01/31/2023
* Stacy Farina, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 01/31/2023
* USD 394,765.00

This REU Site Award to the University of Washington's Friday Harbor Labs, in
Friday Harbor, WA, will support the training of 12 students for 8 weeks during
the summers of 2019-2021. Research focuses on integrative organismal biology of
marine organisms, with an emphasis on marine ecology, developmental biology, and
comparative biomechanics. Mentors from the Departments of Biology, Oceanography,
Forestry, Wildlife, and Fisheries will be involved. Examples of research
projects include biotic and abiotic factors in bull kelp ecology, evolutionary
development of tunicates, digestive system specializations of prickleback
fishes, biomechanics of burial in sediment in fishes, and evolutionary
morphology of fishes using micro-CT scanning and phylogenetic comparative
methods. The program includes one on one mentoring as well as group training in
cross cutting topics that include ethics in research, statistics, career
pathways, bias, and diversity. Applications are encouraged from a diverse group
of motivated young scientists and students from institutions with limited
opportunities for research. Community college students are especially encouraged
to apply. REU participants are selected by mentors and principal investigators
based on essays, interest in research, and letters of recommendation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is anticipated that a total of 36 students, primarily
from schools with limited research opportunities, will be trained in the
program. Focus is placed on students from HBCUs and other minority serving
schools. Work done by REU students will be presented at national meetings or
published in peer-reviewed, open access journals. Students will learn how
research is conducted, and many will present the results of their work at
scientific conferences. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;A common web-based assessment
tool used by all REU Site programs funded by the Division of Biological
Infrastructure will be used to determine the effectiveness of the training
program. Students will be tracked after the program in order to determine their
career paths. Students will be asked to respond to an automatic email sent via
the NSF reporting system. More information about the program is available by
visiting https://fhl.uw.edu/research/student-financial-aid-for-research/summer-
research-internships/, or by contacting the PI (Dr. Adam Summers at
fishguy@uw.edu) or the co-PI (Dr. Stacy Farina
stacy.farina@Howard.edu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.