* 1852277
* REU Site: Engineering for Bouncing Back
* ENG,EEC
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Meghna Babbar-Sebens, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 05/31/2024
* USD 360,000.00

Natural and anthropogenic stresses and shocks, such as hurricanes Katrina,
Sandy, and Maria, recurring heat waves, and droughts in the West, lead
contamination in drinking water at Flint, Michigan, economic distress in Detroit
Michigan, and floods in the Mississippi River, have triggered communities across
the US to consider resiliency in their preparedness and planning activities.
There is critical need for research and education that advances a systems view
of resilience, specifically, one that incorporates response, recovery, and
mitigation via multitude of solutions spanning the built infrastructure systems,
social institutions, emerging technologies, and stakeholder engagement and
capacity-building in communities. To meet this need, a novel undergraduate
research program on "Engineering for Bouncing Back" (EBB) will be developed at
this REU site - one that integrates researchers and undergraduate students from
Civil and Construction Engineering, Chemical, Biological, and Environmental
Engineering, and Electrical Engineering and Computer Science on the topic of
resilience. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The REU Site is built upon ongoing research in
the field of Resiliency at Oregon State University, and offers exciting
interdisciplinary research opportunities to undergraduates nationwide. Technical
research projects coupled with a suite of REU activities will be offered at this
REU site to enable the accomplishment of research and education goals,
specifically: (1) Advance the science on interdisciplinary methods, tools, and
technologies used towards (a) improving resiliency of built infrastructure
systems, (b) improving resiliency of ecosystems and natural resources, (c)
improving capacity for community resilience, and (d) improving capability for
risk and resilience assessment in communities, and (2) Improvement of the
ability of students to employ Systems Thinking skills in solving complex
resiliency research problems, and increase their motivation to pursue
interdisciplinary graduate research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Each undergraduate
student will be part of a research team comprising of a primary faculty mentor,
faculty collaborators (from multiple socio-technical disciplines), and graduate
student. In addition to research projects, students will participate in cohort-
building activities such as, field trips to communities facing unique resiliency
challenges, and a movie night focused on community resilience stories.
Professional development will be comprised of activities such as weekly skill-
building workshops and panels, a 10-page project report, and the final EBB REU
symposium. Applications will be sought from highly motivated underrepresented
and minority students at quarter-term institutions and related programs. Broader
EBB REU recruiting efforts will take place at national conferences for
undergraduate engineering students from underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.