* 1852056
* REU Site: Increasing Statistical Preparation in Research Education for Underrepresented Undergraduates
* SBE,SMA
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2024
* A Blankson, Spelman College
* Continuing Grant
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 08/31/2024
* USD 292,742.00

This project is funded from the Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
Sites program in the Directorate for Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences
(SBE). It has both scientific and societal benefits, and it integrates research
and education. The REU Site "Increasing Statistical Preparation in Research
Education for Underrepresented Undergraduates" (INSPIRE U2 Program) will recruit
and train 24 underrepresented female students in statistical analyses of big
data. It is expected that this initiative will: 1) increase student interest in
advanced degree programs; 2) provide support and mentorship to students; and 3)
serve as a pipeline for entry into advanced degree programs. Each student will
have the opportunity to conduct an independent research project, and in doing
so, students will develop the skills, confidence, and inspiration to pursue
advanced statistics opportunities within the sciences. Key innovations include:
1) the merging of two evidence-based training approaches; 2) training in the
flexible application of knowledge; 3) analysis of data in real world contexts;
and 4) intensive one-on-one mentoring and support. The project will have
significant impact on science, policy, and society by increasing representation
of women and ethnic minorities in statistical and data analysis fields and
enhancing the rigor with which scientific research is
conducted.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Women of color and minorities are less likely to
pursue careers in statistical fields because of lack of uniquely stimulating
opportunities and appropriate support within the college environment. Thus,
there is a critical need for diverse perspectives in statistical inquiry because
there are educational and societal benefits to such diversity. The primary aim
of the REU site is to address this need. Each year, for 3 years, approximately 8
underrepresented undergraduate female students who are rising sophomores will
receive training in statistical programs and analytical techniques, including
modern techniques not commonly included in the undergraduate curriculum.
Students will engage in research in a lab with a faculty mentor and develop
their own research question, conduct data analyses to answer their research
question, and prepare a poster and oral presentation. Finally, students will
participate in activities to promote collaborative behavior such as student
mentorship, faculty mentorship, panel discussions, professional development
activities, and field trips. The overarching goal is diversification among
trained individuals with statistical knowledge and skills, leading to the
enhancement of the scientific workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.