* 1852066
* REU Site: REU in Discrete and Applied Mathematics
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2023
* Robert Bell, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Tiziana Giorgi
* 04/30/2023
* USD 261,739.00

The REU in Discrete and Applied Mathematics provides an atypical opportunity for
students who are an early stage of their study of mathematics to work in small
teams under the supervision of faculty mentors to contribute to mathematical
research. Students are recruited from minority institutions, public and private
universities, and liberal arts colleges, resulting in a diverse group of
participants. Students are recruited at an early stage of their college
experience where they are open to, but not necessarily committed to, the
prospect of a career in the mathematical sciences. Thus, this project
contributes directly to a national effort to retain promising and talented
students with a strong interest in the mathematical and physical sciences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program stimulates interest in mathematics via
research on accessible open research problems. The students acquire mathematical
sophistication and take significant steps towards a career in the mathematical
sciences. Students' discoveries contribute to several areas of active research:
combinatorial games, knot theory, recursive polynomials, compressive sensing,
stochastic processes, topological data analysis, and others. Results are shared
in conference presentations and in research publications. Students learn to read
research articles; to formulate conjectures and construct examples; to program
simulations; to concentrate, listen, and ask questions; to generalize and
simplify mathematical arguments; and to disseminate their discoveries. Students
are immersed in an environment where the mathematical ideas are new and not
fully understood. Students work in one of three separate research groups and
present their progress on a weekly basis to the other program
participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.