* 1852373
* REU Site: Training in Basic and Applied Psychological Science
* SBE,SMA
* 06/01/2019,12/31/2022
* Charles Scherbaum, CUNY Baruch College
* Standard Grant
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 12/31/2022
* USD 335,661.00

This project is funded from the Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
Sites program in the SBE Directorate. It has both scientific and societal
benefits in addition to integrating research and education. Statistics from the
NSF and the American Psychological Association indicate continual under-
representation of African Americans, Hispanics, Asian Americans, Native
Americans, and individuals with disabilities in the field of psychology. The REU
site at Baruch College offers advanced research training to undergraduate
students who attend Baruch College, colleges within the City University of New
York (CUNY), and other educational institutions in the New York metropolitan
area. Baruch College and CUNY in general boast a diverse student body. Although
the recruitment is open to any NSF eligible undergraduate students, this program
is designed to increase the representation of minority, low-income, first
generation college students, and disabled students in scientific psychology.
Specifically, the program does the following: 1) identify early promising
minority, disabled, and economically disadvantaged students throughout the New
York metropolitan area, 2) increase psychological scientists exposure to
cultural and minority issues in psychological research, 3) prepare REU students
for advanced graduate training in psychology and ultimately for careers in
academic settings, and 4) develop a pipeline to provide a pool of talented and
diverse undergraduate students to become the research scientists of the future.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;REU students conduct independent research under the
supervision of an REU faculty member working in an area that matches the
student's expressed interests (e.g., developmental psychology, clinical
psychology, social psychology, or industrial/organizational psychology). Each
student focuses on planning and executing studies with the intention of
presenting papers at professional conferences and submitting manuscripts to
peer-reviewed journals. Specifically, REU students develop research questions
and hypotheses that are grounded in the literature. In order to answer these
newly developed research questions and hypotheses, REU students design research
protocols and plan data collection. Then, REU students learn via hands-on
experience the value of statistical analysis, use of statistical software to
draw inferences about the data, and presentation skills to disseminate the
findings gained in their research. Alongside with the conduct of their research
projects, REU students complete a series of structured activities aimed at
preparing them to apply to graduate school. These activities, such as attending
professional development seminars and workshops, participating at colloquium in
the field of psychology, listening to invited guest speakers from graduate
program admission offices, are coordinated by the Baruch College REU
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.