* 1852961
* Supporting Excellence, Effectiveness, and Diversity in STEM Teacher Education
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2024
* Kathy Hann, California State University, East Bay Foundation, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* James A. M. Alvarez
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,197,172.00

With support from the NSF Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program, this Track 1
Scholarships and Stipends project aims to address the national shortage of
highly qualified mathematics and science teachers. The project intends to
recruit academically successful mathematics and science majors in their senior
year of college, as well as post-baccalaureate STEM professionals, to complete a
teacher credential program. These preservice teachers will receive mentoring and
other supports to enable them to become highly effective teachers in high-need,
urban middle and high schools. The project plans to produce approximately 50
highly-qualified new teachers with STEM degrees over five years. The project
will use a cohort approach for the teacher candidates, which resulted in a
96-97% success rate in a previous NSF-supported mathematics and science
credential program. Noyce Scholars with computer science coursework will be able
to add a Computer Science Authorization to their credential and thus be
certified to teach Computer Science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the
College of Education and Allied Studies and the College of Science at California
State University, East Bay (CSUEB) are collaborating with the Alameda County
Office of Education, Contra Costa County Office of Education, and Hayward, San
Lorenzo, and West Contra Costa school districts. The project intends to: a)
increase the number and ethnic and socio-economic diversity of STEM majors who
enter the teaching profession; b) strengthen the preparation, professional
development, and mentoring that these teachers receive, especially to support
teaching in diverse schools; and c) provide a network of interpersonal and
professional support that sustains their commitment to a teaching career. The RT
Fisher Educational Enterprises will assist the project in implementing
culturally/linguistically relevant and responsive professional development
programming. With the availability of Noyce scholarships and the work of the
newly formed Teacher Recruitment Task Force at CSUEB, this project aims to
increase the number of mathematics and science teacher credentials earned at the
University by 10% each year of the project. Regarding post-baccalaureate STEM
professionals, the project intends to use a creative recruitment strategy that
includes a partnership with EnCorps STEM Teachers Program. This non-profit
organization focuses on recruiting existing industry professionals into teaching
and guides them through the career change process. Recruitment strategies for
undergraduate STEM majors at the University will involve STEM department chairs,
several STEM- or teacher-focused campus affiliates, and outreach to local
community colleges. Dissemination of project strategies, outcomes, and findings
through presentations at conferences and publications have the potential to
inform local, statewide, and national efforts to recruit, support, and retain
increased numbers of STEM teachers who are equipped to provide successful
learning experiences in mathematics and science to students in high-need school
districts. The Noyce program supports talented STEM undergraduate majors and
professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts and experienced, exemplary K-12 STEM teachers to become STEM master
teachers. It also supports research on the persistence, retention, and
effectiveness of K-12 teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.