* 1852578
* REU Site: Biomimetic and Soft Robotics (BioSoRo): from Biological Inspirations to Engineered Mechanisms
* ENG,EEC
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Yantao Shen, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 03/31/2024
* USD 491,713.00

This Biomimetic and Soft Robotics (BioSoRo) REU Site at the University of
Nevada, Reno (UNR) will engage a diverse cohort of undergraduate students for 10
weeks during the summers of 2019-2021. Hosted by the departments of Mechanical
Engineering, Electrical &amp; Biomedical Engineering, and Biology at UNR, this
program focuses on multidisciplinary collaborative projects related to BioSoRo
research that span the fields of biomimetics, additive manufacturing, smart
materials, solid mechanics, and robotics and control. Participants work closely
with graduate student and faculty mentors on their respective research projects,
gain the knowledge and tools for progression in STEM, build a community of
professionals with peers, graduate students, and faculty, and grow in their
perspective on the role of STEM in society. In addition to ten weeks of
intensive research, students take part in educational, social, and professional
development activities that support their sustained growth as engineers and
scientists, including workshops on career development, scholarship community
colloquiums, and tours to Tesla Gigafactory and Amazon Warehouse where
industrial robots are massively adopted. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research projects
at this BioSoRo REU site entail crawling legless animals and soft crawling
robots inspired by them, electroactive polymers and their applications in soft
robots, supercoiled polymer actuators for soft robots, and smart materials
enabled compliant biomedical devices, among others. These projects will offer an
advanced and interdisciplinary platform for enhancing undergraduate research
experience in the cutting-edge BioSoRo research area, which perfectly leverages
fundamental science with state-of-the-art engineering. This REU Site will
capitalize on the broad appeal of BioSoRo research to increase the diversity and
broaden the horizons of students engaged in robotics research. Students with
experience in BioSoRo are in great demand and this REU site will help train and
diversify the next generation of roboticists in the 21st
century.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This site is supported by the Department of
Defense in partnership with the NSF REU program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.