* 1852942
* Strengthening Mathematics Instructions for Elementary &amp; Middle Schools
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2025
* Yeping Li, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* James A. M. Alvarez
* 05/31/2025
* USD 1,002,792.00

With support from the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce), this
Track 1: Scholarships and Stipends project at Texas A&amp;M University (TAMU)
aims to serve the national need of preparing high-quality teachers for high-need
school districts. Elementary and middle school instruction is critical for
fostering student interest in STEM subjects at early stages, and mathematics
lies at the core and foundation of most STEM fields. However, many elementary
and middle school teachers feel unprepared and lack confidence in teaching
mathematics. This project will specifically respond to this need. The work will
be done through a collaboration between the Mathematics Department and the
College of Education at TAMU and in partnership with the Grand Prairie
Independent Scholl District. It will provide solid preparation in mathematics
and pedagogy that are aligned with school mathematics. Noyce Scholars will have
opportunities to work with K-8 students through the mathematics department
Summer Education Enrichment Math Camp and academic year Math Circle. Clinical
practice in high-need schools will be provided through a partnership with the
Grand Prairie Independent School District and other high-need schools. All TAMU
Noyce Scholars at the undergraduate level will obtain a baccalaureate degree in
mathematics as well as teacher certification upon graduation. Individuals who
already have a STEM degree will be supported in a post-baccalaureate year as
they complete teacher licensure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the five-year
duration of the award, the project aims to produce 37 new, certified mathematics
teachers who will teach in high-need elementary and middle schools in urban and
rural regions of Texas. The project will recruit potential Noyce Scholars
through multiple channels: 1) by providing informal teaching experiences to
potential first and second year STEM undergraduates and STEM post-baccalaureates
to gain initial teaching experience; 2) by working with Blinn College, Houston
Community College, Lone Star College and the University of Houston to provide
information for prospective teachers interested in coming to Texas A&amp;M
University; and 3) by utilizing the expansive network of the Association of
Former Students to contact former STEM graduates of Texas A&amp;M. The project
will provide a strong mathematical and culturally responsive pedagogical
training. This is particularly important in Texas where 68.5% or more teachers
have no major or certification in mathematics and more than 65% of the school
age population are students of color. The project will continue to support Noyce
Scholars in their first-year of teaching through a partnership with the high-
need school district. The results from this project will be disseminated broadly
through research conferences and high-impact journals, practitioner conferences,
and school administrator conferences and meetings. The Noyce program supports
talented STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12
STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 STEM teachers to become STEM
master teachers in high-need school districts. It also supports research on the
persistence, retention, and effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need
school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.