* 1852105
* REU Site: Enhancing Undergraduate Experiences in Mobile Cloud and Data Security
* CSE,CNS
* 12/15/2018,11/30/2023
* Xiao Luo, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Jill Denner
* 11/30/2023
* USD 411,000.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site award provides funding
for the renewal of an outstanding REU site at Indiana University - Purdue
University Indianapolis. The site will recruit undergraduates from across the
nation to participate in research topics related to cybersecurity, mobile cloud
security, and data security and privacy. The research projects focus on issues
related to the use of mobile devices such as smart phones and the secure use of
mobile clouds to access, manage, store, and secure digital assets. Mobile cloud
security is an area of current interest that is well-suited to undergraduate
research productivity. The students will use controlled and competitive test
environments to experiment with cyber-attack and defense techniques needed to
secure the mobile devices that are pervasive in our society. This site should
help develop a group of computing professionals who can develop the systems of
the future that impact society and enhance our quality of life. The REU
experience provides students with the foundations and inspiration to pursue
computing careers and research in areas that are rapidly evolving and impacting
all of our citizens. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is led by an outstanding
team offering state-of-the art facilities and professional mentors to guide
undergraduates in explorations of cutting-edge problems related to mobile cloud
security. Students will learn how to use current tools and techniques to solve
those problems that have direct impact on people. The team will use proven
strategies to recruit undergraduate students from groups traditionally under-
represented in computer science including African American, Hispanic and female
students. The students will participate in research and professional development
activities all designed to achieve the goals of retaining and graduating
undergraduate students in computer science and engineering, recruiting students
from groups traditionally under-represented in computing fields, and increasing
recruitment of students into graduate programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.