* 1852677
* RUI:  Characterization and modulation of SH3 domain binding pathway biophysics
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* K Aurelia Ball, Skidmore College
* Standard Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 05/31/2024
* USD 364,418.00

The goal of this research is to understand how common protein binding
interactions can be tuned in small ways to perform specialized functions in
different cellular contexts. The communication within cells that allows cellular
processes to occur is mediated by interactions between proteins. Understanding
the details of these interactions, including their strength and specificity,
will allow researchers to predict and modify the many types of cell behavior.
Results will provide deeper insights into how protein binding interactions
function in different cellular contexts and help explain how a common
interaction can specialize to perform many different cellular functions.
Undergraduate students working on this project will have the opportunity to
learn both computational and experimental biophysics skills, including how both
computational and experimental data can contribute to a project to form a more
complete model of protein interactions. Students will also work closely with
scientists at Texas Tech University (Mike Latham) and the University of
Liverpool (Elliott Stollar) and experience first-hand the importance of
collaboration to the modern scientific process. To allow a larger number of
students to have an experience with undergraduate research, a research-based lab
course will expose students to techniques in computational biophysics and
molecular dynamics simulations. In this course, students develop and carryout a
research project contributing to the larger project goals. This project also
includes the development of a one-credit course for science majors on women and
underrepresented groups in science. This course will be geared toward all
natural science majors, and will encourage students navigating a major where
women are traditionally underrepresented to consider and grapple with ideas
about identity in science. Topics will include the challenges that women and
minorities may face regarding identifying as scientists, stereotype threat, and
impostor syndrome. The course will prepare students to be leaders on the topic
of underrepresented groups in science and include a service-learning
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cellular signaling
interactions often involve binding of intrinsically disordered protein regions
to small domains, but the binding pathways for these interactions are often not
well understood. Full understanding of how these disordered folding and binding
interactions contribute to function requires knowing how the binding pathway can
be tuned in different contexts by adjusting the disordered sequence, domain
sequence, or solvent environment of the interaction. This project will address
this question using an SH3 domain-peptide interaction (Abp1p SH3 domain binding
to the ArkA peptide) as a model system and employing a combination of molecular
dynamics simulations and NMR spectroscopy. SH3 domains are ubiquitous across
eukaryotes, but the SH3 domain family contains many variations that impact
function. These variations can influence the binding pathway, which in turn will
affect biophysical properties such as binding affinity and association rates.
This research will investigate how different aspects of the SH3-peptide
interaction contribute to the binding pathway and biophysical properties of
binding, ultimately defining a set of "rules" that help predict the ways that
this interaction can be modulated with different functional consequences.
Binding is hypothesized to begin with an initial encounter between ArkA and the
SH3 domain, followed by fast initial binding of ArkA segment 1, and then slower,
more specific binding of segment 2. Aim 1 of the research will confirm the role
of the two ArkA segments in the binding pathway and determine how each affects
affinity, specificity, and kinetics. Aim 2 will focus on the role of
electrostatics in binding, and how it affects initial steering to the binding
site as well its importance for specifically binding the correct peptide
sequence. Aim 3 will focus on the importance of proline residues in the peptide
sequence. Proline can uniquely affect conformation by switching between cis and
trans conformational states and adopting a rigid poly-proline II helix
structure. The project will help to advance our understanding of how disordered
protein regions bind SH3 domains and how diversity between different SH3 domains
and partners contributes to their functional differentiation. Understanding how
these biophysical properties are tuned will not only impact the field of SH3
signaling, but also the wider field of disordered peptide binding, as similar
mechanisms may exist for other recognition domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.