* 1852979
* SBIR Phase II:  Multi-Sensory Therapy To Improve Lives of Children with Autism Spectrum Disorder
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2019,03/31/2022
* Andrea Johnson, Teaching It Right, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 03/31/2022
* USD 799,995.00

This SBIR Phase II project will develop a multi-sensory social skill program to
improve the lives of children who have been diagnosed with autism spectrum
disorder (ASD). Currently, ASD is the fastest growing developmental disability
in the US, with 1 in 59 children being affected. It is well established that
children with ASD struggle with their social skills, which negatively affects
the child's ability to make friends and integrate into the community and create
their best life. Current interventions are expensive, time consuming, and
parents, teachers, and therapists are seeking better solutions. This project
will address these issues through the development of an affordable, time
efficient application. The application will greatly improve social skills while
also addressing sensory integration, anxiety, and self-esteem. As research
continues and the product is refined, it will be broadened to all ages,
targeting the ~5 million individuals with ASD in the US, and the ~74 million
worldwide. Additionally, this project can be adapted to help non-ASD children
who struggle with social skills or have developmental disabilities. Using the
program in both homes and schools, creates a strong commercial impact, leading
to a self-sustaining business. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical
innovation of this project is an educational application developed for smart
mobile devices, improving social skills for children diagnosed on the autism
spectrum. This novel technology incorporates and combines proprietary source
code, customizable features, integration of original music, video, facial
recognition technology, and tracking tools to create a powerful modeling,
learning, and practicing environment. The technology is the only social
curriculum designed to allow students to learn and practice the social skill
independently, or with other human interaction; including the ability to have
multiple devices sync together, allowing practice to take place between
participants in real time. The research goal is to develop and test an
application, which teaches children with autism spectrum disorder to improve and
generalize social skills to familiar and unfamiliar people. This will be
accomplished through software development, which will include integration of
video and music, testing for program glitches, compatibility with various
devices, and technology that can be implemented in a one-to-one or group
setting. A pilot study will include an intervention vs. control design to assess
the effectiveness and user ability of the program with students in grades K-6
with varying degrees of autism, thus validating the need and effectiveness of
the program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.