* 1852815
* CRII: CSR: Partitioning Large Graphs in Deep Storage Architecture
* CSE,CNS
* 08/21/2018,03/31/2022
* Dong Dai, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 03/31/2022
* USD 175,761.00

Many computing applications that are important for our society, e.g. managing
social networks, analyzing human genomes, or modeling human brain connectivity,
rely heavily on large graph structures. In practice, representations of large
graphs need to be partitioned and stored on a cluster of machines to ensure the
desired response time and throughput. Such a classic cross-server partitioning
problem has been extensively studied and has been shown to be highly complex.
Furthermore, modern deep storage architecture further complicates the problem
with the need of "cross-hierarchy" partitioning, i.e., placing graphs into
different layers of the storage systems. This change makes existing solutions
inadequate. This research aims to pursue a holistic approach that exploits both
graph structure and workload characteristics to achieve better performance for
distributed graph representations in future deep storage
architecture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, this project includes two
synergistic research tasks, together forming a novel graph partitioning solution
for deep storage architecture. The first task focuses on an online graph
placement algorithm, which could instantly distribute the continuously arriving
graph vertices and edges to proper server and specific internal storage layer
based on an elaborate heuristic score. Building upon the first task, the second
task focuses on adjusting current partitions dynamically according to the
workloads. This adjustment is based on a new promotion/demotion algorithm that
not only promotes/demotes a single vertex but also changes the priorities of its
neighbors according to the Matthew Effect.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the
increasing importance of large graph structures and the emergence of new storage
technologies, existing graph storage systems experience significant challenges
towards graph partitioning. This research effort aims towards building highly
efficient distributed graph storage systems in future storage architecture. In
addition, this project integrates the research activities with education and
outreach efforts to train broadly inclusive and globally competitive science
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.