* 1852820
* Noyce Teacher Preparation Program for Upstate New York
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2025
* Jan DeWaters, Clarkson University
* Continuing Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 06/30/2025
* USD 1,122,549.00

With support from the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce), this
Track 1: Scholarships and Stipends project aims to serve the national need for
culturally competent STEM secondary teachers in high-need school districts.
Teachers who understand the culture of their students and the learning
environment are critical to successful K-12 STEM education in high-need schools
and districts. This project will address pre-service teachers' understanding of
cultural competency and the relationship between cultural competency and gender.
In addition, it will examine the impact of early field experiences on community
building among current STEM teachers, preservice STEM teachers, and K-12
students. Project activities will include a Master of Arts in Teaching teacher
certification program that features a one-year teaching internship in a diverse,
high-need school. During the teaching internship, Noyce scholarship recipients
will conduct action research, engage in cultural activities, participate in
roundtable collaborations with a STEM teacher community, and complete an early
field experience. The outcomes of the project have the potential to inform
teacher education practices, improve understanding of teachers' cultural
competency, and increase knowledge about how early field research experiences
affect teacher capability and community building. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through
this Noyce project, Clarkson University will recruit 20 STEM majors and prepare
them for careers as science and mathematics teachers in high-need school
districts in the rural north and urban capital region of New York state. The
project will provide these undergraduates with scholarships during the
undergraduate senior year and the post-baccalaureate/MAT degree year, as well as
additional supports to help the Noyce Scholars to: 1) develop cultural
competency in rural and urban settings; 2) conduct collaborative research; and
3) engage in STEM educational communities. Induction resources and support will
also be provided during the Noyce scholars' early years of teaching. The project
will partner with Schenectady City School District and Gouverneur Central School
District in New York to share effective practices in recruiting, training,
placement, and support for talented teachers in high-need schools and districts.
Project evaluation will be conducted through focus group discussions, together
with established instruments focusing on STEM teaching self-efficacy,
competency, attitudes, and multicultural sensitivity. The project has the
potential to benefit society by integrating teacher preparation and research to
recruit, prepare, and retain a talented and effective STEM education workforce
of culturally responsive teachers. The Noyce program supports talented STEM
undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers in
high-need school districts and experienced, exemplary K-12 STEM teachers to
become STEM master teachers. It also supports research on the persistence,
retention, and effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.