* 1852687
* Collaborative Research: Voices to Hear (V2H): Native American Youth Learning About Environmental Sciences, Related Careers and Engaging Their Communities through Podcasts
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2018,04/30/2024
* Sameer Honwad, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Robert Russell
* 04/30/2024
* USD 532,816.00

This project will advance efforts of the Innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST) program to better understand and promote practices
that increase student motivations and capacities to pursue careers in fields of
science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM). Voices to Hear (V2H)
will use the oral tradition of storytelling to empower Native American students
(middle school, high school and college) to engage in environmental decision-
making and scientific communication, while building a stronger sense of their
ethnic identity. The Coeur d'Alene Tribe (CdAT), University of Idaho, and
University of New Hampshire research alliance will recruit and work with middle
school, high school, and undergraduate students from the CdAT Reservation in
Idaho and other Tribal youth who attend University of Idaho, to develop high-
quality audio documentaries focused on environmental decision-making processes.
The production of a three- or five-minute high- quality audio
documentary/podcast is a multilayered, labor-intensive process that emphasizes
scientific inquiry, patience, and perseverance, ultimately requiring
observation, data collection, analysis, and building a summary or conclusion.
While podcasts resonate strongly with the oral storytelling traditions of native
American youth, they also provide a mechanism for conducting scientific inquiry.
The project focuses on students learning about how to merge different knowledge
systems (Western- mainstream/dominant science perspective, and Indigenous
traditional knowledge) in order to become effective environmental decision-
makers in the future. By investigating how community members resolve local
environmental problems, students will be mentored by traditional and
professional experts, and learn to utilize both STEM and cultural perspectives
to solve environmental issues. The project will develop and implement a unique,
vertically integrated mentoring model where Native undergraduate students will
be trained to mentor high school and middle school students, thereby helping
middle school and high school students learn about pathways to college and other
careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The V2H project will examine how people from
Native American communities negotiate their Indigenous knowledge sources with
Western science to make decisions in their everyday lives. The project grounds
itself in research on how student's ethnic identity impacts their science
learning and also decision-making capacity in their everyday life. Project
research will employ a mixed-methods design. The project will address several
research questions: (1) What complex systems thinking attributes do students
demonstrate? (2) How do students merge or negotiate different knowledge systems
(Indigenous and Western)? (3) How do the students ethnic identity change through
both audio documentary making and mentoring? (4) What aspects of complex
thinking and integrating knowledge systems improve students attitudes toward
traditional and non-traditional STEM topics? Both quantitative and qualitative
data will be collected and parallel data analysis will be implemented through
the life of the project. In order to understand what complex thinking attributes
students demonstrate, the project will employ a pre- and post- modeling
activity, using Mental Modeler, software that allows individuals to define
components of a system and show the interconnectedness between the components of
that system. Project research and resources will be widely shared with
educational researchers, educators, and Tribal
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.