* 1852235
* REU Site: The RISE Program - Research in Interdisciplinary STEM Education
* EDU,DUE
* 05/15/2019,12/31/2023
* Erika Offerdahl, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 12/31/2023
* USD 359,074.00

The United States depends on a large and diverse workforce in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) fields. In 2012, it was forecast
that the US would need an additional 1 million STEM college graduates over a
decade to remain globally competitive. Yet, the majority of students who enter
college with intentions to major in a STEM discipline do not actually complete a
STEM degree. Improving the retention of undergraduate students in STEM is thus a
critical national priority. This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
project will address this need by hosting the Research in Interdisciplinary STEM
Education (RISE) program at Washington State University. Over the course of
three years, RISE will immerse diverse cohorts of 10 undergraduate students each
summer in authentic research focused on STEM workforce development.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While most undergraduate STEM education reform efforts
have focused on teaching and learning at the undergraduate level, it is also
important to understand the connections to K-12 and informal education settings,
and to view STEM learning as a lifelong, life-wide phenomenon. The RISE scholars
will advance STEM inclusion and diversity by investigating critical research
questions related to STEM pathways, informal STEM education, and authentic STEM
disciplinary practices. The RISE REU program will recruit undergraduate students
from primarily non-PhD-granting institutions, with a particular focus on
recruiting students from groups that are underrepresented in STEM fields. RISE
scholars will participate in extensive mentoring by faculty, graduate students,
and peers; a series of professional skills workshops; and cohort-building
activities to increase a sense of belonging and STEM identity. RISE participants
will gain understandings of the importance of collaboration in STEM, the role of
educational research in improving STEM education, and STEM career pathways. A
comprehensive longitudinal evaluation plan will examine changes in the RISE
scholars' understanding of, appreciation for, and pursuit of career
possibilities in STEM and STEM education research. Ultimately, the REU RISE
project is expected to contribute to a more vibrant and inclusive STEM workforce
while advancing research in STEM education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Research
Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) program supports active research
participation by undergraduate students in areas of research funded by NSF. This
REU project is supported by NSF's Education &amp; Human Resources Directorate
Core Research (ECR) Program and its Improving Undergraduate STEM Education
(IUSE) Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.