* 1852588
* NSF-BSF: Investigating Magnetic Surfaces as a New Approach to Enantioseparations
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2023
* David Waldeck, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 05/31/2023
* USD 469,427.00

Chirality, or the nonsuperimposability of mirror images, is a fundamental
symmetry property of Nature. Just as human left and right hands are
nonsuperimposable mirror images, biomolecules such as protein and DNA and other
biologically-active molecules are chiral. The nonsuperimposable structural forms
of these molecules are referred to as enantiomers. Artificially synthesized
molecules are often a mixture of enantiomers. The ability to separate the
mixtures into enantiomerically-pure compounds, or a single enantiomer, is
particularly important to the chemical and pharmaceutical industries, as one
enantiomer may have an entirely different effect than another. Yet, enantiomeric
separations remain a costly aspect of the chemical production process. With
support from the Molecular Separations program in the Division of Chemical,
Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport Systems, and partial co-funding
from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging program in the Division of Chemistry,
the PIs will examine the application of a novel and potentially generic
principle for the separation of enantiomers using magnetic solid surfaces. In
chiral molecules, applying a voltage affects how strongly the molecule interacts
with a ferromagnetic surface. The strength of the interaction depends on whether
the molecule is left-handed or right-handed. To separate enantiomers using
magnetic surfaces and applied voltages, however, the chiral molecules and
surface must be in direct contact. The goal of the project is to establish the
molecular parameters affecting the separation and to identify the ideal magnetic
materials. The ability to separate enantiomers using such an approach has the
potential to reduce the cost of producing drugs and other agriculturally-
relevant molecules, improving human health and promoting
sustainability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed activity builds on fundamental
insights into the chiral induced spin selectivity effect and the recent finding
that charge polarization in chiral molecules is accompanied by spin
polarization. Recent results show that chiral molecules enantiospecifically
adsorb on ferromagnets, where the adsorbed enantiomer is determined by the
direction of magnetization of the substrate. The molecule's spin polarization
affects the adsorption energy with a magnetic surface primarily through a change
in the Pauli repulsion. The spin polarization changes the symmetry constraints
on the electronic wavefunction, and this strongly affects the Pauli repulsion
energy as the electron cloud of the molecule overlaps with the electronic
wavefunctions of the substrate. Based on this behavior, a new approach to
enantioselective separations and purification using magnetic materials will be
developed. This goal will be accomplished through four objectives: 1) examining
how the enantioselective adsorption of chiral molecules depends on the molecular
properties; 2) examining different chromatographic constructs for separating
mixtures of enantiomers; 3) exploring and defining the experimental conditions
for efficient separations; and 4) examining the use of crystallization with
magnetic surfaces for separations. The research will result in fundamental
understanding of enantiomeric separations using magnetic
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.