* 1852808
* Advancing STEM Teaching in Mathematics and Biology
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2025
* Michael Kiel, Marywood University
* Continuing Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 06/30/2025
* USD 992,734.00

With support from the NSF Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program, this Track
1: Scholarships and Stipends project aims to serve the national need for
preparing high quality biology and mathematics teachers. A recent assessment by
the Pennsylvania Department of Education indicates significant teacher shortages
in mathematics and in life and physical sciences. The shortages are most acute
in high-need school districts, which disproportionately serve students from low-
income and underrepresented populations. This project will help to address these
shortages by recruiting, preparing, and supporting 20 diverse, academically-
talented STEM students to teach mathematics and science in high-need school
districts. The resulting Scholars will earn a bachelor's degree in biology or
mathematics, and will meet the eligibility qualifications for Pennsylvania
secondary teaching certification in biology or mathematics. The project will
achieve these outcomes by providing biology and mathematics majors with
scholarships and other support including: significant field service in a high-
need local education agency; professional identity development; seminars and
workshops on cultural, linguistic, and academic disparity delivered by
experienced teachers from the partnering school districts; intensive mentoring
that extends into the first two years of each Scholar's teaching career; and,
early, expanded student-teaching experiences, including an innovative, three-
week "Maymester" immersion at the beginning of Scholars' junior year.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over a five-year period, the project aims to (1) recruit,
retain, and graduate 20 high-quality and diverse biology and mathematics majors
with secondary education certification; (2) enrich and prepare highly effective
STEM teachers who are specifically trained to work in high-need schools; (3)
place 100% of project graduates in high-need schools; and (4) institutionalize
the project's successful supplemental and programmatic elements. Scholars will
be recruited from Marywood's mathematics and biology undergraduates, as well as
from students who transferred from community colleges in Lackawanna, Luzerne,
and Susquehanna Counties. In addition to collaborating with community colleges,
Marywood is also partnering with high need school districts of Carbondale,
Forest City, Riverside, and Scranton. As the project progresses, the project
will evaluate the new teacher preparation curriculum and activities, with
emphasis on the efficacy of the early student-teaching experience provided by
the innovative Maymester activity. This project will also examine the effects of
the Maymester activity on the Scholar's view of their preparedness for practicum
and student teaching and their view of teaching in a high-need district.
Studying the impact of the Maymester activity will add to the knowledge of best
practices in preparing future STEM teachers for the classroom. Through
publications and both regional and national meetings, the PIs will disseminate
findings from the curriculum assessment, Maymester field experience, and other
project activities. Long-term, the project is positioned to help address
Pennsylvania's shortage of STEM teachers and its educational disparities for
low-income and underrepresented students. The Noyce program supports talented
STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM
teachers, and supports experienced, exemplary K-12 STEM teachers to become STEM
master teachers in high-need school districts. It also supports research on the
persistence, retention, and effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need
school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.