* 1852475
* REU Site: Undergraduate Computer Research (UnCoRe) in Cyber Security
* CSE,CNS
* 12/15/2018,11/30/2023
* Lunjin Lu, Oakland University
* Standard Grant
* Jill Denner
* 11/30/2023
* USD 380,000.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site award renews an
exemplary REU site at Oakland University. Each summer, undergraduate students
from across the nation will work on challenging research problems related to
cybersecurity, an area of national priority for our nation. The site includes a
strong research component combined with professional development opportunities
for the participating undergraduate students. The team will continue to use
successful strategies employed in past REU Sites to recruit undergraduate
students from groups traditionally under-represented in computer science. A
particular focus will be on recruiting women and students from institutions
where there are limited research opportunities. The ultimate goal is to
contribute to the development of a diverse scientific workforce with expertise
in areas critical to national security in the evolving global society of the
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is led by an outstanding team offering
research experiences in topics that are current and of national interest.
Students will learn how to use tools and techniques to solve problems that are
timely and of relevance to the field of computer science as well as to our
nation. The students are immersed into a research environment with all of its
facets: participating actively in shaping a research project and in defining the
solution; communicating to peers and other audiences about the research and
their findings; visiting research laboratories and attending scientific and
technical presentations; and forming collegial relationships with research teams
that include faculty, graduate students, and other scientific researchers. The
resulting research is often presented at professional conferences and included
in technical publications thus contributing to the body of research critical to
sustaining secure and trustworthy cyberspace.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.