* 1852360
* REU Site: Collaborative Research: Earth and Planetary Science and Astrophysics REU at the American Museum of Natural History in Collaboration with the City University of New York
* MPS,AST
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2023
* Denton Ebel, American Museum Natural History
* Continuing Grant
* James Higdon
* 03/31/2023
* USD 255,248.00

This award provides renewed funding for undergraduate students to conduct
experimental, observational, theoretical, and computational research activities
in earth science, planetary science, and astronomy at the American Museum of
Natural History (AMNH) in New York City. Eight students per year will be
selected to perform research into topics ranging from meteoritics, to
volcanology, to experimental and theoretical astrophysics. The participants will
be rigorously trained and well-educated in the fundamentals of the scientific
enterprise, and will receive valuable research experience in an active,
immersive, integrated research and education
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although it recruits from a nationwide pool,
this Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site particularly leverages
longstanding collaborations between scientists in the City University of New
York (CUNY) system and at AMNH. CUNY is a 269,000-student urban public
university network whose students primarily come from communities
underrepresented in science. The CUNY/AMNH partnership will therefore enhance
the REU Site's ability to recruit students in urban, traditionally underserved
populations. Aside from their primary research activities, REU interns will also
participate in Museum programs; attend field trips, colloquia, and conferences
to present research; and present their work in a scientific symposium open to
the public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.