* 1852784
* Foundations for Advancing STEM Teaching in Rural School Districts
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2021
* Paul Skrade, Upper Iowa University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Lewis
* 03/31/2021
* USD 72,666.00

With support from the NSF Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program, this project
aims to serve the national interest in high quality STEM teaching by
investigating the STEM teaching needs of rural Iowa. The project involves a
partnership between Upper Iowa University, local high-need school districts, and
Northeast Iowa Community College. This partnership will define local teacher
workforce needs and develop new recruiting strategies to interest STEM majors in
teaching. It will build stronger pathways to teaching careers for community
college students and identify supports that can help STEM majors become
successful STEM teachers. Information produced by the project can inform efforts
to increase the number and quality of STEM teachers who can meet the needs of
rural schools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The activities of this project include
surveys of local area school personnel, as well as focus groups with current
STEM and education majors and alumni. The resulting data will provide insights
into factors that support or hinder careers in STEM teaching at rural schools.
The data will also document specific areas of STEM teacher shortage and inform
the development of targeted recruiting strategies. Articulation agreements
between Upper Iowa University and Northeast Iowa Community College will be
strengthened by developing degree plans that enable STEM majors to graduate in
four years with teacher certification and the skills to meet the needs of rural
school districts. A review of existing academic support strategies for STEM
majors will be conducted, and each strategy will be evaluated for potential
success in the local context. Conference participation will enable project
personnel to disseminate findings from the project and will inform the project
of viable models in use elsewhere. A strong internal dissemination plan will
ensure that information is shared with stakeholders directly engaged in the
project and those whom the project intends to serve. The project may provide
useful insights into affordances and constraints that arise in conjunction with
the new All Science teacher endorsement area recently developed by the Iowa
Department of Education. The NSF Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program
supports talented STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to become K-12
mathematics and science teachers in high-need school districts and in-service
teachers to become STEM master teachers. It also supports research on the
persistence, retention, and effectiveness of K-12 teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.