* 1852355
* REU Site: Collaborative Research: Earth and Planetary Science and Astrophysics REU at the American Museum of Natural History in Collaboration With the City University of New York
* MPS,AST
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2021
* CHARLES LIU, CUNY College of Staten Island
* Continuing Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 03/31/2021
* USD 55,808.00

This award provides renewed funding for undergraduate students to conduct
experimental, observational, theoretical, and computational research activities
in earth science, planetary science, and astronomy at the American Museum of
Natural History (AMNH) in New York City. Eight students per year will be
selected to perform research into topics ranging from meteoritics, to
volcanology, to experimental and theoretical astrophysics. The participants will
be rigorously trained and well-educated in the fundamentals of the scientific
enterprise, and will receive valuable research experience in an active,
immersive, integrated research and education environment.

Although it recruits from a nationwide pool, this Research Experiences for
Undergraduates (REU) Site particularly leverages longstanding collaborations
between scientists in the City University of New York (CUNY) system and at AMNH.
CUNY is a 269,000-student urban public university network whose students
primarily come from communities underrepresented in science. The CUNY/AMNH
partnership will therefore enhance the REU Site's ability to recruit students in
urban, traditionally underserved populations. Aside from their primary research
activities, REU interns will also participate in Museum programs; attend field
trips, colloquia, and conferences to present research; and present their work in
a scientific symposium open to the public.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.