* 1852111
* REU Site: Research Experiences for Undergraduates in Chemical Engineering at the University of Florida
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2024
* Helena Hagelin-Weaver, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 04/30/2024
* USD 394,728.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) program in Chemical
Engineering at the University of Florida (UF), Department of Chemical
Engineering (ChE), will host a diverse cohort of undergraduate students who will
be exposed to state-of-the-art Chemical Engineering research in the broad areas
of: Catalysis and Reaction Engineering, Nanomanufacturing and Nanoscale
Engineering, Complex Flows and Interfacial Phenomena, and Biomedical
Applications. Visits to local technology incubators and interactions with local
entrepreneurs will provide participants with examples of translation of
laboratory technologies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this 10 week summer
REU program are to provide meaningful research experiences to undergraduates
interested in chemical engineering research, provide formal and informal
education on how to conduct research, and motivate students to pursue advanced
studies in chemical engineering. Participants will conduct research in a broad
range of areas representative of current Chemical Engineering research,
including catalysis and reaction engineering, nanomanufacturing and nanoscale
engineering, complex flows and interfacial phenomena, and biomedical
applications of chemical engineering. Participants will be mentored by a group
of sixteen faculty with a distinguished track record of mentoring
undergraduates. Weekly seminars will introduce participants to many of the
skills needed to be successful in research. These seminars will be led by UF ChE
faculty, promoting interactions with potential role models. Participants will
also benefit from visits to technology incubators and cultural sites close to
Gainesville, FL.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.