* 1852744
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Investigating Overt Definite Articles and Grammatical Variation
* SBE,BCS
* 12/01/2018,05/31/2022
* Sarah Murray, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 05/31/2022
* USD 18,900.00

The questions "Is the doctor on board?" and "Is a doctor on board?" can signify
very different situations. With the first question, a husband may simply be
looking for his wife, whereas with the second, a doctor is needed for an
emergency. The only difference between these two questions is "the" (the
definite article) and "a" (the indefinite article). Many languages, however, do
not have overt definite and indefinite articles. How, then, do speakers of these
languages differentiate between these two meanings? One way to differentiate is
by context: "Is doctor on board?" in languages without overt articles can be
either definite or indefinite, and in context speakers understand whether a
particular doctor is needed or any doctor. Certain linguistic theories predict
that if a language has an overt definite article, then certain grammatical
constructions are prohibited. One such prohibited construction is where
modifiers appear disconnected from the noun they modify ("Friendly I saw the
doctor" is not grammatical in English, but possibly grammatical in languages
without definite articles). This project will investigate variation in two
dialects of an underdocumented language, each of which have different ways of
expressing definiteness. These dialects, while mutually understandable, also
differ with respect to possible grammatical constructions, like the disconnected
modifier construction. This project will advance our understanding of
crosslinguistic variation in how languages express definiteness and keep track
of individuals in discourse, research with implications for the fields of
natural language processing, speech recognition and other branches of
computational linguistics. Broader impacts include a public repository of
recordings and transcriptions, materials for use by community members, promotion
of linguistic sustainability in the region and collaboration with local
university students as active contributors to knowledge on their heritage
language. Other outcomes include the training of a doctoral
student.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CoPI, a doctoral candidate at Cornell
University, will document and analyze two dialects of Ch'ol (CTU), an endangered
Mayan language of southern Mexico, for her doctoral dissertation. As the two
dialects of Ch'ol (Tila and Tumbala) have different ways to express
definiteness, the CoPI will connect this research to theories that predict that
certain grammatical constructions are prohibited if a language has a definite
article. The Tumbala dialect allows for a variety of modifiers to be
disconnected from the nouns they modify. The Tila dialect, however, does not
allow many modifiers to appear far away to the noun they modify. The hypothesis
of this project is that the Tila dialect has more restrictions than the Tumbala
dialect because the Tila dialect has a grammaticalized definite article, whereas
the Tumbala dialect does not. During fieldwork, the CoPI will record and
transcribe narratives, and conduct interviews with speakers. These varied
sources of data will create an empirically sound foundation for the dissertation
and future work. The outcomes of this project include in-depth documentation of
definite articles and nominal constructions in Ch'ol as well as dialectal
variation with respect to definiteness and disconnected nominal expressions,
both novel contributions to the field. It will also advance linguistic models at
the interface of syntax and semantics and inform work on the marking of
definiteness crosslinguistically.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.