* 1852893
* Rural Integrated STEM Education: Middle and High School Teacher Pathways Developed Through a Regional Alliance
* EHR,DUE
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2020
* Sagayamary Rayappan, University Corporation at Monterey Bay
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Camacho - Walter
* 01/31/2020
* USD 125,000.00

With support from the NSF Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program, this project
aims to serve the national interest in high quality STEM teaching by increasing
the number of talented and adaptive STEM teachers in rural California. This
project will build capacity to educate STEM teachers by developing a plan to
recruit, prepare, and support undergraduate STEM students from two-year and
four-year colleges to teach in rural, high-need middle and high schools. By
transforming the early experiences of future teachers, the project aims to
develop highly qualified STEM educators capable of investing in the next
generation of scientists in rural districts and communities. The project
partners will develop a plan for two-year teacher preparation pathways that
focus on inquiry experiences and STEM research in the first two years of
college.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will establish a regional alliance
between three post-secondary Hispanic Serving Institutions (HSIs) and the County
Office of Education, which represents 24 school districts in California's
Central Coast region. This alliance will collaboratively develop early-access
STEM teacher pathways. The HSIs (California State University Monterey Bay,
Hartnell College, and Monterey Peninsula College) will plan how to integrate
evidence-based components into early STEM teacher pathways. These components
include active learning and culturally responsive pedagogy, with the expectation
that the additions will contribute to STEM teacher diversity. The Next
Generation Science Standards Regional Collaborative Teacher Network, coordinated
by the County Office of Education, will provide prospective teachers with access
to an inclusive STEM community of practice, which includes in-service teachers
with expertise in STEM-teaching best practices. The project action plan will
identify steps to develop early STEM inquiry, teaching, and mentored research
opportunities. The project has the potential to develop a model for broadening
the pool of STEM students who enter teacher education programs at the California
Community College System (113 colleges) and the California State University
System (23 universities). As a result, this project may provide a blueprint for
an expanded STEM teacher preparation pipeline, thus helping to address rural
STEM teacher shortages and broaden the pool of highly-qualified STEM teachers.
The NSF Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program supports talented STEM
undergraduate majors and professionals to become K-12 mathematics and science
teachers in high-need school districts and in-service teachers to become STEM
master teachers. It also supports research on the persistence, retention, and
effectiveness of K-12 teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.