* 1852898
* Strengthening STEM Teacher Education Pathways in Kentucky with Collaborative Partnerships
* EDU,DUE
* 05/15/2019,04/30/2021
* Kristin Cook, Bellarmine University
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 04/30/2021
* USD 125,000.00

With support from the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program, this Capacity
Building project aims to help address a national shortage of K-12 STEM teachers
by strengthening STEM teacher education pathways in Kentucky. This project will
enable Bellarmine University to streamline the institution's Master of Arts in
Teaching (MAT) program so that STEM undergraduate students can complete it with
only one additional year of study. The University also intends to develop
partnerships with nearby community colleges to facilitate transfer of community
college students to the University and their successful completion of both a
STEM bachelor's degree and a MAT degree. By streamlining the teacher
certification program and developing partnerships to increase access to the
institution's MAT program, this project has the potential to increase the number
of highly-qualified STEM teachers in high-need K-12 STEM classrooms in
Kentucky.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project involves collaborations between
Bellarmine University, Bluegrass Community and Technical College, Jefferson
Community and Technical College, Jefferson County Public Schools, which is one
of the nation's largest urban school districts, and the Kentucky Science Center.
The project aims to accomplish the following goals: (1) develop an early-start
MAT certification for STEM undergraduates; (2) develop a recruitment pipeline
and support system throughout Bellarmine University's STEM teacher education
program via partnership agreements with the collaborating community colleges and
school district; (3) develop a partnership agreement with the school district to
hire future STEM teachers produced by a subsequent project; (4) develop a STEM
summer camp and internship agreement with the Kentucky Science Center for STEM
undergraduates and MAT students; and (5) develop a plan to recruit, prepare, and
support new STEM teachers in high-need school districts, thus expanding and
diversifying the pool of new STEM teacher candidates. This project comes at a
critical time in Kentucky because of changing student demographics, critical
industry needs in STEM, and the state's adoption of the Next Generation Science
Standards, which have a strong K-12 STEM curriculum. In addition to benefitting
a high-need school district in Kentucky, this project is expected to contribute
to national efforts in STEM teacher education and serve as a model for other
states with similar needs in STEM education. The Noyce program supports talented
STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM
teachers in high-need school districts and experienced, exemplary K-12 STEM
teachers to become STEM master teachers. It also supports research on the
persistence, retention, and effectiveness of K-12 teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.