* 1852629
* Building the Capacity to Recruit, Enroll, and Graduate Mathematics Education Majors
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/2019,01/31/2024
* Joseph Alfano, Assumption College
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Lewis
* 01/31/2024
* USD 118,315.00

With support from the NSF Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program, this project
aims to serve the national interest in high quality STEM teaching by building
capacity to educate more math majors to become highly-qualified math teachers in
high-needs school districts. This project will enable faculty from Assumption
College, Holyoke Community College, and Middlesex Community College to develop
successful transfer pathways into an existing dual degree track for Math and
Education majors. This project will also strengthen partnerships between STEM
and Education faculty at Assumption College by supporting collaboration to
develop and deliver a new, two-course sequence for STEM majors. The courses will
be designed to deepen interest of STEM majors in teaching as a career and will
prepare them for a teaching experience at a math-focused summer camp for local
high school students. By investigating factors that affect undergraduate STEM
majors' interest in teaching as a career, the project will contribute new
knowledge about pathways to teaching for STEM undergraduates.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project activities aim to increase awareness among
first-year, second-year, and transfer students about the existing dual degree
program, enable more students to declare the dual major in Mathematics and
Education in their third year, and increase the number of students who
matriculate as certified teachers. Intensive advising and updated informational
materials will increase student and faculty awareness of the new courses and the
new articulation agreements developed among the partner colleges. An
informational campaign will target parents and teachers of students in local
high schools to recruit high school students for the summer camp in mathematics.
The project's assessment strategies will provide information that will be used
to: 1) support the STEM majors' successful delivery of effective mathematics
instruction at the summer camp; and 2) determine what aspects of the cohort
experiences increase interest in teaching. The overall project will benefit from
the oversight of an advisory group composed of mathematics and education faculty
and undergraduate students enrolled in the dual degree program. Dissemination
efforts will focus on sharing knowledge and curricular materials with local
communities as well as with a national audience through conference presentations
and publications. The NSF Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program supports
talented STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to become K-12 mathematics
and science teachers in high-need school districts and in-service teachers to
become STEM master teachers. It also supports research on the persistence,
retention, and effectiveness of K-12 teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.