* 1852999
* SBIR Phase II:  Ureter Detection during Minimally Invasive or Robotic Surgery by Electrical Stimulus Evoked Responses
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2019,12/31/2020
* Albert Huang, Allotrope Medical
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2020
* USD 951,914.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is to completely change
how critical&lt;br/&gt;anatomic structures such as the ureter are identified and
protected during surgery. As surgical&lt;br/&gt;technology advances and
procedures are done using robots and through millimeter-
sized&lt;br/&gt;incisions, there is an ever-increasing need for technology that
quickly and easily identifies&lt;br/&gt;different structures in the body during
surgery to increase the safety of these techniques,&lt;br/&gt;shorten the
operations and decrease healthcare costs both from a procedure length
standpoint&lt;br/&gt;as well as surgical complications. Precise electrical
stimulation that generates targeted smooth&lt;br/&gt;muscle structure
contractions make them immediately visible to the surgeon without
needing&lt;br/&gt;to perform complex and risky dissections, and eliminates the
need for costly (and invasive)&lt;br/&gt;products such as ureteral stents to
keep patients safe. Smooth muscle stimulation during&lt;br/&gt;surgery will
change how we operate both today, and in the future. It can help surgeons
identify&lt;br/&gt;tissue structures with the push of a button, help determine
healthy and unhealthy tissues from&lt;br/&gt;each other, and can guide clinical
decision making. With an ever-increasing need to deliver&lt;br/&gt;quality care
to patients, technology that increases surgical efficiency, patient safety
and&lt;br/&gt;decreases healthcare costs will have high demand and significant
commercial impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research
(SBIR) Phase II project will greatly advance the field of&lt;br/&gt;surgery
through design, development and clinical use of an innovative smooth
muscle&lt;br/&gt;stimulation device. Surgeons currently spend up to 40% of their
operating time looking for&lt;br/&gt;structures such as the ureter to prevent
accidental injury in over 3 million operations done each&lt;br/&gt;year in the
US alone, and injuries to this structure accounts for over $3 billion in
annual&lt;br/&gt;healthcare over-spending. This Phase II project will bring a
unique smooth muscle stimulation&lt;br/&gt;technology into the operating room to
benefit surgeons and patients. A signal generator will be&lt;br/&gt;designed and
built (with safety features in place), tested, and paired with sterile
surgical&lt;br/&gt;instruments. These will be tested first in large animal
models as well as in-silico studies to&lt;br/&gt;confirm safety and efficacy,
and then a clinical pilot study will be performed in the
hospital&lt;br/&gt;setting in patients that consent to participate. The
anticipated result of this project is to have a&lt;br/&gt;medical device system
that passes all standard electrical safety requirement for human use
that&lt;br/&gt;is shown to be clinically effective in assisting surgeons in
identification of structures such as the&lt;br/&gt;ureter during lower
abdominal/pelvic operations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.