* 1852095
* REU Site: Physics and Chemistry Research at Wooster
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Susan Lehman, College of Wooster
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 03/31/2024
* USD 326,132.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU site in the Physics and
Chemistry departments at The College of Wooster closely guides undergraduates in
publishable research projects. This site targets improving the retention of
students in science and helping build the technological workforce that is
essential to our nation's future. Its long-running granular flow experiment
allows investigation of critical phenomena like avalanches and earthquakes. Its
reaction-diffusion simulation sheds light on wave-front recovery in damaged
cardiac tissue. Its ongoing study of a unique swellable glass, discovered at
Wooster, informs its commercial use in environmental remediation projects. The
site's faculty have extensive experience introducing and training students in
research, especially young students recruited from undergraduate and two-year
colleges. The site supports at-risk students as it introduces them to the
challenge, excitement, and rewards of doing research in science. Students become
practicing scientists through research, oral and poster presentations, written
reports, and article co-authorship.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
DESCRIPTION&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU site in the Physics and Chemistry
departments at The College of Wooster enables even novice undergraduates to make
significant scientific contributions. It regularly recruits students from
primarily undergraduate institutions and local two-year colleges. The research
projects span a broad range of fields including granular materials,
spatiotemporal pattern formation, swellable glass, quantum optics, nonlinear
dynamics, celestial mechanics, and astrophysics. Approaches include theory,
computation, and experiment. This site includes a STEM outreach component
through which students conduct and explain engaging science demonstrations for
7th grade girls in Wooster's Buckeye Women In Science, Engineering, and Research
(B-WISER) summer camp.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.