* 1852925
* Preparing Committed and Culturally Competent STEM Teachers in South Central Texas
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Toni Sauncy, Texas Lutheran University
* Continuing Grant
* Mindy Capaldi
* 03/31/2024
* USD 988,780.00

With support from the NSF Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program, this Track
1: Scholarships &amp; Stipends project at Texas Lutheran University aims to
serve the national need of preparing high-quality STEM K-12 teachers for high-
need school districts. The project has the potential to advance collaboration
between science and education faculty in addressing the critical shortage of
teachers in STEM fields in Texas. Through partnerships with regional high-need
school districts, the project will recruit biology, chemistry, mathematics, and
physics majors for high school teaching careers. The project will support at
least twenty new teachers with scholarships, mentoring, and specialized training
for their transition to and success in the classroom. Undergraduate recipients
will receive up to two years of scholarship support to complete the Bachelor of
Science degree in their selected discipline, while also completing requirements
that prepare them to successfully obtain teaching certification upon graduation.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on the intersection of passion for
teaching, cultural awareness, and modern science and mathematics practices. As
such, the project will implement best-practice techniques for training teachers
to identify cultural barriers, recognize and address related issues, and promote
inclusion for broad participation in STEM fields. The emphasis on culturally
responsive teaching using research-based pedagogies will be the hallmark of the
program. Noyce Scholars will participate in extracurricular enrichment
activities designed to broaden cultural perspectives and foster passion for and
commitment to teaching as a career. A key component of the project is the
support and engagement of program graduates through continued virtual and in-
person connections with STEM and Education faculty at Texas Lutheran University.
In-service teachers will participate in professional development workshops at
the University and be supported by experienced mentors at one of the four
partnering high-need regional school districts. This work aims to increase
understanding of how the small liberal arts college setting, combined with close
faculty-student mentoring, nurturing of passion and vocation, and rigorous
preparation in STEM content areas, can affect the recruitment, motivation, and
persistence of STEM teachers. The Noyce program supports talented STEM
undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers in
high-need school districts and experienced and exemplary K-12 STEM teachers to
become STEM master teachers. It also supports research on the persistence,
retention, and effectiveness of K-12 teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.