* 1852721
* EAGER: Composing Pathways for Collaboration Between Computer Science Researchers and Practitioners (CompPath)
* CSE,CNS
* 03/15/2019,12/31/2021
* Nigamanth Sridhar, Cleveland State University
* Standard Grant
* Allyson Kennedy
* 12/31/2021
* USD 299,967.00

Cleveland State University, together with the Teaching Institute for Excellence
in STEM (TIES), will design and pilot ways for computer science (CS) faculty to
engage with and contribute to preK-12 CS learning opportunities in their
communities. The two-year project, called CompPath (for Composing Pathways for
Collaboration Between Computer Science Researchers and Practitioners) will
explore the creation of meaningful and authentic connections between cutting-
edge computer science research and K-12. It will emphasize the translation of
research products in a manner that broadens participation by being inclusive of,
and appealing to, women, people of color, and other under-represented
minorities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the project will
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&gt; Create demonstrative collaborations between
researchers that will serve as models to other computing researchers across the
country; &lt;br/&gt;&gt; Collect an inventory of opportunities that a CS
researcher can leverage to incorporate outreach activities in their research
project in a sustainable and authentic manner;&lt;br/&gt;&gt; Design and launch
a searchable clearinghouse infrastructure that will allow CS researchers and
other Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM)-related groups
located in proximate regions to easily find each other; and&lt;br/&gt;&gt; Host
a series of "design studio" events that are focused on meaningful collaborations
between CS researchers and providers of Broadening Participation in Computing
resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In its dissemination, the project will leverage
the network of the STEM Learning Ecosystems Community of Practice (SLECoP), an
initiative comprising 68 communities across the US focused on dynamic, cross-
sector STEM engagement&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.