* 1852564
* REU Site: Sustainable Groundwater Resources
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2023
* Leora Nanus, San Francisco State University
* Continuing Grant
* Aisha Morris
* 04/30/2023
* USD 428,362.00

The focus of the Sustainable Groundwater Resources REU Site is groundwater
sustainability science. Groundwater is a fundamental component of the global
hydrologic cycle and a vital natural resource. It sustains many rivers, lakes,
wetlands, and other groundwater dependent ecosystems, and is a significant
source of freshwater for human consumption. Groundwater is also the foundation
for irrigated agroecosystems, food production, ecosystem services, energy-
extraction and production, and other industries. As a result of this demand,
excessive groundwater (over)extraction, particularly in many of the largest and
most important food producing aquifer systems in arid and semi-arid regions, has
resulted in rapidly declining water levels and substantial loss of storage,
referred to as the global groundwater crisis. Climate variability and change and
the associated modifications to the hydrologic cycle are exacerbating concerns
over the global groundwater crisis and societal implications. The sustainability
of groundwater resources, particularly in California, is a well-recognized and
urgent concern from local to global scales. Our students and exceptionally well-
qualified Research Mentors will address knowledge gaps and practical solutions
to the global groundwater crisis, with particular emphasis on California's
Sustainable Groundwater Management Act (SGMA). We will also use a formative and
summative evaluation plan to rigorously assess and continually improve the
quality and impact of our REU Site. The REU Site will have the following
positive impacts: (1) help create an engaged U.S. workforce; (2) contribute to
the diversification of the U.S. workforce; (3) help prepare students for careers
to meet the unprecedented challenges of sustainable freshwater resources,
particularly related to SGMA; (4) promote increased research productivity and
new research ideas for all participants; and (5) help build academic capacity
and practical solutions for rural and urban communities across
California.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The REU Site will provide genuine research
experience and training in groundwater sustainability science for undergraduate
students, particularly women and underrepresented minorities (URM), at an early
stage in their scientific careers. There are five primary objectives. (1) To
provide junior- and senior-level undergraduates the opportunity to engage in
independent research and make original intellectual contributions. (2) To
provide community based research experience and professional development
opportunities that create an engaged workforce in hydrologic sciences and
engineering. (3) To expand the participation and increase the retention of women
and URM students in STEM. (4) To integrate cutting edge research and training
about groundwater sustainability science, particularly related to California's
Sustainable Groundwater Management Act (SGMA). (5) To provide a framework for
productive collaboration between interdisciplinary Research Mentors and
undergraduates across the CSU system. The REU Site has five components. (1) A
two-week, inquiry-based learning orientation that exposes students to the
scientific process and fundamental concepts and skills. (2) A seven-week
independent research experience where students will take primary responsibility
for their project, while under their RM's guidance and resources. (3) A weekly
professional development seminar where students engage with professionals to
learn about graduate school and careers. (4) Social and professional activities
to foster a strong cohort experience. (5) A community-wide research symposium
where REU students will present their research results to the California
groundwater community, friends, and family. We will recruit 10 students per year
from the diverse URM student talent pool in the 23-campus California State
University system and from across the U.S., training a total of 30 REU fellows
over the three-year REU Site. We will target women and URM students who have
completed at least one year of college-level hydrology or related courses, and
interest in pursuing a graduate degree(s).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.