* 1852214
* REU Site: Mountains and Minds: Next Generation Chemistry for Materials and Catalysts
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2023
* Sharon Neufeldt, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 03/31/2023
* USD 278,248.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site award to Montana State
University, located in Bozeman, MT, supports the training of 10 undergraduate
students for 10 weeks during the summer of 2019-2021. This site is supported by
the Department of Defense in partnership with the NSF REU program. The program
engages participants in research projects centered around the field of catalysis
and materials chemistry. Students receive training in state-of-the-art research
techniques and instrumentation. Alongside research, participants also take part
in activities designed to build strong science communication skills for the
general public as well as the scientific community. Participants also receive
professional development training, regularly interact with faculty and graduate
student mentors, and engage in outreach activities. This combination of
programming prepares a diverse cohort for research and a professional career in
STEM fields. This site's recruitment effort places an emphasis on recruitment of
Native Americans and students from primarily undergraduate institutions and
tribal colleges in the Northwest, Rocky Mountains, and Great Plains regions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Undergraduate researchers engage in projects related to
bio-inspired materials, protein-based catalysts, bacterial catalysts for polymer
degradation, polymer characterization,. Projects also include research on
nanomaterial synthesis, energy storage and conversion materials, catalytic
activation of small molecules, switchable catalysis, carbohydrate-functionalized
macromolecules, gas-surface interactions, and electrochemical devices such as
batteries and fuel cells. Each of these research topics is a focus of current
faculty-led research programs at Montana State University. Professional
development, with an emphasis on science communication skills, equips the
undergraduate participants for graduate research and chemistry
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.