* 1852042
* REU Site: ICompBio - Engaging Undergraduates in Interdisciplinary Computing for Biological Research
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Hong Qin, University of Tennessee Chattanooga
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 03/31/2024
* USD 435,498.00

This REU Site award to the University of Tennessee at Chattanooga, located in
Chattanooga, TN, will support the training of 10 students for 10 weeks during
the summers of 2019 to 2021. This REU focuses on interdisciplinary computational
biology (iCompBio) training for college sophomores and juniors in STEM majors.
The student application includes an application form, transcripts, a personal
statement, a resume, and 2 letters of recommendations. Applications will be
reviewed by a team of faculty research mentors. Students will learn various
computational methods and apply them to address biological questions. Each
student will be jointly mentored by a computer science mentor and a biology
mentor. A one-week computing bootcamp will be provided to teach students
essential data science using R, and advanced data processing and deep learning
methods using Python. The biological research topics include aging and
longevity, ecological networks, biodiversity, microbial pathway evolution,
aquatic ecology, environment sustainability, nanoparticle fertilizers, field
ecology, herbarium digitization, protein structures, and cell membrane
structures. The computing training includes coding, modeling, simulation, deep
learning neural networks, computer vision, parallel computing, statistics, data
visualization, and mobile App development. Students will also go through
training in ethics and responsible conduct for research. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;It is anticipated that a total of 30 students, primarily from schools
with limited research opportunities, will be trained in iCompBio. Students will
learn how to conduct reproducible computational research, and will make their
coding projects publicly available through GitHub. Students will also be
encouraged to present their research results in scientific meetings. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;A common web-based assessment tool, SALG URSSA, used by all REU Site
programs funded by the Division of Biological Infrastructure will be used to
determine the effectiveness of the training program. Students will be tracked
after the program in order to determine their career paths. Students will be
asked to respond to an automatic email sent via the NSF reporting system. More
information about the program is available at http://utc.edu/icompbio or by
contacting the PI (Dr. Hong Qin at hong-qin@utc.edu ) or the co-PI (Dr.
Soubantika Palchoudhury at soubantika-
palchoudhury@utc.edu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.