* 1852688
* A Collaborative Network to Increase the Number of High-Quality Secondary School STEM Teachers in Georgia
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Kimberly Shaw, Columbus State University
* Continuing Grant
* James A. M. Alvarez
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,181,913.00

With support from the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce), this
Track 1: Scholarships and Stipends project at Columbus State University aims to
serve the national and local need of preparing high-quality Science, Technology,
Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) teachers for high-need school districts.
Columbus State University will work in cooperation with the Muscogee County
School District to prepare STEM teachers who are well-grounded in STEM
disciplines. The project intends to recruit individuals pursuing or possessing
baccalaureate degrees in a STEM discipline and prepare them to become middle and
high school mathematics, computer science, and science teachers who can meet the
needs of students in high-need schools. Nearly two-thirds of all high school
students enrolled in Muscogee County School District qualify for free or reduced
lunch. Ten of nineteen middle and high schools in the district are Title 1
schools. The funding support from this grant will help the region address both
STEM workforce requirements and the shortage of teachers in an impoverished
socioeconomic environment. Specifically, internships will be provided to recruit
potential pre-service STEM teachers and scholarships will be provided to support
the costs of pre-service STEM teacher education. In addition, the project aims
to create a Community of Reflective Practitioners for interns, Scholars,
graduates, and other interested students and faculty. The project relies on a
well-established network of support at Columbus State University and Muscogee
County School District, which is expected to improve the training of pre-service
Scholars and the induction of new teachers, thus improving the retention of
teachers in high-need schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over a five-year period, the
project aims to provide 96 one-semester internships and 48 one-year
scholarships. This support is intended to result in the preparation of 24 new
STEM educators. Although some of the Scholars may be individuals with STEM
baccalaureate degrees, the majority will be undergraduates working to earn
bachelor's degrees in STEM disciplines. Recruitment will include STEM majors in
chemistry, biology, earth and space sciences, mathematics, and computer science.
The project will implement an Intern-Scholar-Mentor Triad model, which is
expected to increase the duration of the teacher candidates' engagement with
Mentor Teachers in a high needs school. Regular commitments of time to work with
the mentor teacher in the school setting will immerse the teacher candidates in
the school culture. This immersion is aimed at addressing some of the myths
about working in high-need settings and at building intern and Scholar self-
efficacy in these environments. The Noyce program supports talented STEM
undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers
and experienced, exemplary K-12 STEM teachers to become STEM master teachers in
high-need school districts. It also supports research on the persistence,
retention, and effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.