* 1852538
* REU Site: Cyberinfrastructure (CI) Research 4 Social Change
* CSE,OAC
* 03/01/2019,02/28/2022
* Rosalia Gomez, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Alan Sussman
* 02/28/2022
* USD 371,689.00

The world is increasingly more dependent on computational power, augmented by
larger and larger networks of sensors and instruments. To fuel innovation across
multiple disciplines, advanced computing (data, high performance computing,
analytics) is required to keep pace with and accelerate the rate of scientific
discoveries. In response to the National Science Foundation's mission to promote
the progress of science; advance the national health, prosperity and welfare;
and secure the national defense, the Cyberinfrastructure (CI) Research 4 Social
Change REU project is actively engaging ten undergraduate students each summer
for nine-weeks in solving real-world problems of national relevance, teaching
them to not only be critical thinkers, but to be creative and reflective as
well. The REU project is preparing the future scientific workforce to use
advanced CI resources, thus building capacity in research areas that support
major advances in understanding across a broad range of societal challenges.
Students have a strong desire to have an impact in their communities, a strong
desire to have a sense of belonging, and a strong desire to be materially part
of something larger than themselves. Connecting social change principals to
real-world problem solving is key to long-term success for recruiting and
retaining underrepresented communities to computational fields and for preparing
students to leverage the national CI.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The REU aims to meet
three objectives: (1) train students to use the national CI by integrating
learning of computational science, data-enabled science and multi-disciplinary
science in preparation for graduate programs and the workforce; (2) train
students to apply advanced computational skills, critical thinking, and
creativity to address problems relevant to society; and (3) increase the number
of diverse and computationally competent students in the STEM pipeline. The
enriching and transformative experience at a world-class supercomputing center
includes: training in High Performance Computing (HPC), visualization, and data
intensive computing; mentoring by The University of Texas (UT) at Austin
researchers; social and team-building activities on the UT Austin campus;
professional development and graduate school preparation; and leadership
development and opportunities to develop and enhance communication skills.
Research projects emphasize advanced computing as a tool to power discoveries
that will impact social change for future generations. Using the CI, students
conduct cutting-edge research in engineering, science, and computational
medicine: helping automate processes in support of cleaner energy sources for
production of biofuel; enhancing research resources for modeling/prediction of
porous material properties in fields of petroleum, civil and environmental
engineering as well as geology; using data science and visualization to
illustrate interfaces between science, traditional culture, and pressing
societal problems in the Pacific region; developing and analyzing numerical
algorithms for multiphysics, multiscale flow and transport problems in storm
surge, tides, and coastal circulation; and developing and analyzing machine
learning algorithms for individualized medicine. The REU recruits at least 50%
underrepresented students. Targeted recruitment also includes women, first-
generation college students, and majority students from institutions with
limited research opportunities, including Minority-Serving
Institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.