* 1852995
* RAPID:  Well and Profitable during Pacific Northwest Fires: modeling I-O air pollution measured by fine and ultra-fine particulate matters
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2020
* Amy Kim, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 08/31/2020
* USD 127,516.00

Part 1: As of August 2018, 110 large forest fires exist in western Washington.
State health officials have designated many consecutive days of unhealthy air
quality in the Puget Sound area. One of the primary health concerns of forest
fire smoke is with microscopic particulate matter (PM-25) that can enter the
bloodstream. While this health impact is known, we do not have a good
understanding of how indoor air quality is impacted by infiltration of high
PM-25 outdoor air quality during infrequent periods of massive forest fire
outbreaks. This proposal takes advantage of a limited window of opportunity for
obtaining data on the indoor and outdoor air quality in the Puget Sound region
home to 3.7 million residents. The research will measure PM-25 in locations
impacted by the massive forest fire outbreak, coupled with intensive studies of
four building in the region to address fundamental questions about how people
can stay healthier indoors during the wildfire season, and how businesses can
better support employee health. Part 2: The objectives of this proposal are to
develop a comprehensive collection of fine and ultrafine particulate matter data
in both indoor and outdoor locations near a massive wildfire outbreak, conduct a
case-study-based field experimentation of air quality in office buildings with
known air handling operations, and understand how worker health and the success
and profitability of organizations are impacted by episodic forest fires. Air
quality data will be collected by handheld equipment and regression analyses
will be performed using the measured indoor and outdoor particulate matter
concentrations. A recursive model will be adapted to calculate the infiltration
factor for various particulate matter concentrations. Principal component
analysis will be used to help identify probable sources that produce various
indoor particulates. Potential psychological tolls will be both quantitatively
and qualitatively assessed by questionnaires measuring perceived productivity,
controllability of indoor air quality, and environmental trust. Correlational
and content analyses, as well as paired-sample t-tests, will reveal associations
between these variables during times of poor air quality and compare them
against times of baseline air quality. This topic is significant for several
reasons. First, the absence of a nationwide monitoring network to track
ultrafine particulates has hampered the research community in developing robust
health studies of these particles. Second, an information asymmetry exists
between indoor and outdoor air pollution levels. Indeed, the sole measure of
ambient outdoor fine particulate matter paints an incomplete picture of total
exposure to air pollution. Third, while studies on mental health responses to
natural disasters exist, the subtle psychological tolls from discomfort (e.g.,
headaches, scratchy throat, limited outdoor activities) experienced during a
secondary-disaster (e.g., deterioration of air quality in neighboring regions of
the wildfire zone) are seldom discussed. This proposal provides an opportunity
for a naturalistic field study; results can be used to compare to other
laboratory and experimental studies. Office buildings in the United States
represent over 50 percent of existing commercial building stock by number and
total square footage. Scholarly data are not available about the infiltration of
fine and ultrafine particles in work environments. This research will fill a
data void concerning needed information on the infiltration of fine and
ultrafine particles in work environments.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.