* 1852774
* A Post Baccalaureate STEM Teacher Preparation Program for High-Needs Schools in the West Georgia Region and Beyond
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2026
* Anne Gaquere-Parker, University of West Georgia
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 06/30/2026
* USD 927,308.00

With support from the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce), this
Track 2 Teaching Fellowship project aims to serve the regional need for highly-
qualified high school STEM teachers in high-needs school districts. It also aims
to create teacher leaders in STEM disciplines. The project will recruit
individuals with a baccalaureate or higher degree in a STEM discipline. These
Noyce Fellows will be fast-tracked into teaching through a one-year Master of
Arts in Teaching (MAT) program, with teaching certification. The MAT program
will include advanced STEM content and pedagogical content coursework, inquiry-
based instruction, intensive coaching, and full-day internship/student teaching
experiences. The Fellows will receive a salary supplement for each of the four
years they teach in a high-need school district. Induction activities will
support the Fellows from the beginning of their teaching careers, including
attention to helping the master teachers develop leadership skills. Fellows will
be part of a learning community that includes exemplary teachers, school
administrators, university faculty, and community leaders. The program is
designed to develop highly effective high school teachers who will help the
state and nation develop a skilled STEM workforce, including future STEM
teachers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of the project is to
recruit, prepare, and sustain 20 additional STEM-certified master teachers who
will be teacher leaders at high-needs high schools in the fields of biology,
chemistry, physics, geosciences, and mathematics. A concerted effort will be
made to recruit Fellows from underrepresented groups, thus broadening
participation in high school teaching. This project is designed for post-
baccalaureate STEM majors who have also passed the state content exam in their
respective fields. Fellows will be placed in Carrollton City Schools or Carroll
County Schools, two high-need partner districts. The West Georgia Youth Science
Technology Center, a non-profit organization, is partnering with the project to
provide professional development during the post certification years, as is the
Carrollton/Carroll County Education Collaborative. An additional project goal is
to assess the effectiveness of the project's preparation model for developing
teacher leaders. The research plan includes analysis of pedagogical approaches,
induction strategies, and leadership development activities. The engagement of
Fellows in this scholarly work is expected to build their capacity for making
ongoing contributions to the field. Findings from project research will be
presented at professional conferences and published in peer-reviewed journals.
This project will make an impact on society by producing more highly-qualified
STEM teachers who have a commitment and are better prepared to teach in high-
needs schools. These Fellows, in turn, can inspire students to pursue STEM
careers, thus strengthening the technology-based workforce needed to grow
Georgia's economy. In addition, the Fellows can inspire more students to pursue
STEM teaching, ensuring that the pool of high-quality teachers continues to
grow. The Noyce program supports talented STEM undergraduate majors and
professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary
K-12 STEM teachers to become STEM master teachers in high-needs school
districts. It also supports research on persistence, retention, and
effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-needs school
districts.&amp;#8195;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.