* 1852401
* NRAO/GBO Research Experience for Undergraduates
* MPS,AST
* 03/01/2019,02/28/2023
* James Braatz, Associated Universities, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* James Higdon
* 02/28/2023
* USD 520,299.00

This award will provide renewed funding of the National Radio Astronomy
Observatory (NRAO) Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site. The REU
program will be offered annually to fifteen qualified applicants in three
locations: Socorro, NM; Green Bank, WV; and Charlottesville, VA. These sites are
the headquarters for the operations of the Very Large Array (VLA) and Very Long
Baseline Array (VLBA), Green Bank Telescope (GBT), and Atacama Large
Millimeter/submillimeter Array (ALMA), respectively. Students will perform
cutting-edge research in several areas, including all fields of astronomy
(cosmology, extragalactic, galactic, stellar, solar system, astrochemistry,
pulsars, etc.), as well as astronomical engineering and computing. In addition
to their assigned research project, all students participate in a hands-on
observing experience using the NRAO GBT, VLA, and/or VLBA.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award will enable a pipeline of skilled scientists and
engineers to be developed in the field of radio astronomy, which is critical for
the infrastructure of NSF-funded facilities. The program has also demonstrated
its effectiveness in retaining students in STEM fields: indeed, over 300 past
participants remain in the field of astronomy. Finally, participants also
receive instruction and experience with communicating their scientific research
through oral and written presentation of their research project results,
including the opportunity to present their research at a professional meeting
following their appointment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.