* 1852807
* Philadelphia Regional Pre- and In-Service Teacher Conference Series on Integrating STEM in Everyday Life
* EDU,DUE
* 04/15/2019,02/28/2021
* Victor Donnay, Bryn Mawr College
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 02/28/2021
* USD 49,996.00

With support from the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce), The
project aims to serve the national need of advancing the development of highly
effective science and mathematics teachers. Te project is led by Bryn Mawr
College on behalf of the Philadelphia Regional Noyce Partnership (PRNP), a
collaboration of nine institutions of higher education (Arcadia University, Bryn
Mawr College, Community College of Philadelphia, Drexel University, LaSalle
University, Saint Joseph's University, Temple University, University of
Pennsylvania, and West Chester University, and the Philadelphia Education Fund).
Through a series of five conferences over fourteen months, this cohesive,
focused professional development series will convene approximately 100 Noyce
pre- and in-service secondary STEM teachers, and other Philadelphia-area STEM
teachers. Through the conference activities, these participants will gain the
understanding and skills needed to "Integrate STEM in Everyday Life," the
primary theme of the year-long work. It is anticipated that implementing a "STEM
in Everyday Life" approach will increase the success of students in STEM
classes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference series aims to partner pre-service
and in-service teachers to develop non-traditional curriculum units that are
both inquiry-based and place-based, using the students' cultural and physical
environment as the source of student research and data collection. Educators
will be supported in thinking intentionally about areas of their students' lives
in which learning STEM concepts would be highly motivating. Examples of such
areas include sports, food and nutrition, health and safety, music, and
transportation. The workshop participants will design and develop learning
experiences that engage their students in exploring how STEM concepts and
practices intersect with language arts, history, and fine arts, as well as how
STEM affects their lives and influences their decisions. In this conference
series, teachers will be challenged to develop engaging place-based, project-
based units that not only align with the Next Generation Science Standards and
the Common Core State Standards, but also to place STEM teaching in socio-
scientific and cultural contexts. In addition to the member institutions of the
PRNP, this project will reach out to institutions of higher education in the
Philadelphia region who have not had Noyce programs and introduce students and
faculty from these institutions to the Noyce network. Furthermore, the project
will disseminate what is learned through this work in publications and
presentations at national professional meetings. This project has the potential
to advance instructional skills of teachers in developing and implementing
placed-based curricular units that use the surrounding communities as their
laboratories. Thus, learning environments can be extended from inside school
walls into the community, while simultaneously bringing cultural and community
stakeholders into the world of schools. This interchange has the potential to
open new relationships within each community along STEM, cultural, and community
lines. The Noyce program supports talented STEM undergraduate majors and
professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary
K-12 STEM teachers to become STEM master teachers in high-need school districts.
It also supports research on the persistence, retention, and effectiveness of
K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.