* 1852224
* REU Site: Ecological Modeling of the Mississippi River Basin
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2022
* James Peirce, University of Wisconsin-La Crosse
* Standard Grant
* Tiziana Giorgi
* 05/31/2022
* USD 272,281.00

The objectives of this project are to train undergraduates in interdisciplinary
mathematics via research projects in ecological modeling; to motivate
undergraduate students, especially underrepresented and/or first-generation
college students with limited access to research at their home institution, to
attend graduate school; and to prepare undergraduate students to be successful
in an interdisciplinary, collaborative setting. To achieve these objectives as
part of this REU Site, students use ecological modeling techniques to address
questions about wildlife diseases as well as the factors contributing to
floodplain forest diversity and water quality. Projects utilize 20-year data
sets from the Mississippi River Basin to better understand the biological
patterns and processes underlying this unique region. The 24 student
participants develop the motivation and wide-ranging skills necessary to
transition into STEM-related careers, including those in mathematical biology.
Since this REU research experience is in collaboration with federal scientists,
results from students' projects can be rapidly applied to resource-management
problems, which may help to inform future decisions made by state and federal
agencies (such as the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research projects completed by participants in this REU Site will contribute to
the overall body of knowledge in ecological modeling by tackling novel research
questions in the areas of wildlife disease, water quality and forest diversity
using ordinary and stochastic differential equations, optimal control theory,
time-series analysis, multivariate analysis, and occupancy modeling. The mentors
include faculty and federal scientists who are excited to continue leading
undergraduate research projects in ecological modeling and disseminating project
results in peer-reviewed journals and/or regional or national
conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.