* 1852752
* Creating Pathways in STEM Education
* EDU,DUE
* 02/01/2019,08/31/2020
* Adam Brown, Saint Bonaventure University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Lewis
* 08/31/2020
* USD 70,675.00

Creating Pathways in STEM Education is a Capacity Building project at St.
Bonaventure University. The project will contribute to the national interest in
educating high quality teachers of STEM fields by designing four new curricular
pathways at St. Bonaventure University. These pathways will enable students to
achieve a BA in biology, chemistry, mathematics or physics as well as secondary
teaching certification within four years. The curricular design process will
strengthen relationships between STEM faculty and education faculty through
collaborative engagement. Local teachers will also participate in the design
process to provide their insights into elements of teacher preparation programs
that truly prepare new STEM teachers to be effective in high-need schools. The
project will also engage in market research and recruiting activities that will
contribute to deepening understanding of factors that are salient for recruiting
future STEM teachers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The curriculum development process
will take place through a stepwise series of workshops with STEM and education
faculty from St. Bonaventure University as well as teachers from high need
schools in the local area. Workshops will enable participants to construct a
shared understanding of 1) the essential features of high quality content and
pedagogy education for future STEM teachers, 2) the realities of STEM teaching
in high need schools, and 3) state requirements for STEM teacher certification
programs and effective models for meeting requirements. A final series of
meetings will engage faculty participants in outlining the four new pathways. An
external consultant will guide the process and provide comments on draft
proposals, which will be finalized and submitted for institutional and state
review as tangible products during the project period. Market research on models
at other institutions and on the potential pool of students for these new
degrees will be conducted to provide the supporting documentation for the
proposals that is a required part of the review process. Dissemination efforts
will focus on sharing lessons learned with local and institutional communities
as well as with a national audience through conference
presentations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.