* 1852723
* Computer Science for All: Developing a Computer Science Endorsement Program for Teachers
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2019,11/30/2022
* Theresa Steinbach, DePaul University
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 11/30/2022
* USD 75,000.00

With support from the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program, this Capacity
Building project at DePaul University aims to serve the local need for computer
science (CS) teachers. It will do so by building capacity to develop a CS
endorsement program that can provide teachers with formal CS teaching
credentials. Recognizing the importance of computer skills to prepare students
for career opportunities, Chicago Public Schools, a project partner, has
developed an ambitious Computer Science for All (CS4All) initiative. CS4All
requires that all students in Chicago Public Schools complete a year-long CS
course as a high school graduation requirement. Currently, it is estimated that
75% of CS instructors are teaching out-of-subject. As a result, Chicago Public
Schools, the nation's third largest school district, does not have enough
qualified CS teachers to meet the CS4All goals. DePaul University, which has two
of the most prominent CS and education programs in the state of Illinois, will
partner with Chicago Public Schools to enable the school system to meet the
pressing need for qualified CS teachers. In an increasingly technological,
computer-driven world, the United States needs more people who enter the
workforce with the skills needed for twenty-first century careers. This project
expects to contribute to filling this need by ensuring that high school
graduates from Chicago Public Schools have the foundational computer science
skills that will prepare them for these careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
central goal of this project is to establish the infrastructure for a computer
science program that has the potential to prepare hundreds of teachers. Those
teachers, in turn, will work with thousands of students in Chicago Public
Schools and those students will graduate from high school better prepared for
college and with the tools necessary for twenty-first century careers. To
accomplish these goals, this project will work to develop a CS teacher
endorsement program at DePaul University that will prepare teachers with formal
CS qualifications to educate students in Chicago Public Schools. CS officials at
Chicago Public Schools will partner with Education and CS faculty at DePaul to
develop the courses and overall framework for the endorsement program. To inform
this effort, project personnel will conduct online and face-to-face interviews
with DePaul students and CS professionals in the Chicago area to determine
critical components that must be included in a state-of-the-art CS curriculum.
Project personnel will also obtain input about the needs of students from
Chicago Public School teachers who, despite the barriers, have obtained a CS
endorsement. With its established online learning infrastructure, DePaul will
investigate the possibility of developing an online curriculum, that could
increase access to the endorsement program by removing the barrier of commuting
to campus. The Noyce program supports talented STEM undergraduate majors and
professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts and experienced, exemplary K-12 STEM teachers to become STEM master
teachers. It also supports research on the persistence, retention, and
effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.