* 1852319
* Collaborative Research: REU Site: Multisite REU in Synthetic Biology
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Robert Newman, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/29/2024
* USD 356,308.00

This collaborative REU site award to Simmons University, located in Boston, MA,
and North Carolina A&amp;T State University, located in Greensboro, NC, will
support the training of 12 students for 10 weeks during the summers of 2019-
2021. This is a multisite REU collaborative and each site will host 6 students
each summer. The focus of the program is to provide research experiences in the
multidisciplinary field of Synthetic Biology, an emerging field of biology that
integrates multiple scientific disciplines, including biology, mathematics,
chemistry, and computer science. Faculty mentors will be drawn from the
Departments of Chemistry, Biology, Mathematics, and Computer Science at both
institutions. During the 10-week program, students will be engaged in synthetic
biology research projects that teach them how to 1) use synthetic biology
strategies to solve complex biological problems, 2) work in a multidisciplinary
research team, and 3) develop cross-disciplinary communication skills. A common
week-long boot camp will be incorporated at both institutions using shared
modules to articulate common objectives, laboratory techniques, and
computational skills. To foster the collaboration between the sites, paired
virtual research groups will be created between sites and joint programming in
STEM career planning will be delivered using a variety of social media
platforms. The online learning community will consist of weekly cohort meetings
via webinar and a virtual journal club led by students and facilitated by
faculty mentors. During the program, students will also participate in a series
of workshops focused on core synthetic biology techniques, bioethical issues
associated with synthetic biology, implicit bias and sexual harassment in STEM,
and careers in STEM. The summer program will culminate with a consortium-wide
virtual symposium where students will have the opportunity to present their
research to their colleagues and receive constructive feedback. Students will be
selected based on their interest in research, academic record, recommendation
letters from their home institutions and phone interviews with faculty mentors
on the selection committee. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is anticipated that a total
of 36 students, primarily from underrepresented minority groups and from schools
with limited research opportunities, will be trained in the program. Students
will learn how research is conducted, and many will present the results of their
work at scientific conferences. This program is designed for students interested
in pursuing research careers in STEM fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A common web-
based assessment tool used by all REU Site programs funded by the Division of
Biological Infrastructure will be used to determine the effectiveness of the
training program. Students will be tracked after the program in order to
determine their career paths. Students will be asked to respond to an automatic
email sent via the NSF reporting system. More information about the program is
available by visiting or by contacting the PI (Dr. Jennifer Roecklein-Canfield
at Jennifer.canfield@simmons.edu) or the co-PI (Dr. Mariam Ismail at
Mariam.ismail@simmons.edu) at Simmons University or the PI (Dr. Robert Newman at
rhnewman@ncat.edu) at North Carolina A&amp;T State
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.