* 1852589
* Observations Relevant to Cometary Hyperactivity (The Year of 46P/Wirtanen)
* MPS,AST
* 11/15/2018,10/31/2020
* Tony Farnham, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Luke Sollitt
* 10/31/2020
* USD 59,900.00

During the fall of 2018, the very bright, very active comet 46P/Wirtanen will
share the sky with two other bright comets, 21P/Giacobini-Zinner and 64P/Swift-
Gehrels, as they reach their closest approach to the sun. Comet 46P/Wirtanen
will be especially bright. The investigators will collect images and spectra of
these three small comets whose orbits are controlled by Jupiter's presence. The
observations during their passages near the sun this year will provide future
studies with significant data to quantify compositions and physical
characteristics of gases and dust around the comet, investigate the presence of
icy grains, and determine common aspects or key differences among the comets.
These observations are time critical as these good observing conditions will not
present themselves again for over a decade for comet 21P, and more than two
decades for comets 46P and 64P. The investigators will share their
interpretations of the measured cometary activity, as well as the expected
stunning and informative images of these comets, with the broader community
through various public talks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Unlike the hyperactive comet
46P, most Jupiter-family comets display a level of activity that can be
accounted for by sublimation from a small fraction of their surface area. Comet
103P/Hartley 2 (the target of the NASA space probe Deep Impact), on the other
hand, is a representative member of a hyperactive population that,
paradoxically, exhibit active fractions &gt; 100%. During its flyby of Hartley
2, Deep Impact observed a large carbon dioxide jet, suffused with small grains
of water ice, originating from one lobe of the comet. The carbon dioxide
escaping from the nucleus likely dragged subsurface water-ice grains into the
coma. Once in the coma, the distributed ice grains dramatically increased the
surface area for water vapor sublimation, explaining Hartley 2's hyperactivity.
This model suggests that hyperactive comets are governed by subsurface volatiles
with low sublimation temperatures that entrain ice grains to produce anomalously
high-water production rates. Since the Deep Impact measurements, however, no
other hyperactive comet has been sufficiently observed to confirm the
applicability of the Hartley 2 model; this will change with observations of
46P.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.