* 1852388
* REU Site: Thermal Management on Multiple Scales
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2023
* John Meacham, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 04/30/2023
* USD 366,967.00

The primary objectives of this REU site at Washington University in St. Louis
are to expand student participation in thermal management research on multiple
scales and to attract a diverse pool of curious, motivated students into
engineering careers. A large and diverse STEM workforce is critical to global
competitiveness. This REU site will help increase the participation of women and
underrepresented minorities in engineering careers through two proven
strategies: (1) providing undergraduate research experience and (2) teaching
students the societal importance of engineering through exposure to a variety of
industrial, entrepreneurial, and academic career options; tours; and discussions
with engineers. Students will study research topics involving heat and power,
ranging from novel battery technologies, to enhanced cooling of micro-
electronics and power electronics, to radiation in carbon capture processes.
This will expose students to a range of engineering challenges, research
methodologies, and careers that address the ever-expanding need for thermal-
fluids engineers. The site will prepare students for their careers by teaching
them how to communicate through oral presentations, posters, and written papers
or reports. To further broaden participation, students will undertake an
outreach project by assisting in teaching a short engineering course to
underserved high school students in Washington University's College Prep
program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ability to control temperature and the
transfer of thermal energy (thermal management) is critical to addressing the
most important global challenges: clean and renewable energy production;
inexpensive, efficient and reliable transportation; and ever-increasing data
storage and processing demands. This REU site will advance the current
understanding of fundamental heat and mass transfer, while translating
discoveries to applied technologies for thermal management at the
nano-/microscale, component, and system scales. For 10 weeks during the summer,
students will be immersed in research projects tied to emerging technologies,
such as metal-air batteries and nanofluidic and micro-/nanostructural thermal
transport enhancement, while also learning the role of thermal-fluids engineers
in the micro-/power electronics, chemical/material processing, transportation,
and energy industries. The site will be interdisciplinary, approaching topics in
thermal management from mechanical and chemical engineering perspectives.
Activities will include lunches with faculty, research skills seminars,
lab/industry tours, preparation for the GRE, and social activities. Participants
will have multiple one-on-one advising sessions with the Principle Investigator
to define and develop a plan for achieving personal goals, and students'
progress will be tracked after the summer ends. The summer will culminate with
students preparing a technical report, conference proceeding, or journal article
as well as presenting their research results through a poster and oral
presentation at a final research symposium. The fall after their summer
experience, some of the students will have the choice of presenting their
posters at ASME's International Mechanical Engineering Conference and Exposition
or AIChe's Student Conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.