* 1852679
* SBIR Phase II:  Carbon Nanotube Enhanced Membrane Distillation for  Sea and Brackish Water Desalination, and the Treatment of Saline Waste Water
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2022
* Cheng Li, NanoSepex Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 06/30/2022
* USD 662,453.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovative
Research (SBIR) project arises from addressing one of the world's major
challenges - the need for water. We address this problem through the development
of a novel technology for economic desalting for inexpensive clean water
generation and the treatment of high concentration saline waste. There is no
"one size fits all" approach to water desalting. Many factors such as salt
concentration, the presence of specific ions, energy cost, pretreatment
requirements and capital investments are important considerations in selecting a
desalting technology. The carbon nanotube immobilized membrane distillation
(CNIM-MD) being developed here offers many advantages such as the ability to
utilize waste heat and solar energy and as well as the ability to handle high
salt concentrations. The CNIM-MD is being designed with the aim of treating high
salinity water (above 750,000 ppm dissolved solids that are not normally handled
by reverse osmosis (RO). The primary target market for CNIM-MD is concentrating
brine for zero liquid discharge (ZLD) where brine is concentrated and the solids
are eventually precipitated out, pure water is reused and no water is discharged
as industrial effluents. Other potential markets for CNIM-MD are treating RO
reject to increase pure water yield, and the treatment of produced water in oil
and gas industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase II project proposes to
scale up the CNIM fabrication process via roll-to-roll (R2R) coating,
demonstrate CNIM-MD at pilot scale and initiate commercial sales. The
intellectual merit of the project lies in the novel approach to design and
synthesis of scalable membrane systems for water desalination, and the treatment
of saline waste. The CAPEX and OPEX of CNIM-MD compared to thermal evaporators
is compelling, and CNIM-MD can be a major component of a hybrid ZLD treatment
train integrating membrane technology with thermal evaporator. In short, the
development of CNIM-MD will be a major development in the area of membrane
treatment of high concertation brine. The success in the synthesis of novel
membrane architecture such as CNIM will impact in many areas beyond
desalination, which include carbon capture, gas purification, emission control,
dehumidification as well as capturing pure water from the atmosphere. They have
potential to impact major industries such as power plants, petrochemicals, oil
and gas exploration, dehumidification, air purification, and food
processing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.