* 1852171
* REU Site: Combinatorics, Probability, and Algebraic Coding Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2023
* Fernando Pinero, East Tennessee State University
* Standard Grant
* Tiziana Giorgi
* 05/31/2023
* USD 323,998.00

The project is a collaboration between East Tennessee State University (ETSU)
and the University of Puerto Rico in Ponce (UPRP). The PI and the co-PI lead ten
undergraduates during each of three years in a series of open ended mathematical
research projects. Twelve projects are assigned each year, and the
investigations result in a refereed research publication in at least half the
cases. Participants are selected after a nationwide search, and travel to the
Joint Mathematics Meetings each year to present their research. Projects chosen
for the students are contemporary; difficult but tractable; of interest to the
wider mathematical community; and usually lead to more questions with every new
result. Students are required to present their work and they endeavor to publish
it. Their introduction to research is thus similar to what they will encounter
during the rest of their careers. The students' areas of research are actively
investigated by leading researchers supported by NSF. Demographically, students
are similar to those at regional schools such as ETSU and UPRP, and reflect the
diversity of our nation's mathematical pool: Selected students are least 50%
female; at least 40% are from underrepresented groups; at least 40% are first
generation college attendees; and at least 50% are from schools with limited
undergraduate research opportunities. Students are carefully mentored, and taken
"from a relatively dependent status to as independent a status as their
competence warrants" (NSF 13-542).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students work on
extremal, algebraic, or probabilistic problems in coding theory, combinatorics,
or graph theory. Specifically, problems are either in algebraic coding theory,
or extremal/probabilistic discrete mathematics. For example, research teams in
these two groups work on diverse aspects of algebraic graph constructions, or
permutation and word patterns. Students advised by the PI use (a) deep methods
in discrete combinatorial probability, and (b) classical combinatorics - in
tandem with classical analysis (inequalities, asymptotic analysis etc). The
concept of concentration of measure is the intellectual focus of several of
these activities. The students advised by the co-PI, on the other hand, are
expected to work with linear codes from cutting-edge research. They will work
with codes derived from Reed-Solomon codes, Hermitian codes and other codes from
algebraic function fields, while others will be expected to find explicit
constructions of codes for specific applications. Students might determine good,
long codes from graphs and design good encoding and decoding algorithms, or use
Grobner bases, finite fields, and polynomials over finite fields in order to
find explicit constructions of extremal combinatorial
objects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.