* 1852501
* REU Site: Multidisciplinary Physics at Purdue University
* MPS,PHY
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2024
* Sergei Savikhin, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 04/30/2024
* USD 460,767.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) and Research Experiences for
Teachers (RET) site will provide 12 undergraduate physics majors from across the
country with a ten-week long research project emphasizing one-to-one mentoring
with faculty from a wide range of disciplines within the Purdue University
Department of Physics. Interactions with the community of scientists is
emphasized with a unique interdisciplinary science seminar series, two required
public talks on their research, an abstract on the research, tours of Purdue
scientific facilities, including the unique Brick nanotechnology center, field
trips to national facilities at Fermilab and Argonne, REU Olympics at Notre Dame
University, plus picnics, ball games, canoe trips and other social activities
arranged by this REU program and the university-wide SROP program. The weekly
seminar initiated and hosted by the Physics Department combines Physics REU
participants with students from other Purdue summer sites (REU &amp; SURF at
Biology, Chemistry, Engineering etc.) to emphasize interdisciplinary
opportunities and interactions among students across many fields. Similar
objectives are designed for two RET participants, whose research activities will
be reflected in their subsequent classroom teaching, inspiring their own
students about careers in research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The participants in
this REU/RET program will collaborate with their mentors and other researchers
to advance diverse state-of-the-art areas of physics, such as: nanophysics of
electrons in reduced dimensional conductors, dynamical behavior in proteins,
quantum mechanisms of photosynthesis, single molecule/protein dynamic imaging,
the use of cosmogenic nuclei as chronometers in geoscience, coherent imaging of
tumors, particle detectors with improved hardness and resolution, detectors for
TeV radiation, investigation of dark matter, novel application of nuclear
detectors for sensing hazardous materials, properties of graphene, application
of biofilms in seismic measurements, the fundamental nature of nuclear decay,
enhanced long-baseline imaging for radio astronomy, seismic propagation in
structures of geologic interest, the quantum nature of bird magnetoreception,
analysis of data collected at the Large Hadron Collider at CERN, and other
current topics of importance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.