* 1852454
* REU Site: Interdisciplinary Research Experience in Computational Sciences
* CSE,OAC
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Juana Moreno, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Juan Li
* 02/29/2024
* USD 380,900.00

Computational simulations are rapidly emerging as a co-equal branch of inquiry
with experiment and theory. In parallel, automated instruments store massive
amounts of measurements. However, computational science will only fulfill its
full potential if advances in undergraduate and graduate education accompany the
advances in hardware. The 30 undergraduate students participating in this
Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) program are engaged with varied
computational science projects, learn how to use state-of-the-art
cyberinfrastructure tools, manage large amounts of data, experience activities
that characterize research careers, and work in interdisciplinary research
teams. The Center for Computation &amp; Technology (CCT) at Louisiana State
University provides an ideal setting for the REU student to become familiar with
interdisciplinary research. For ten weeks in the summer, the students work
collaboratively with their mentors on a wide variety of computational science
projects. With research groups exploring gravitational waves, complex emergent
phenomena in material science, or computational music and arts, the participants
work on cutting edge research in computational sciences. By preparing the next
generation of students in the computational sciences, this project serves the
national interest, as stated by NSF's mission: to promote the progress of
science; to advance the national health, prosperity and welfare; or to secure
the national defense.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is a clear need for
training the workforce on computing and computational science. But, currently,
the majority of students learn little, if any, Computational Science (CSci) in
the classroom and are not prepared for CSci research or data science. This
proposal provides an evidence-based approach to address these issues and prepare
the next generation of students. One of the current barriers in CSci education
is that while CSci is intrinsically multidisciplinary, traditional academic
departments set rigid boundaries between disciplines. Because LSU Center for
Computation &amp; Technology is not an academic unit, it provides an ideal
setting for the REU student to become familiar with interdisciplinary research
by participating in a multidisciplinary research team. During ten weeks the
participants experience activities that characterize research careers, such as
presenting their research in scholarly forums, and working on the soft- and
hard-skills needed in interdisciplinary research. Faculty mentors work with the
students in individual and group meetings, and they provide activities that help
students appreciate the nature of multidisciplinary research and the value of
working as a team. At the conclusion of the REU, students are encouraged to
continue their CSci research and present their work at their home institution,
informing others about computational science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.