* 1852738
* Fostering Integrated Responsive Science Teaching by Developing Science Teachers Who Can Cross Disciplinary Boundaries and Create Engaging, Inclusive Classrooms
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Seth Bush, California Polytechnic State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Julio Soto
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,192,706.00

With support from the NSF Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program, this Track 1
Stipends and Scholarships project aims to serve the national need of preparing
excellent STEM teachers for high-need schools and districts. Over its five-year
duration, this project will recruit and prepare at least 27 Biology, Chemistry,
and Physics majors to become teachers in high-need school districts in the San
Luis Obispo area. The project includes a collaborative partnership with a
Hispanic-serving two-year college (Cuesta College) and two high-need school
districts (Lucia Mar Unified School District and Santa Maria Joint Union School
District). The project builds on previous Noyce awards by: 1) establishing a
summer program for new teachers; 2) enabling interested undergraduates to
participate in program activities before they commit to becoming Noyce Scholars
and to pursuing a teaching career; and 3) providing research experiences for
Noyce Scholars. Results of this project will inform colleges and schools about
effective approaches for recruiting, preparing, and supporting science teachers
in high-need settings. In addition, incorporation of training about culturally
responsive teaching and the collaboration with a Hispanic-serving institution
have the potential to broaden participation in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project activities build on a foundation of curricular and support strategies
developed with previous Noyce awards. The overarching the goal is to increase
access to STEM education and careers, including populations historically
underrepresented in STEM fields. New activities include creation of two
professional development units on culturally-responsive teaching for pre-service
STEM teachers. In addition, cross-disciplinary science instruction will be
incorporated though implementation of the Ambitious Science Teaching model. This
teaching model provides a roadmap for student-centered science teaching in which
students create and revise scientific models, and make evidence-based arguments.
This strategy is intended to help students solve authentic, relevant problems
that require an interdisciplinary approach, which is a major goal of the Next
Generation Science Standards. Dissemination of project outcomes has the
potential to provide new information to teacher education programs, including
those working with populations that are underrepresented in STEM majors and
careers. The Noyce program supports talented STEM undergraduate majors and
professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts and experienced, exemplary K-12 STEM teachers to become STEM master
teachers. It also supports research on the persistence, retention, and
effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.