* 1852138
* REU Site: Condensed Matter Physics and Applied Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2019,05/31/2023
* Amlan Biswas, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 05/31/2023
* USD 249,428.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: This project brings undergraduates to the University
of Florida to conduct research on the physics of materials and their
applications. Having students conduct research while an undergraduate is one of
the best ways to encourage them to continue in science, technology, and
engineering education. Applications come from across the United States, and
there is a special emphasis on recruiting and accepting students from schools
with limited research opportunities and from underrepresented groups in science
and engineering. For many students this is their first and perhaps only
opportunity to experience advanced scientific research. The research conducted
lays the scientific foundation for the next generation of materials used in a
myriad of applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: Each student
works with a faculty mentor from physics, chemistry or materials science and
engineering, alongside other members of their research group in a 10-week
program. The research topics include: measuring the electronic, magnetic,
thermal, and optical properties of nanometer scale materials, growing new
materials including superconductors and those with topological properties, and
computational modeling of electronic and biomaterials. The research conducted
lays the foundation for applications of new materials. Students in the program
attend professional development workshops on written and oral communication,
applying to graduate school, cutting edge scientific research, and visit
scientific facilities both on and off the University of Florida campus. The
students become sufficiently knowledgeable in their research area that they give
tours of their research labs during week 6 of the program. At the end of the
program participants write a 10 to 20-page paper and give a presentation on
their research. Many participants also present their results at scientific
meetings and/or publish their results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.