* 1852998
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Archaeological investigation of foodways and social organization in the Americas
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2019,01/31/2020
* Jeffrey Blomster, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 01/31/2020
* USD 20,437.00

This doctoral dissertation project will use archaeological plant and animal
evidence to advance knowledge about how food was utilized, how food related to
social organization, and more broadly, how sociopolitical complexity developed
in the human past. The project will not only generate detailed data on faunal
and botanical remains to advance archaeological theory, but will also provide
time depth and comparative data for understanding modern societal challenges
related to food and inequality. The project will support and strengthen
international scientific collaborations and student training in STEM research.
Public and community science outreach and conservation of local historical
heritage will also be fostered through community and researcher collaborations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project builds upon recent calls by scholars to
develop a more social approach to the archaeological study of food practices,
including consideration of the relationship between people and food in everyday
and ritual settings within a social and cultural system. The investigators will
address the relationship between food and social organization through a thorough
analysis of exceptionally well-preserved faunal and botanical remains of an
early village in the Mixteca Alta of Oaxaca, Mexico. The archaeological site of
Etlatongois is temporally situated at the dawn of social complexity in the
Oaxacan region of Mesoamerica, ca. 1000 BC. Zooarchaeological and
paleoethnobotanical analyses will be carried out in one of the largest faunal
and floral samples ever excavated for the region, in terms of volume of material
pertaining to a single time period. The excellent preservation of the sample
will also allow for the study of the comparative morphology of maize to better
understand the development of this domesticate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.