* 1852700
* Preparing Secondary STEM Teachers with Experiential Learning and Computational Thinking Skills for Effectiveness in High-Need School Districts
* EDU,DUE
* 04/15/2019,03/31/2025
* Nancy Jacqmin, Carlow University
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Ellis
* 03/31/2025
* USD 926,918.00

With support from the NSF Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program, this Track 1
Scholarships and Stipends project aims to serve the national interest in
preparing high-quality STEM teachers. It will do so by recruiting undergraduate
STEM majors and STEM professionals and preparing them to become STEM teachers.
In partnership with Pittsburgh Public Schools, Carlow University seeks to
prepare 26 highly effective biology, chemistry, and mathematics secondary
education teachers. The secondary education program in STEM at Carlow University
is a five-year, master's degree program. Consequently, STEM majors in their
junior year and STEM professionals will be recruited to enter the program. The
STEM majors will receive three years of scholarship support as they complete a
baccalaureate degree and a master's degree in secondary education. The STEM
professionals will receive one year of support as they complete a master's
degree in secondary education. The Noyce Scholars will have multiple
opportunities to engage in experiential learning, with an emphasis on developing
computational thinking skills. These learning opportunities include workshops,
and weeklong courses. Their teaching skills will be enhanced with training about
restorative justice practices and culturally responsive teaching to prepare them
to teach successfully in high-need classrooms. Successful passage of the Noyce
Scholars into teaching careers will be supported by a team of advisors that
includes STEM and education mentors, a teacher-mentor from Pittsburgh Public
Schools, and a coach that works with the Scholar from enrollment through the
first three years of teaching.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project intends to
recruit and enroll 12 biology, chemistry, and mathematics undergraduates as
Noyce Scholars between 2019-21 and 14 STEM professionals between 2019-23. To
help prepare the Noyce Scholars to be successful in supporting diverse learners
in high-need school districts, the Carlow University program will include
coursework that includes issues of social justice, positive behavioral supports,
restorative justice practices in schools, culturally responsive pedagogy,
universal design, individualized learning, trauma-informed teaching practices,
classroom design and instructional techniques to support students with
disabilities, and content specific literacy practices to support English
Language Learners. Noyce Scholars with complete practicums and student teaching
in Pittsburgh Public Schools. The project will develop, apply, and assess best
practices in experiential learning, with an emphasis on computational thinking,
which is a method of problem solving developed in computer science that has a
broad application across disciplines. It involves the applicable concepts of
decomposition of large problems into smaller parts, abstraction of relevant
pieces, identification of similarities to already solved problems, and
development of algorithms. Results of project evaluation and research activities
should generate new knowledge that will contribute to best practices in
recruiting and preparing highly effective STEM teachers for careers in high-need
schools. The research study intends to address gaps in the literature about the
impact of computational thinking training on the effectiveness of pre-service
teachers, on secondary education, and whether pre-service and in-service
coaching enhances teacher proficiency in computational thinking. Carlow
University is a longstanding member of large local educational consortia in the
region, which will enable swift and comprehensive dissemination of project
findings. The program has the potential to help address the high-need STEM
teaching shortages in the local community and region. The Noyce program supports
talented STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12
STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 STEM teachers to become STEM
master teachers in high-need school districts. It also supports research on the
persistence, retention, and effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need
school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.