* 1852707
* Collaborative Research: Dynamic Roots as the Biophysical Link Between Deep Moisture and the Atmosphere
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Ying Fan Reinfelder, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 06/30/2024
* USD 233,405.00

Plants play an important role in moving water across the land surface between
the atmosphere above and the soil below. Some plants can extend their roots
substantially below the surface to take advantage of ground water, giving them a
moisture reservoir that persists through dry seasons and droughts. When plants
tap into this reservoir they transpire moisture through their leaves, providing
a source of moisture to the atmosphere at a time when the air may be at its
driest. The extent to which this transpired groundwater influences
meteorological conditions such as precipitation, cloudiness, and atmospheric
stability is not known, nor is its dependence on region, season, and other
factors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The transpiration of groundwater involves a
complex set of biological and physical processes which are difficult to observe
and simulate. But the PIs have developed a scheme in which the bulk effect of
these processes can be approximated using two observationally-motivated
assumptions. First, the extent to which plants extend their roots to tap
groundwater depends on their position relative to the local topography. In dry
or seasonally dry climates plants on a hilltop are typically too high above the
water table to effectively access groundwater, so we can assume that they rely
exclusively on near-surface soil moisture. At the valley floor the water table
can be so close to the surface that plant roots have to be shallow to avoid
excessive salinity and waterlogging, so they also rely exclusively on near-
surface moisture. Thus maximum groundwater uptake occurs at mid-hillslope
locations, and groundwater usage depends on the Height Above Nearest Drainage
(HAND). The PIs have developed a "giant hillslope" method to quantify this
dependence in terms of a five-bin representation of small-scale HAND
topography.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Second, roots respond dynamically to the
vertical profile of soil water. The PIs argue that root dynamics can be simply
represented by assuming that roots actively extend to reach available
groundwater, taking up water from whatever level offers the greatest moisture
access for the least effort. This assumption is formalized using a scheme in
which the transport of moisture through roots is analogous to the movement of
electric current in a circuit: the roots act as "wires", through which a
"current" of moisture flows from a specific soil layer to the plant leaves,
driven by the "voltage" difference (i.e. water potential difference) between
plant leaves and the soil layer tapped by the roots. The flow of moisture from a
soil layer to the surface is then given by the ratio of the layer-to-leaves
voltage drop to the resistance of the wire, in exact analogy to Ohm's law
(electric current equals voltage divided by
resistance).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs implement their root-groundwater
scheme in the Noah land-surface model, which is coupled to the Weather Research
and Forecasting (WRF) model to form a coupled land-atmosphere model. The model
is then used to test the impact of groundwater transpiration on the continental-
scale hydrological cycle. Among the scientific questions to be addressed is the
extent to which groundwater transpiration promotes precipitation, both by making
a substantial contribution to the moisture available for precipitation, and by
reducing atmospheric stability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research has societal
value due to the importance of the hydrological cycle for water resources. The
work is of particular value for building bridges between the research
communities concerned with the separate but closely connected fields of land
surface hydrology, continental-scale hydroclimate, and plant ecology. The
implementation of the new scheme in the WRF model will make it available for
operational use, as WRF is widely used for weather forecasting. The PIs also
conduct educational and outreach activities in K-12 schools, and the project
supports two graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.