* 1852831
* Robust and Scalable Volume Minimization-based Matrix Factorization for Sensing and Clustering
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2018,06/30/2021
* Nikolaos Sidiropoulos, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 06/30/2021
* USD 249,319.00

This project focuses on matrix factorization using a simplicial cone model,
which has a wide variety of applications in remote sensing (particularly
hyperspectral imaging), radio frequency sensing for dynamic spectrum access,
clustering and topic modeling, and social network analysis, to name a few. The
project focuses on robust and scalable computational tools for this model, using
a convex hull volume minimization criterion. The motivation partially comes from
a result that was recently obtained by the principal investigators, showing that
unique factorization is possible under mild conditions if one adopts the volume
minimization criterion. These conditions are far more realistic than those
required by existing approaches, suggesting that more challenging scenarios and
even new application domains are within reach if only related optimization,
robustness, and scalability challenges can be effectively addressed. This
research will provide the computational underpinnings of these exciting
developments. High-performance volume minimization software will be publicly
released to enable researchers and practitioners to tackle new problems, handle
much larger datasets, and boost performance in existing applications like
hyperspectral imaging. On the education front, the project will help train a
graduate student in cutting-edge computational engineering research, and will
also help engage talented undergraduates through senior honors projects,
introducing them to research and publication opportunities.

In terms of theory and methods, key aspects of volume minimization-based matrix
factorization are still poorly understood. The research will provide a set of
high-performance computational tools rooted in deep understanding of the
strengths and weaknesses of the original volume minimization criterion which
promises exciting discoveries. The research will evolve along the following
synergistic thrusts: i) robust optimization algorithms for volume minimization;
ii) scalable and adaptive algorithms towards online volume minimization; iii)
validation, using existing (e.g., hyperspectral imaging) as well as promising
new (e.g., document clustering) applications; and iv) theoretical aspects of the
volume minimization formulation, focusing on fundamentals such as
identifiability and performance bounds. Devising scalable volume minimization
algorithms makes a lot of sense for modern sensing and clustering problems which
involve rapidly increasing amounts of data. From an applications point of view,
volume minimization for spectrum sensing, channel identification, and document
clustering are completely new and challenging.