* 1852139
* Recruitment and Induction of Secondary STEM Teachers Integrating Lesson-Study as a Continuous Improvement Learning Mechanism
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Randall Groth, Salisbury University
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 03/31/2024
* USD 1,199,846.00

With support from the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program, this Track 1
Scholarships and Stipends project aims to serve the national need of preparing
high-quality mathematics and science teachers. The project intends to place 36
new STEM teachers into high-need schools in the lower Eastern Shore of Maryland,
thus enhancing STEM learning in these schools. In addition, results of project
analysis and research should increase understanding of strategies to recruit,
educate, and support exceptional secondary STEM teachers. The project will use
first- and second-year school-based internships, together with junior- and
senior-level scholarships to encourage and support STEM majors to become
secondary mathematics and science teachers. All STEM majors who participate in
the project will work together to design and analyze lessons under the guidance
of expert teachers in local schools. The project will revise the teacher
education curriculum to increase learning about instructional technology and
equity issues in schools. Support for scholarship recipients will continue into
their first years of teaching, when the project will provide expert mentor
teachers and peer communities to ensure their successful professional induction.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to produce 36 new STEM teachers by
supporting undergraduates as they complete majors in the fields of biology,
chemistry, earth science, mathematics, and physics. The project seeks to
motivate 24 first- and second-year STEM majors who are not yet in the
professional teacher education program, to pursue teaching by hiring them for
early field experience internships. The project will award junior- and senior-
level Noyce scholarships of up to $10,000 per year to 36 academically high-
performing STEM majors, with emphasis on including those from underrepresented
populations. The scholarship recipients will develop strong knowledge in STEM
content and pedagogy as they complete their degree programs. The project will
provide an induction program that fosters the development of skilled and
reflective practitioners, so that the scholarship recipients will receive
support as they graduate and enter the teaching profession. The project seeks to
lay the foundation for the long-term retention and success of scholarship
recipients as STEM teachers in high-need school settings. Wicomico County Public
Schools, a high-need local education agency, will partner with Salisbury
University to provide school-based clinical experiences and mentors for the STEM
majors. Lesson study, a research-based method for continuous improvement of
teaching, will be a key component of the clinical experiences. Quantitative and
qualitative data will be gathered to address research questions including: (1)
How does lesson study participation influence STEM majors' motivations to teach?
(2) To what extent does lesson study encourage academically talented STEM majors
to pursue teaching careers? and (3) To what extent does lesson study encourage
STEM majors from racial minorities to pursue teaching careers? Findings related
to these research questions will be disseminated at professional conferences and
in journals, adding to the knowledge base about effective strategies for
preparing STEM teachers for teaching in high-need schools and districts. The
Noyce program supports talented STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to
become effective K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school districts and
experienced,exemplary K-12 STEM teachers to become STEM master teachers. It also
supports research on the persistence, retention, and effectiveness of K-12
teachers in high-need school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.