* 1852331
* REU Site: Engineering Medical Advances at the Interface of Experiments and Computation
* ENG,EEC
* 01/15/2020,12/31/2023
* Homayoun Valafar, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 12/31/2023
* USD 360,000.00

This three-year REU Site, "Engineering Medical Advances at the Interface of
Experiments and Computation", at the University of South Carolina at Columbia
(USC) provides a ten-week summer research experience for ten undergraduate
student participants. Students will be recruited nationally and selected on the
basis of their academic performance, potential and enthusiasm for conducting
research, and future plans for a research career. Recruiting targets primarily
undergraduate institutions (PUIs) at which students might not otherwise gain
access to research opportunities as well as institutions with a high proportion
of minority students. Research at the interface of experiments and computation
will stimulate future strategies to increase the length and quality of life
through preventive healthcare, early diagnostics, and therapeutics. The proposed
REU site exposes young researchers, our future scientific leaders, to this
interdisciplinary and collaborative research environment, which is needed to
understand complex and intricate biological phenomena. In addition to research,
participants will engage in enrichment activities that span science,
professional development, and (bio)medical product protection/commercialization.
Planned activities will broaden their exposure to experimental and computational
research, with focus on strategic integration of these approaches to achieve a
common goal. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The REU Site leverages expertise of an
interdisciplinary group of faculty working at the interface of experiments and
computation to advance understanding of fundamental biological phenomena and
biomedical technologies. The proposed research is derived from ongoing,
federally funded projects as well as newly established collaborations involving
junior faculty. Research efforts utilize tools and knowledge at the interface of
engineering and medical advancement to gain insight into interactions among
biological molecules, cells, and tissues as well as interactions between
synthetic systems and biological structures. It is expected that student
participants will develop valuable, lasting relationships with faculty and
graduate student mentors as well as fellow researchers, which will provide
resources and encouragement in their pursuit of a research career. Planned
social activities will build a sense of community among mentors and participants
and facilitate an informal sharing of research. During a concluding symposium,
participants will formally share their research as both a poster and oral
presentation. The symposium is designed to ensure that participants complete the
program with the materials necessary to present their research at a national
meeting, for which travel funds are made available. Together, these elements
will ensure the success of an REU Site that provides mentorship, education
opportunities, and a positive perception of research to undergraduate students
within an interdisciplinary setting that emphasizes experimental-computational
collaboration. The unique strengths of the proposed REU Site will inspire
participants and enable success in their future research
endeavors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.