* 1852486
* REU Site: Research Experiences in Physiology and Neurobiology at UCONN
* BIO,DBI
* 02/15/2019,01/31/2024
* Joseph Crivello, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 01/31/2024
* USD 399,819.00

This REU Site award to University of Connecticut, located in Storrs,
Connecticut, will support the training of 12 students for 10 weeks during the
summers of 2019-2021. The Department of Physiology and Neurobiology will offer
research opportunities on Modeling in Physiological Systems. Research projects
will expose REU participants to life in the research lab, where they will learn
how to pose research questions, work as part of a research team, and experience
first-hand the opportunity to devise their own research questions and the means
to answer them. Professional development offerings and social events will
include field trips and workshops on safe practices in the laboratories, ethical
issues in science, leadership, graduate school application, and communication
skills. An end-of-program symposium features student platform talks and poster
presentations. Housing, a stipend, meal and travel allowances will be provided.
Interested students, especially underrepresented minorities, veterans, first-
generation college students, and students with disabilities from institutions
with limited research opportunities are encouraged to apply. Online application
is available through the site website. Students will be accepted on a rolling
basis after an interview with potential faculty mentors.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is anticipated that a total of 36 students, primarily
from schools with limited research opportunities, will be trained in the
program. This Site encourages applications from veterans and students with
disabilities. Students will learn how research is conducted, and many will
present the results of their work at scientific conferences. The training is to
support students who are interested in pursuing a research oriented career in a
STEM field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A common web-based assessment tool used by all
REU Site programs funded by the Division of Biological Infrastructure will be
used to determine the effectiveness of the training program. Students will be
tracked after the program in order to determine their career paths. Students
will be asked to respond to an automatic email sent via the NSF reporting
system. More information about the program is available by visiting
https://pnbreu.uconn.edu, or by contacting the PI (Dr. Xinnian Chen at
Xinnian.chen@uconn.edu) or the co-PI (Dr. Anastasios Tzingounis at
anastasios.tzingounis@uconn.edu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.