* 1852611
* The Decadal Survey in Astronomy and Astrophysics 2020 (Astro 2020)
* MPS,AST
* 11/01/2018,06/30/2022
* James Lancaster, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 06/30/2022
* USD 2,475,269.00

For the last 60 years, at about ten-year intervals, the astronomy community has
carried out assessments of the field that establish priorities for investment
and future development in the discipline. These studies, known as "decadal
surveys", rely on broad community input to identify compelling scientific
opportunities, defining and ranking the tools and resources necessary to realize
them. This award to the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and
Medicine (NAS) provides the NSF contribution for carrying out the next such
survey, which is also supported by the National Aeronautics and Space
Administration (NASA) and the Department of Energy Office of High Energy
Physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The survey will be organized and conducted in a
collaboration between the Board on Physics and Astronomy and the Space Studies
Board. The study will assess progress and developments in astronomy and
astrophysics (A&amp;A) over the past decade, explore promising new directions
for the period 2022-2033, and assess the state of the profession, making
recommendations to address outstanding issues. The decadal report resulting from
this activity will provide clear and broad guidance to those within these
disciplines, to policymakers, and to other interested parties. Like its
predecessors, it will be invaluable in guiding federal investments in the
highest scientific priorities, as determined by community consensus. In
addition, helping to determine the key questions at the frontiers of the field,
and the tools and methods needed, can lead to fresh insights and new
perspectives on compelling new areas of the science. Assessing the state of the
profession and providing recommendations to address outstanding issues will
positively impact the environment in which this research takes
place.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The report will identify new directions and the
facilities needed, formulate guidelines for advancing science in the United
States and abroad, and serve as a valuable resource for those outside the fields
of A&amp;A, including the general public, to learn about recent advances and
future directions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.