* 1852527
* Research Experience for Undergraduates:  Innovations at the Nexus of Food, Energy and Water Security
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Debra Mlsna, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 08/31/2023
* USD 357,534.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site award to Mississippi
State University, located in Starkville, MS, supports the training of 10
students for 10 weeks during the summers of 2020-2022. In this program, funded
by the Division of Chemistry, participants pursue collaborative research
projects at the interface of chemistry, engineering, and environmental science.
Participants learn about the interdependencies of water quality, fertilizer use
for increased food production, and renewable energy using interdisciplinary
approaches. This research leads to the development of environmentally -engaged
scientists and a better trained workforce. Through seminars and workshops, this
program also promotes entrepreneurial thinking and explores pathways to starting
small businesses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Participants learn about the areas of
energy security, water quality, food security and related issues. The research
project areas include the conversion of biomass and energy crops into biofuels;
the utilization of biochar (a biofuel production byproduct) for the purification
of water; and the enhancement of food security through biochar soil amendment.
Components of these projects include growing biomass, converting it into
biofuels, and using the by-products to clean water and improve soil quality.
These projects expose participants to research instrumentation, which encourages
excitement for science and teaches participants practical skills that can
translate to careers in the chemical sciences or graduate school. Alongside
research, seminars and workshops shape an environmentally conscious and
entrepreneurially-minded cohort, building a chemical sciences workforce ready to
tackle big societal problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.