* 1852074
* REU Site: Summer Intensive Research Experiences in Neuroscience (SIREN)
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2019,02/28/2023
* Robert Duncan, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/28/2023
* USD 387,716.00

This REU Site award to the University of Michigan (UM), located in Ann Arbor,
MI, will support the training of 10 students for 10 weeks during the summers of
2019-2021. This Site is supported by the Department of Defense in partnership
with the NSF REU program. The scientific theme of the REU Site is
interdisciplinary neuroscience, a hallmark of the UM Neuroscience Graduate
Program. Participants will conduct independent research in one or more of the
following subdisciplines: behavioral, cognitive, cell/molecular, developmental,
sensory, translational, and computational neuroscience. In addition, students
will engage in weekly workshops and journal clubs focused on current topics in
neuroscience, research ethics, and research skills. Also, students will
participate in a weekly improv course designed to build confidence, incorporate
wit, and develop agility in public speaking. Eligible participants include
undergraduate students who are U.S. citizens or permanent residents majoring in
a STEM discipline. Priority will be given to students from disadvantaged
backgrounds and underrepresented groups. The program also seeks to expand
diversity and inclusion toward students with disabilities, and through a
partnership with the National Technical Institute of the Deaf, encourages
applications from deaf and hard-of-hearing students. Acceptance will be based on
academic record, strength of recommendations, personal statements, and
expression of a sincere interest in pursuing a research career. All participants
will receive housing, meal and travel allowances and a
stipend.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is anticipated that a total of 30 students,
primarily from schools with limited research opportunities, will be trained in
the program. Students will learn the fundamentals of scientific research through
hands-on training, with the goal of presenting their results at scientific
conferences. The coordinated workshops and innovative training exercises will
prepare students for successful, long-term scientific career, both within and
outside of academia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The web-based assessment tool URSSA,
used by all BIO-funded REU Site programs, will be used to determine the
effectiveness of the training program. Additional survey instruments will be
used to evaluate program activities and track program alumni to assess retention
in neuroscience and broader STEM disciplines. More information about the program
is available by visiting: https://neuroscience.med.umich.edu/reu-site or by
contacting the PI (Dr. R. Keith Duncan at rkduncan@umich.edu) or the co-PI (Dr.
Shelly Flagel at sflagel@umich.edu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.