* 1852883
* Preparing Next Generation Science Teachers with STEM Plus Art and Design (STEAM) Approaches
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2024
* Andrea Ward, Adelphi University
* Continuing Grant
* Patrice Waller
* 07/31/2024
* USD 929,450.00

With support from the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce), this
Track 1: Scholarships and Stipends project at Adelphi University aims to serve
the national need of preparing high-quality science teachers for high-need
school districts. This project aims to address an acute shortage of well-
prepared grade 7-12 science teachers in Long Island and Queens, New York.
Building on lessons learned from the prior Adelphi Noyce project, this project
shifts the focus to STEAM (STEM + Art and Design), which is intended to foster
creativity through engagement with the arts and project-based learning. This
approach is expected to promote deeper understanding and facilitate the transfer
of knowledge across STEM subjects. The project will make use of the University's
Makerspace, engage STEM majors working towards teaching certification in
clinical practice at partner schools where STEAM is embedded through an
interdisciplinary approach, and partner with two community-based organizations
that offer STEAM programming. At each clinical practice site, scholars will be
paired with accomplished mentor teachers. By preparing science teachers to use
creative endeavors and Maker challenges to frame STEM learning, STEM may become
more accessible to youth who are typically underrepresented in STEM
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to recruit, support, and
prepare 24 science teachers, including those from typically underrepresented
groups, to take STEM teaching positions in high-needs school districts.
Undergraduates working to obtain baccalaureate degrees in biology, chemistry,
biochemistry, physics, or environmental studies will be recruited through
Adelphi's Scholar Teacher Education Program, a five-year, combined baccalaureate
and master's program for students preparing to teach at the adolescent level.
They will receive Noyce support for the junior, senior, and master's years. In
addition, one year of support will be provided to STEM Professionals (i.e.
graduates from STEM programs and/or career changers from STEM fields) as they
earn Master of Arts in Education degrees with teacher certification. This
project is a partnership of Adelphi University, the Mineola Public Schools, New
York City Department of Education/Queens High School for Teaching, Global Kids,
Operation SPLASH, and Nassau Community College. This project is designed to
equip future science teachers with the knowledge and pedagogical skills needed
to implement the Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS) in their instruction.
Distinguishing elements of the preparation and induction program include the
following four activities: 1) The STEAM Laboratory I, STEM into STEAM, is a
course in which Noyce Scholars will explore and tinker with materials linked to
the NGSS, including basic electronics, 3D printing, Arduino, LilyPad, Makey-
Makeys, small motors, and green screens as they develop knowledge, skills and
interest in integrating the arts into science instruction; 2) The STEAM
Laboratory II, Computer Programming for Hackers and Makers, is an introductory
computer programming course that takes advantage of the creative environment of
the University's Makerspace to introduce students to big ideas in computer
science and computational thinking; 3) The STEAM Summer Internship supports
Scholars as they serve as informal education teachers for STEAM programming in
the Long Island Flood Resiliency Solutions, Flood Mitigation Designs, Resilient
Housing Solutions, and Water Quality Studies projects; and 4) The Scholar
Learning Communities support continued professional development during Scholars'
first two years of teaching, focusing on evidence-based instructional practices,
developing and implementing new instructional ideas in their classrooms, and
continued use of the Makerspace. Knowledge generated by the project's research
agenda focuses on the effectiveness of the STEAM-based model for science teacher
preparation and may benefit other teacher preparation programs. The Noyce
program supports talented STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to become
effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 STEM teachers to
become STEM master teachers in high-need school districts. It also supports
research on the persistence, retention, and effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers
in high-need school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.