* 1852022
* REU Site: Stanford Earth Summer Undergraduate Research in Geoscience and Engineering (SURGE)
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Jonathan Payne, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Aisha Morris
* 12/31/2023
* USD 420,110.00

The SURGE REU will match 10 undergraduate students to faculty in Stanford Earth
(Stanford School of Earth, Energy and Environmental Sciences) that are in their
area of interest. The undergraduate students will come from community colleges
or four-year universities in the US with eight-week-long mentored research
experiences during the summers of 2020 through 2022 in the areas of Earth System
Science, Energy Resources Engineering, Geological Sciences, and Geophysics. In
the selection process, priority will be given to students from underrepresented
backgrounds in the Earth and environmental sciences, including students who do
not have prior research experience and who come from undergraduate institutions
with limited research opportunities. Within this three-year span, the SURGE
program will provide research opportunities to 30 students with the aim of
helping to create a diverse pipeline into Earth and environmental sciences post-
graduate programs and careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SURGE Scholars will be
matched with faculty members based on research interest, application essays,
letters of recommendation, and interviews. In addition to gaining scientific
training in a Stanford Earth research group, students will also participate in
graduate school preparation and professional development activities such as a
GRE prep course that meets twice per week and workshops on applying to graduate
school, planning career trajectories, and giving oral presentations.
Participants will also have the opportunity to participate in coding workshops.
Weekly faculty research seminars will familiarize students to a broad range of
research topics in the Earth sciences, while educational field trips will
provide opportunities for students to learn in the field and build a sense of
community. A research symposium concludes the program, where students present
their project findings through oral presentations and posters in front of
faculty, mentors, and other Stanford Earth colleagues who help review the
presentations. SURGE scholars will live on the Stanford campus and have access
to dining halls and other Stanford amenities, sharing the residential experience
with fellow scholars and thus enhancing the cohort research experience. Program
success will be measured through student and faculty surveys. SURGE scholars
will be tracked after the program in order to determine their career paths and
to provide an alumni network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.