* 1852396
* REU Site: Wearable and Emerging technologies - Facilitating research Opportunities and Creating pathways for Underrepresented Students (WE-FOCUS) at FIU
* ENG,EEC
* 03/15/2019,02/29/2024
* Jean Andrian, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 02/29/2024
* USD 379,642.00

Wearables systems are smart, connected Internet of Things (IoT) devices which
integrate digital health and user-friendly wearables. With the exponential
increase in the wearable market growth (predicted to be $34 B by 2020),
education and training in these areas becomes crucial. The multi and
interdisciplinary research in wearables spans the areas of nanotechnology,
advanced materials engineering, microelectronics, sensors, interfaces, and
communications; and forms the cornerstone to impact many engineering sectors,
ranging from defense to healthcare. As an example, wearable sensors powered by
advances in nanotechnology and communications are facilitating the tracking of
vital parameters in the patients' natural environment. Over the next decade, the
correlation of environmental parameters with individual health parameters
generated by nano-enabled wearable sensors will lead to a new paradigm in
healthcare and will enable patients, doctors, scientists and engineers to
predict, manage and treat chronic disease. The REU Site: Wearable and Emerging
technologies - Facilitating research Opportunities and Creating pathways for
Underrepresented Students (WE-FOCUS) at Florida International University (FIU)
aims to provide students an early exposure to the cutting-edge research
activities to prepare them to adapt to new technological environments they will
live and work in. It will help prepare students to successfully serve in the
nation's continuing development through their careers as scientists, engineers,
and leaders in these emerging technologies, and advance the cultural diversity
in the American STEM workforce. This vision directly supports NSF's 2018-2022
strategic goal of early investment in the development of the next generation of
researchers to advance the capability of the Nation to meet current and future
challenges. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;FOCUS addresses the growing need for a skilled
workforce in the areas of critical technology needs in the coming decades.
Through this program, FIU will recruit academically talented students from
culturally and racial/ethnically diverse populations along with placing a
special emphasis on attracting women participants to the program. Students will
be immersed in a research experience in the field of wearable sensors and
systems integrated with and facilitated by tiered mentoring offered by faculty,
postdocs, and graduate students to ensure their persistence in the program.
Additionally, professional development seminars, workshops, and field trips will
be organized to enhance scholars' interest in STEM careers. Upon completion of
their summer research project, focused advising will be provided throughout the
academic year to ensure the success of students in advance level engineering
courses. Student feedback and program evaluation results will be used to
identify the best practices to improve research experience in engineering
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This site is supported by the Department of
Defense in partnership with the NSF REU program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.