* 1852339
* REU Site: IRIS Undergraduate Summer Research in Seismology
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* John Taber, Incorporated Research Institutions for Seismology
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wenner
* 03/31/2024
* USD 704,644.00

The primary goal of this project is to encourage more students, representing a
more diverse population, to choose careers in Earth science. The Incorporated
Research Institutions for Seismology (IRIS), a consortium of over 120 research
universities and institutions dedicated to monitoring the Earth and exploring
its interior through the collection and distribution of seismological data, will
accomplish this by providing at least 10 undergraduate students per year with
research experiences as part of a 9 to 11-week internship program. Participants
will attend an intensive week-long preparatory course that will help build a
support system amongst the cohort. Then the students will work with leaders in
the seismological community, in both lab-base and field-based settings, to
conduct research. The program is designed to provide participants with close
mentoring from their research mentor and the program's alumni mentor to guide
not only their scientific research, but also to enable their own personal
growth, skill development, and scientific identity. Throughout the summer
students complete weekly assignments designed and sequenced to enable the
production of a suite of work products that will become the foundation for
presenting their results, provide opportunities to reflect on their work and
solidify learning gains, and allow them to benefit from experiences of prior
participants. The culmination of each student's internship experience is the
opportunity to attend a professional conference and present the results of their
summer research. Such experiences bring closure to the research project, offers
undergraduate student interns an opportunity to share their experience and
expertise with their new peer community, and provides meaningful exposure to the
full spectrum of Earth science research as a viable career option.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary work of this project will be to provide
undergraduate research opportunities (URO) within the field of seismological
research. However, this proposal also seeks to improve the scientific
communities understanding of and ability to improve both the short and long-term
impacts of UROs on undergraduates as they consider and pursue careers within the
geosciences. Through this project we will target three aspects of a URO that,
when viewed through the lens of a cognitive apprenticeship, have the ability to
influence student outcomes. First, we seek to develop and pilot a curriculum
that contributes towards the development of a more inclusive geoscience culture
that is resistant to all forms of harassment and discrimination. Next, we seek
to develop resources for mentors in the seismology community to successfully
assess undergraduates research skills and use these assessments to mentor
undergraduates. Finally, we seek to develop resources and programing to enable
undergraduates to develop and embrace their own science identity. Data to both
measure the impact of the URO on students and efficacy of the resources
developed will be collected from both mentors and mentees through surveys, semi-
structured interviews, and professional and academic artifacts (e.g. abstracts,
papers, technical reports, presentations). The program will also work
collaboratively with other REU sites to collect similar data, especially when
measuring the efficacy of URO resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.