* 1852112
* REU Site: Automotive and Energy Research and Industrial Mentorship (AERIM) Program at Oakland University
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2024
* Laila Guessous, Oakland University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 04/30/2024
* USD 370,304.00

The goal of the Automotive and Energy Research and Industrial Mentorship (AERIM)
REU Site at Oakland University, is to contribute to the development of a
diverse, internationally competitive, and globally-engaged science and
engineering workforce, an NSF priority. This program will engage a diverse
cohort of undergraduate students in research and industrial mentorship
experiences focused on automotive and energy-related research as well as provide
opportunities to interact with professionals from several automotive
manufacturers. Both the automotive and energy industries are primary drivers of
the U.S. economy, manufacturing in particular, and would benefit from the
development of a highly skilled and innovative workforce. The REU students will
also benefit from participation in organized STEM outreach activities in
partnership with the Michigan Science Center in Detroit.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The AERIM REU Site will engage 30 undergraduate students,
particularly women and under-represented minorities, in 10-week research
experiences during the summers of 2019-2021. The program is designed to excite
and motivate the students to pursue graduate studies and careers in science and
engineering. Working with industrial and academic mentors, student teams will
work on timely, automotive and energy-related research topics in mechanical
engineering with a special emphasis on technologies that aim to improve
performance and efficiencies of lithium-ion batteries, internal combustion
engines, automotive materials, and alternative propulsion and energy systems.
The research topics are of particular importance to the automotive and energy
industries and will be relevant and appropriate for undergraduates. The specific
topics of lightweight automotive materials, effects of fuel dilution in engine
oil, lithium-ion batteries, flame propagation, and piston heat transfer are of
particular importance to the automotive industry and will be appropriate for
undergraduates. Students will be introduced to current problems, modern
analytical, experimental and numerical methods, and will contribute to timely
on-going research programs in academic and industrial research settings. Key
features of this program include: a three-tier mentorship program that involves
faculty, industrial mentors and graduate students; an ongoing commitment from
several automotive manufacturers (e.g., GM, FCA, Ford) that includes mentorship
by individuals with extensive industrial experience and access to laboratory and
industrial facilities; a service learning outreach activity in partnership with
the Michigan Science Center in Detroit; and learning, networking and peer
support opportunities through coordinated professional activities inside and
outside the university.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.