* 1852506
* REU Site: Changing Dynamics of Hydrological Systems in Urban Areas: Response To Human Disturbance and Climate Change
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Barry Hibbs, California State L A University Auxiliary Services Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Aisha Morris
* 08/31/2024
* USD 389,984.00

Hydrologic challenges in urban areas of the world provide a compelling reason to
engage undergraduate students in multidisciplinary urban hydrologic research.
Drought, overuse, degradation, and population growth are causing significant
stress upon urban areas. With 55% of the world's population residing in urban
areas and urban populations expanding, it is key to train a future generation of
scientists to tackle urban hydrologic problems. Another challenge is that
underserved groups are inadequately represented in the hydrologic workforce and
are, thus, often not involved in policy decisions that directly impact their
communities. To address these concerns, this project presents a vertically
integrated set of mentor-focused education and research experiences to provide
career pathways for undergraduate students from underrepresented backgrounds in
the field of urban hydrology. Our proposal aims to attract motivated students
from underrepresented backgrounds to investigate urban hydrological problems
through a nested series of events during a 10-week Research Experiences for
Undergraduates (REU) summer training program. Program activities include
independent research, professional training, mentoring, social activities, a
research and training field activity, and post-summer activities. The REU
research activities include investigations in five topical areas: (1) surface
hydrology of urban areas; (2) climate-driven changes in urban groundwater; (3)
meteorology and precipitation along coastal urban corridors; (4) hydrochemistry
of urban streams/hydrochemical methods development, and; (5) river sedimentation
and restoration in urban coastal watersheds. The intellectual merit of this
proposal is established through undergraduate engagement in high-level urban
hydrologic research. Student research on urban hydrologic systems will provide
an understanding of important hydrologic processes in urban watersheds. The
research will contribute to the understanding of climate and anthropogenic-
forced change in urban hydrologic systems that require additional study and
long-term monitoring. The broader impacts of the proposal are focused on
recruiting and retaining students from underrepresented backgrounds in the
hydrological sciences. As a result, this effort aims to expand representation in
water resources decision making.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU program provides
multidisciplinary training and education focused on urban hydrology affected by
climate change, and challenges of integrating diversity and demographic equity
in policy and technical decisions. Objectives of the program are to: 1) provide
students an enriching and cultural experience under the guidance and mentorship
of a core group of faculty with research interests in fields of urban hydrology;
2) increase the number of students pursuing advanced degrees in water-related
fields, such as hydrogeology, watershed analysis, and hydrologic modeling, and;
3) increase the number of underrepresented students and especially those that do
not have access to research opportunities and/or professional development,
providing exposure/training in research and opportunities for these students to
pursue graduate degrees or employment. To accomplish these objectives, the REU
program includes engagement in supervised research, training activities,
mentoring activities, social activities, a research and training field activity,
and post-REU activities. Research activities include investigations in five
topical areas: (1) surface hydrology of urban areas; (2) climate-driven changes
in urban groundwater; (3) meteorology and precipitation along coastal urban
corridors; (4) hydrochemistry of urban streams/hydrochemical methods
development, and; (5) river sedimentation and restoration in California coastal
watersheds. Training activities include half-day workshops for undergraduate
mentees covering several professional topics including developing computing
skills in the Spatial and Temporal Data Analysis short course, technical
writing/abstract preparation, and poster/oral presentation. Mentoring activities
include Friday afternoon meetings between REU students plus faculty and graduate
students where they have informal discussions related to career and professional
development and challenges. Social activities include three weekend social
events to create bonds between REU students and faculty peers. A combination
research and training activity includes a four-day field trip through the lower
part of the Colorado River Basin scheduled for the end of the third week. After
the summer REU activity is complete, faculty mentors will continue to work with
student mentees to finalize the dissemination of the REU research results
through conference publications and presentations by the student participants
and to provide career guidance as practicable. We expect the REU effort to help
lead students into productive research enterprises after their term in the
program is complete.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.