* 1852781
* Preparing STEM Teachers for Western Pennsylvania
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Nina Thumser, PENNSYLVANIA WESTERN UNIVERSITY
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Ellis
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,018,144.00

With support from the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce), this
Track 1: Scholarships and Stipends project aims to serve the regional need for
highly-qualified STEM teachers in high-need school districts. The U.S.
Department of Education has identified a growing teacher shortage in
Pennsylvania, particularly in mathematics and science. The primary goal of the
project is to increase the number of highly qualified middle and high school
STEM teachers who are ready to teach in high-need urban and rural Pennsylvania
schools. Over a five-year period, this project plans to award 17 two-year
scholarships to upper-division undergraduate STEM majors, who will be supported
to complete their STEM degree and teaching certification. In addition, the
project plans to award 12 one-year stipends to post-baccalaureate STEM scholars,
to support their attainment of teaching certification. The Noyce Scholars will
participate in rural and urban capstone field experiences at educational
facilities specializing in Trauma Informed Care Models. These experiences are
expected to help the Scholars develop versatile skills that will be applicable
in any school district. While at the university and for the first three years
after their employment at teachers, the Scholars will have STEM and teacher
mentors and access to professional development opportunities. These supports are
expected to contribute to the Scholar's success as teachers and their retention
in the teaching profession. The training that the Scholars receive is designed
to ensure that they can use effective teaching practices in their classrooms,
thus improving their students' learning in STEM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project plans to recruit Scholars from three populations: 1) current STEM
undergraduates at the University, who will be supported to earn both their STEM
degree and a teaching certification; 2) community college students who will
transfer to the University and will be supported to complete their STEM degree
and teaching certification; and 3) post-baccalaureate scholars who will be
supported to earn their teaching credential. To accomplish recruitment goals,
the University has developed collaborative relationships with Butler Community
College, Jamestown Community College, and Allegheny Community College. To
broaden the teaching experience of the Noyce Scholars, it has also developed
collaborations with rural school districts (Corry Area School District, Union
City Area School District, and Penncrest School District) and diverse urban
school districts (City of Erie School District and Pittsburgh School District).
As a result, Scholars will have both rural and urban classroom experiences prior
to their employment as teachers. The project leadership team anticipates that
studying the effects of recruiting and retaining students from urban upbringing
and providing them with rural experiences (and vice versa) will provide unique
pedagogical training for future STEM teachers. Consequently, this project has
the potential to be a model for other teacher-preparation universities who aim
to provide training for multiple school environments. The Noyce program supports
talented STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12
STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 STEM teachers to become STEM
master teachers in high-need school districts. It also supports research on the
persistence, retention, and effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need
school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.