* 1852163
* REU Site: Multidisciplinary Undergraduate Research Training in Wearable Computing
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2023
* Hassan Zadeh, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 04/30/2023
* USD 273,599.00

The goal of this Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) site is to provide
undergraduates with unique training, research, and education opportunities in an
area of national priority, i.e., research in multidisciplinary technology
development to enhance the healthcare system. The project will recruit eight
undergraduates for eight weeks each year, primarily from communities
traditionally underserved in computing, to carry out hands-on research in the
field of wearable computing. The work will target computing research in the
application areas of healthcare and wellbeing, such as monitoring, prevention,
and/or management of chronic diseases. The participants will explore topics in
pervasive computing, machine learning, data mining, circuits and system design.
The undergraduates will gain knowledge about computing research, as well as how
new technologies can be developed to improve health and wellbeing by providing
health assistance and facilitating clinical decision
making.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program will engage REU participants in
research topics of emerging national interest; they will work in and learn from
multidisciplinary teams with faculty, postdocs, and students from computer
science and engineering and health sciences. The program benefits from a
university-supported, campus-wide community of undergraduate scholars. The
program will promote a feeling of community of scholars to enhance participants'
experiences in the program. The community of scholars will live, work, and
socialize among themselves as well as with students from other REU programs on
campus. The participants will be engaged in regular team meetings, seminars,
team work and mentoring, and social activities. This REU site will facilitate
the training of a new generation of students with expertise in computing
research for addressing significant healthcare challenges. The program is
expected to have a positive impact on increasing the number of students who will
pursue graduate degrees. The research results, program features, and benefits to
the participating students will be disseminated via the program website and
through publications and presentations in scholarly
venues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.