* 1852857
* Building Capacity for STEM Teachers with Cultural Responsiveness
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2021
* AnnMarie Gunn, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 06/30/2021
* USD 75,000.00

With support from the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program, this Capacity
Building project aims to serve the national interest in high-quality STEM
teaching. It will do so by building the capacity to help secondary mathematics
teachers engage in culturally responsive teaching practices. Specifically, this
project will modify the STEM teacher education curriculum at the University of
Florida St. Petersburg to include training in culturally responsive teaching.
Nationally, there is a significant need for grades 6-12 mathematics and science
teachers. This teacher shortage is compounded by the need for teachers who are
culturally responsive, which is the knowledge and skills that enable one to
relate effectively to other cultures and, thus, to better meet the needs of
diverse learners. By making the proposed curriculum modifications, this project
is expected to lay the foundation to support the development of teachers who
have robust knowledge of STEM content and well-developed skills in effective
STEM instructional techniques. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is a
partnership between the University of Florida St. Petersburg and Pinellas County
Schools, the 7th largest school district in Florida and the 26th largest in the
US. Nearly half of the Pinellas County students are from an underrepresented
minority group and just over half receive free or reduced lunches. Consequently,
the need for culturally responsive teaching practices in Pinellas County Schools
is critical. This need is further underscored by the fact that underrepresented
minority students and students of lower socio-economic status are also
significantly less successful in mathematics and science. To address this need,
the project partnership will facilitate the development of a culturally
responsive teaching program and examine whether the program produces teachers
who are well prepared to teach in high need schools, and who will be successful
and persist in their teaching career. Because many other US school districts
have diverse student populations, this project has the potential to improve many
other teacher preparation programs. Thus, a goal of this project is to develop a
structure that can be replicated elsewhere to ensure that other STEM education
programs can provide effective teacher preparation that includes cultural
responsiveness. The Noyce program supports talented STEM undergraduate majors
and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts and experienced, exemplary K-12 STEM teachers to become STEM master
teachers. It also supports research on the persistence, retention, and
effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.