* 1852471
* Collaborative Research: Experimental and Numerical Constraints on Density Evolution, Buoyancy Reversal, and Runout Distance in Pyroclastic Density Currents
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Benjamin Andrews, Smithsonian Institution
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 05/31/2024
* USD 61,024.00

Explosive volcanic eruptions often generate pyroclastic flows, which are violent
currents of hot ash and gas that travel along the ground at hurricane force
speeds. Few people survive and many structures cannot withstand encounters with
pyroclastic flows, making them the deadliest features generated from explosive
volcanic eruptions. Dilute pyroclastic flows are particularly hazardous because
they are less constrained to follow topography, making them much more
unpredictable. These flows typically terminate when the ground hugging current
becomes less dense than the surrounding atmosphere and reverses buoyancy, at
which point it rises up to form ash-laden plumes. Understanding the mechanism
and rate of this buoyancy reversal, and ultimately the runout distance of these
flows, is necessary for accurate hazard prediction and for interpreting deposits
of past eruptions. Likewise understanding the formation of buoyant plumes is
necessary to understand the aviation and ashfall hazards 100's of kilometers
from the eruptions. As the world's population continues to grow, deadly
encounters with volcanic eruptions will increase rapidly, and thus scientists
need to accurately predict their behavior, including impact force, runout
distance, and buoyancy reversal in order to mitigate their hazards. In addition
to those societal impacts, graduate and undergraduate students as well as a
postdoc are supported by this award. Interactive tools and videos are also being
developed around this work, to be distributed to K-12 educators as well as via
the National Museum of Natural History.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because the
destructiveness of pyroclastic flows inhibits direct measurements, this study
will combine physical analog experiments with multiphase numerical modeling to
establish how pyroclastic flow properties, dynamic pressures, and buoyancy
evolve during travel. Ground hugging flows can reverse their buoyancy if enough
pumice and ash is deposited and/or if enough air is entrained and heated,
expanding the flow. At present, this reversal is often posited as an abrupt
terminating condition for the progression of the flow on the ground. Counter,
however, to assumptions used in parameterized models, the processes that result
in buoyancy reversal, entrainment and deposition, are heterogeneous and can
alter concentration gradients as indicated by previous analog experiments,
multiphase numerical models, and field evidence. Indeed, previous approaches
that treat such currents as uniform oversimplify entrainment, resulting in
inaccurate predictions of flow dynamics. As the behavior and runout of turbulent
currents are strongly dictated by the development of buoyancy reversal, a better
understanding of the interactions and feedbacks between sedimentation and
entrainment is needed to develop more realistic models. Experiments in the
Experimental Volcanology Laboratory (Smithsonian Institution) will investigate
how buoyancy evolves due to entrainment in stratified currents. Experiments
using the Deep Water Basin in the Morphodynamics Laboratory (UT Austin) will
investigate how entrainment evolves in stratified currents modified by particle
settling. Each set of experiments will provide independent and crucial
information about how instabilities develop and incorporate ambient fluid into
stratified currents, and how these processes control the rate and location of
buoyancy reversal and liftoff. Three dimensional data from the experiments will
be directly compared to multiphase numerical simulations (UOregon) to validate
stratification evolution and liftoff conditions under end-member scenarios. A
suite of simulations will also be used to explore the mixing processes and mass
balance during the initiation of liftoff in ways not possible with parameterized
entrainment models. This study aims to investigate heterogeneous deposition and
entrainment in turbulent, stratified, particle-laden currents using
complementary analog experiments and multiphase numerical models to establish
how pyroclastic flow properties, dynamic pressures, and buoyancy evolve during
transport.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.