* 1852933
* Support for Research Team Seminars in Anthropology
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Paul Ryer, School for American Research
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 06/30/2024
* USD 183,857.00

Although digital communication is a key component of team research, studies on
the practice of collaborative science also demonstrate that face-to-face
interaction is needed to successfully advance research, which can be challenging
to achieve when investigators are located throughout the United States and in
other countries. NSF/SAR (School for Advanced Research) research team seminars
benefit the field of anthropology by providing important opportunities for in-
person collaborative interdisciplinary research, given the lack of resources to
bring busy scholars together for an extended time that is free of everyday
professional responsibilities. Supporting both existing and new research teams
of U.S. and international scholars with in-person focused, uninterrupted time to
discuss, synthesize, and analyze results of their collaborative research, this
project will result in plans for successful completion, expansion, and
development of new projects that will benefit and enrich the field of
anthropology. This project will also support the NSF's goals of building
scientific infrastructure through collaboration and increasing understanding of
the causes, consequences, and complexities of human social and cultural
variability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the advancement of
collaborative, interdisciplinary, and international research in anthropology by
an in-person team of scholars. The project also increases discovery and
understanding, as well as the quality and importance of the products resulting
from this type of research framework. With NSF funding, the School for Advanced
Research (SAR), an advanced research center for anthropology and allied
disciplines located in Santa Fe, New Mexico, will implement three years of
research team seminars in cultural anthropology, biological anthropology, and
archaeology. Eligible research teams will have a primary focus on a question of
anthropological importance that is timely and addresses a specific need.
Seminars will be selected by an expert panel of SAR staff and external scholars
through an annual competition. For each seminar, NSF funding will cover domestic
and international travel, lodging, meals, and other related costs for up to 10
participants (6 U.S. and 4 international scholars) to meet in the SAR Seminar
House for three days. Funding will also support a portion of SAR staff salaries
to administer the project and advertising of the research team opportunity.
Organizers of the research team seminars are expected to develop a meeting
schedule in advance and provide SAR with a report after the seminar concludes
that describes activities and results, including plans for new research,
publications in peer-reviewed journals and edited volumes, and conference
presentations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.