* 1852260
* CMU REU Site in Software Engineering (REUSE)
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/2019,02/28/2023
* Claire Le Goues, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Peter Brass
* 02/28/2023
* USD 398,735.00

Software engineering (SE) is a rich field focused on improving the effectiveness
of software development through a variety of tools and techniques. Research in
software engineering brings core aspects of computer science, such
as&lt;br/&gt;programming languages and machine learning, to bear on emerging
software concerns such as privacy, security, mobility, and adaptability. This
project supports an ongoing Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site
at Carnegie-Mellon University that provides students with training in
interdisciplinary software engineering research,&lt;br/&gt;including
understanding the research literature, formulating and refining research
questions, developing novel solutions to software engineering problems, and
applying scientific evaluation methods. The project will support
the&lt;br/&gt;training of 30 undergraduate students over 3 years with research
experiences in interdisciplinary software engineering at Carnegie Mellon
University. These students will be recruited primarily from undergraduate-only
institutions where students have limited research opportunities, with a special
emphasis on providing opportunities to members of underrepresented groups in
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) and first- and second-
year students. Participants will perform research with faculty mentors,
participate in community activities, and communicate their work both through
traditional publication channels and student research competitions
and&lt;br/&gt;via department-wide presentations at the end of the summer. A
primary goal for the program is to improve the pipeline from college to graduate
school and from graduate school into faculty positions; simultaneously, the site
actively trains graduate students to act as effective mentors of research
assistants, a critical skill for future faculty
members.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While built on computer science fundamentals (like
algorithms, programming languages, compilers, and machine learning), software
engineering is simultaneously an engineering discipline. That is, both the
practice of SE and SE research problems revolve around technical solutions that
successfully resolve conflicting constraints. As such, trade-offs between costs
and benefits are an integral part of evaluating the effectiveness of methods and
tools. This REU site takes this further, by tackling research problems that are
at the intersection of software engineering and another field, including
privacy, security, mobility, and human psychology and other sciences. A subset
of these problems includes, among others:&lt;br/&gt;* Sustainable maintenance of
critical open source infrastructure;&lt;br/&gt;* Development of novel
programming languages that can (A) support and enforce&lt;br/&gt;critical
security properties or (B) support visualization of
mathematical&lt;br/&gt;diagrams and notation; &lt;br/&gt;* Encoding and analysis
of privacy requirements across distributed,&lt;br/&gt;service-oriented systems;
and&lt;br/&gt;* Automatic identification and repair of defects in complex,
modern software&lt;br/&gt;systems.&lt;br/&gt;The project will build on the
experience of many of the faculty mentors who have&lt;br/&gt;worked with
undergraduate students in their individual research. This site is supported by
the Department of Defense in partnership with the NSF REU
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.