* 1852369
* REU Site: Research in Chemistry at West Virginia University
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Michelle Richards-Babb, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 03/31/2024
* USD 326,976.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site award to West Virginia
University, located in Morgantown, WV, supports the training of 10 students for
10 weeks during the summers of 2019-2021. This program, funded by the Division
of Chemistry in the Mathematical and Physical Science Directorate, engages
participants in research centered on the chemistry of health. These projects
focus on the potential of research to benefit society both directly and
indirectly in the fields of health care, forensics/criminology, energy, and
sustainability. Alongside research, this program features an extensive training
program, which includes training in the research process and cutting-edge
scientific instrumentation, laboratory safety, scientific ethics, scientific
communication, and strategies for effective collaboration. Participants also
perform scientific outreach activities at the Shack Neighborhood House to
strengthen local Appalachian youths' enthusiasm for science. Through this REU
program, participants discover how their research efforts can benefit society
both directly and indirectly, resulting in a workforce more aware of the value
of scientific research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The participants' research projects
focus on solving fundamental scientific problems related to the chemistry of
health. These projects include the development of sustainability in chemistry
through the synthesis of pharmaceuticals and fine chemicals using earth-abundant
transition metal catalysts. Participants carry out their research in
collaboration with faculty and graduate students and are trained on modern
scientific equipment and/or in the use of high-performance computing resources
and computational chemistry/biophysics software. This program recruits students
from primarily undergraduate institutions and community colleges, especially
women, underrepresented minorities, first generation college students, U.S.
Armed Forces veterans and persons from economically depressed areas (e.g.,
Appalachia). Involvement can improve the likelihood that participants enroll in
graduate-level training in chemistry or a related discipline, thereby improving
the scientific workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.