* 1852428
* REU Site: Interdisciplinary Climate Science Research at The Pennsylvania State University
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2024
* Gregory Jenkins, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Manda S. Adams
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,015,245.00

This project supports a Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site at
Pennsylvania State University. Undergraduate students will conduct authentic
research on topics related to climate science. The research topics will take in
interdisciplinary look at climate science and the societal relevance, spanning
beyond atmospheric science to also include impacts of a changing climate such as
human health, ecology, and engineering solutions. New statistical and
computational approaches will be introduced to students to make sense of the
ever-larger data being collected on the climate system. Mentors to the
participants will bring expertise in impacts (wildfires, forests, health, and
water quality), climate dynamics (ice sheets), measurement systems (drones and
remote sensing), and climate remediation (carbon
storage).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program is a complete, summer-long immersion
in the research process complemented with weekly activities to enhance students'
professional development through workshops and seminars on science
communication, graduate school, and career opportunities. Students will choose
to work with one or more leading climate science researchers who have designed a
clear and concise research project with achievable goals. A small research group
made up of faculty, research associates, post-doctoral scholars, and senior
graduate students will mentor each student. Students will report their research
in the form of a peer-reviewed journal article, a conference-style poster, and a
short (2-3 minute) oral presentation. Students will be encouraged to present
research at national meetings and produce peer-reviewed publications. With the
aid of an education specialist, surveys and focus groups will be used to obtain
feedback from students and mentors during and after the summer session, which
will be used to improve the program. Specific improvements to this REU renewal
include: (1) interdisciplinary expansion using faculty from seven departments,
(2) co-mentoring of students, and (3) enhanced targeting of underrepresented
groups. The program will accommodate 14-15 students each year, targeting women,
minorities, and students from institutions outside of those with the highest
research activity, as these constituencies are underrepresented in climate
science. The program will provide students with sufficient knowledge so that
they not only contribute to solving societally relevant scientific problems but
also to the improvement of scientific literacy within academia and throughout
our educational systems and society at large.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.