* 1852535
* REU Site: Multifunctional Materials
* ENG,EEC
* 03/15/2019,02/29/2024
* Ibrahim Karaman, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 02/29/2024
* USD 360,000.00

This renewal Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site at Texas A&amp;M
University (TAMU)offers research experiences on various aspects of
multifunctional materials, or materials which combine two or more important
properties (for example, strength and electrical energy storage capacity) to
diverse and talented cohorts of students particularly from predominantly
undergraduate and minority serving institutions in Texas and across the country.
There is extensive materials research activity in the southwestern US, which
serves exponentially growing sectors in energy, aerospace, electronics and
health; however, materials research and education efforts are fragmented, and
many undergraduates do not know what materials science is. Advances in
materials, particularly multifunctional materials are critical to addressing the
country's most challenging problems in energy and health. The research products
will benefit society broadly and the project will help to recruit more students
into materials science and engineering, an area where an increased and more
diverse workforce is urgently needed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of
this 10 week summer, REU site are: 1. Recruit ten undergraduate participants
with majors in STEM disciplines per year, focusing particularly on predominantly
undergraduate and minority serving institutions in Texas, and building on
existing connections with faculty at those institutions. 2. Engage undergraduate
participants in high quality research experiences related to multifunctional
materials, building their understanding of the research process, increasing
their confidence in their ability to do research, and stimulating their interest
in pursuing careers in materials science and engineering. 3. Through a rigorous
assessment and student tracking process, evaluate the impact of the REU site on
student participants' subsequent education and career choices, and evaluate the
effectiveness of specific components of the research experience, thus helping to
improve future REU efforts. The research activities will focus on multiscale
experiments and modeling of material systems that exhibit multifunctional
properties. The experimental activities will include fabrication and
characterization of shape memory alloys, 2-D materials, MAX Phases, fibers and
polymers, as well as design and testing of carbon nanofiber devices, carbon
nanosponges, alternative energy storage device materials, Layer-by-Layer polymer
assemblies, multifunctional coatings, and nastic material systems. The modeling
activities will include atomistic simulations, continuum scale constitutive
modeling, statistical materials discovery methods, materials informatics and
machine learning methodologies, finite element based micromechanics, and
macroscopic finite element modeling of applications. Students will learn how
research is conducted, develop laboratory and modeling skills, and learn how to
conduct design, analysis, testing and optimization of multifunctional materials
and components. The students will collaborate with a faculty research mentor
from the multidisciplinary Department of Materials Science and Engineering along
with a trained graduate student mentor. They also will participate in a
professional development program that includes training in communications and
research methods skills, graduate school information sessions, and optional
field trips and tours. The students are provided with opportunities to present
their research results in a poster symposium held at the end of the summer. The
program will collaborate closely with TAMU's AGEP-T program and LSAMP program as
part of comprehensive recruitment plan to ensure a diverse and talented
applicant pool for the REU Site.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This site is supported by
the Department of Defense in partnership with the NSF REU
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.