* 1852822
* Supporting Leaders in Elementary Mathematics Teaching in Missouri
* EDU,DUE
* 04/15/2019,03/31/2025
* Rhonda McKee, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Mindy Capaldi
* 03/31/2025
* USD 1,209,620.00

With support from the Robert Noyce Teaching Scholarship Program, this Track 3:
Master Teaching Fellowships project aims to serve the national need of
recruiting and preparing highly effective elementary mathematics teachers. The
project responds to national calls for content specialists to assume greater
responsibility for teaching elementary students. It will do so by providing
elementary mathematics teachers in Missouri with specialized training in
elementary mathematics content, pedagogy, and leadership, so that they can
become certified as Elementary Mathematics Specialists. The project's Master
Teaching Fellows will complete a two-year master's degree program based on
standards developed by the Association of Mathematics Teacher Educators. After
completion of the master's degree, the project will continue to support the
Master Teaching Fellows in becoming mathematics leaders in their school and
district. Research will be conducted to document Master Teaching Fellows'
leadership activities as well as the structural and systemic supports that
enable them to improve teaching and learning in their local contexts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will recruit and select 24 promising
elementary mathematics teachers from two high-need Missouri school districts,
Columbia Public Schools and Independence Public Schools, which are partners in
the project. The Master Teaching Fellows will participate in extensive training
and practice in the transformation of mathematics teaching at the school level.
The project will support a partnership between mathematics and education faculty
at the University of Missouri and University of Central Missouri, along with two
high-need school districts and the Missouri Council of Teachers of Mathematics.
Through these partnerships, the Master Teaching Fellows will have the resources
to research local instructional problems, helping schools to navigate challenges
such as selecting mathematics curricula and resources, supporting individual
teachers in using high-leverage teaching practices, developing structures for
teacher collaboration, and using data to inform efforts to improve mathematics
instruction. In addition, the research will document the development of
sustainable models for providing mathematics leadership though formal and
informal roles. It will disseminate findings at the state and national level
about the use of elementary mathematics specialists as a district and school
improvement strategy. The Noyce program supports talented STEM undergraduate
majors and professionals to become effective K - 12 mathematics and science
teachers in high-need school districts and experienced and exemplary K - 12 STEM
teachers to become STEM master teachers. It also supports research on the
persistence, retention, and effectiveness of K - 12 teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.