* 1853146
* SBIR Phase II:  Gripper-integrated proximity, contact and force sensing for collaborative robots
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2019,09/30/2020
* Nicolaus Correll, Robotic Materials Inc
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 09/30/2020
* USD 809,043.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is a new generation of
smart robotic hands that will manifest a new plateau for industrial manipulation
and robotics research. Previously hard manipulation challenges will be available
out-of-the-box, enabling industry to create new, complex applications.
Integration of sensing, actuation, control, and programming environment into a
single low-cost device will decrease complexity, setup time and cost of
collaborative robotic solutions, and, together with a new generation of low-cost
robotic arms, enable industrial tasks of high commercial value, including bin-
picking, kitting and assembly. A simple, graphical programming interface paired
with a browser-based scripting interface will make robot programming accessible
to a workforce with widely varying educational backgrounds, thereby increasing
productivity and efficiency in the workplace and ensuring long-term economic
viability of US-based manufacturing. This project also contributes to workforce
development by training a new breed of engineers that are equally versed with
mechanical, electronics and control, while providing opportunities for a diverse
population of students at the University of Colorado. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project fundamentally advances the
understanding of the interplay between proximity, contact and force sensing;
self-supervised learning techniques to improve hand-coded robot controllers; and
manufacturing challenges of systems that tightly integrate sensing, actuation,
and computation. Building up on a proof-of-concept gripper design resulting from
Phase I research that has successfully demonstrated a variety of challenging
industrially-relevant bin picking, kitting and assembly tasks, this research
will investigate new algorithms for dual-arm assembly problems including
improved path planning and collision avoidance, optimization algorithms for
automatic parameter tuning to improve grasp and assembly success, and training
of deep convolutional neural networks to replace hand-coded segmentation
algorithms for object identification and ?actor critics?. Rigorous testing for
robustness, reliability and accuracy throughout the project will drive algorithm
development. Safety analysis will feed back into hardware and controller
design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.