* 1853718
* Cryptocurrencies and the New Spaces of Finance
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2019,10/31/2023
* Matthew Zook, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 10/31/2023
* USD 285,806.00

This project investigates the ways in which blockchain-based cryptocurrencies
are reshaping the geographies and practices of valuation and financing within
startup firms. Cryptocurrency-backed initial coin offerings (ICOs) represent a
novel form of venture financing that changes the scale and scope of investment
as well as encouraging firm structures that maximize hospitable regulatory
locations. The outcomes of these processes have important implications for the
location of economic growth and wealth formation, particularly within the
finance sector. The project seeks to clarify how novel financing practices
associated with cryptocurrencies impact new firm formation within the technology
sector. Findings will be disseminated via a variety of publications (academic
and more general and using open access publishing), the distribution of tools,
code, and datasets developed for this project for gathering, cleaning and
analyzing data via open-source tools and data such as GitHub, and through
educational activities such as student training and classroom modules.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The contribution of this research is to demonstrate how
novel financing practices associated with cryptocurrencies impact new firm
formation within the technology sector. The research will advance theory and
understanding within economic geography by looking specifically at
financialization and the ways financial institutions and logics exert power in
economic systems within these new spaces of finance. The project has three
specific objectives. The first is to determine the geographies of core
cryptocurrency functions by asking: what factors contribute to the geographies
of different cryptocurrency operations? How are locations integrated with
downstream operations such as ICOs? These questions will be answered using data-
scraping and geolocation methods drawn from geospatial science and digital
geographies. The second objective is to assesses how cryptocurrencies' uses and
networks contribute to value. This will be addressed by using social network
analysis, machine learning, natural language processing, and deep neural nets
from computational sociology and computer science to ask: how do networks of
cryptocurrencies differ between use types? How does network interaction
contribute to value? The third objective focuses on how cryptocurrencies affect
financing and entrepreneurial practices within tech-based startups. The
investigator will use interviews to gather data to answer: What are the
motivations of investors/entrepreneurs in ICOs? and What additional functions
are folded into the financing process? Together these objectives will
fundamentally advance basic knowledge in economic
geography.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.