* 1853207
* SBIR Phase II:  A multi-omics data integration approach for precision medicine and improved clinical trial success
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Cordelia Ziraldo, Advaita Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 02/29/2024
* USD 714,707.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project will be the development of an analysis method
and software package to identify human disease subtypes using omics data. This
technology will enable the ability to provide personalized treatment for
patients, and more successful and cost-effective clinical trials, bring drugs to
market more rapidly. The goal is identification of disease subtypes and patient
subgroups, a prerequisite to the ability to distinguish between patients who are
in danger and need the most aggressive treatments, and those who are less suited
to treatment because they will never progress or recur or they will develop
resistance. Currently, 70% of drugs entering Phase III clinical trials fail,
leading to a loss of more than $1 trillion per year. This may be avoided by
refining trial inclusion criteria and administering the drug only to the
patients most likely to respond. The technology is designed to identify patient
subgroups most likely to respond or not respond to a given treatment. This
technology also may reduce the cost of prophylactic clinical trials by reducing
the number of subjects and/or duration necessary to achieve sufficient power.
The technology will significantly reduce drug development costs while
simultaneously improving patient care by selecting the correct treatment for
each patient. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this SBIR Phase II
project is to develop a novel analysis method and software package that is able
to identify subtypes of disease based on the integration of multiple types of
omics data. Many drug candidates fail and many patients receive inappropriate
treatment because of the current inability to distinguish between subgroups of
patients (respondents vs. non-respondents) and/or subtypes of disease
(aggressive vs. non-aggressive). The current unmet challenge is to discover the
molecular subtypes of disease and subgroups of patients. Attempts to achieve
this based solely on gene expression signatures have been undertaken but yielded
only modest success (very few gene expression tests are FDA-approved to date).
The technology proposed here may be used to discover clinically relevant disease
subtypes by integrating multiple types of high-throughput data. In addition, the
Phase I results obtained on real patient data demonstrated that the technology
is able to distinguish between more and less aggressive types of cancer based on
their molecular profiles alone. This Phase II project proposes to extend this
technology to integrate genomic and clinical data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.