* 1853344
* ICE-TI II
* EDU,EES
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2024
* Cynthia Lindquist, Cankdeska Cikana Community College
* Standard Grant
* Regina Sievert
* 04/30/2024
* USD 2,471,197.00

The goal of the Tribal Colleges and Universities Program (TCUP) is to support
Native-serving institutions of higher education in building their science,
technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) instructional and research
capacities. Using a suite of activities and building on past successful work,
Cankdeska Cikana Community College (CCCC) addresses TCUP's goals in the project
titled ICE-TI II, with the ultimate goal of increasing the number of Native
Americans graduating with STEM college degrees and entering the STEM workforce.
The project provides new options in CCCC's mathematics instruction through the
addition of the Carnegie Math Pathways system. Through collaborative work with
other tribal colleges, the math curriculum is enhanced through the integration
of community and student relevant content. Improvements in student support
services (such as increased Internet access and tutoring) aimed at reducing
common academic and non-academic barriers to Native students? college success
are also key project activities. A participatory evaluation provides feedback
that enables formative optimization of the project?s activities and outcomes.
Findings from the evaluation will be disseminated in a range of forums to allow
others, particularly those serving Native American students, to tap into the
project's lessons learned.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ICE-TI II project builds
capacity in STEM instruction and research at CCCC through a comprehensive set of
innovations in instruction and curriculum development. The project is designed
to impact multiple system levels, including individuals, organizations,
communities, and the broader society. Activities include increasing the use of
problem-based learning and new educational resources, providing academic and
non-academic services to ameliorate barriers to student engagement and
retention, and supporting students' advancement from the two-year college
experience through the transition to four-year colleges, graduate studies, and
entrance into the workforce. Using Community-Based Participatory Action Research
principles and employing a staggered, prospective multiple-cohort design, the
project seeks to investigate questions about how best to support underprepared
students? success in college. Since the Carnegie Math Pathways is a recently
developed strategy, this project contributes to the emerging body of knowledge
about the efficacy of CMP, especially for American Indian students and those
living in rural areas. The project will inform future evaluations, as well, by
assessing the psychometrics of instruments used to measure characteristics of
American Indian students that may influence their academic
success.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.