* 1853864
* GeoAI for Terrain Analysis: A Deep-Learning Approach for Landform Feature Detection
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2019,01/31/2024
* Wenwen Li, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 01/31/2024
* USD 400,000.00

Geospatial Artificial Intelligence (GeoAI) represents an exciting new research
area that incorporates machine intelligence and data-driven approaches for
geospatial problem solving. Rapid advances in AI methods, the proliferation of
spatial big data, and immense computing power are transforming the way research
is conducted and prompts new discoveries. This project develops a new Geospatial
Artificial Intelligence (GeoAI) solution to enable large-scale, automated,
intelligent, and highly accurate landform feature detection and terrain
analysis. Conventional approaches to terrain analysis have been limited to the
use of pixel/object-based image analysis and shallow machine learning, which
suffer from significant performance challenges when dealing with big data in
complex classification tasks. This research, which spatializes deep (machine)
learning by incorporating spatial principles and spatial relational data,
represents a methodological breakthrough in GeoAI and spatial data science more
broadly. Leveraging GeoAI for landform feature recognition enriches spatial
knowledge and enhances the understanding of land-surface processes on Earth and
other planets. It also benefits geospatial applications that have societal
benefit, including anomaly detection that can be used in search and rescue
operations and by recognizing landform features indicative of environmental
change. The investigators intend on developing the GeoAI community using the
model used to establish the Geographic Information Science (GISci) community in
the past. GeoAI-related symposia will be organized to serve as an important
venue for researchers from diverse disciplines and organizations to discuss new
advances and open challenges in GeoAI. The project includes a postdoctoral
scholar and trains undergraduate students as interdisciplinary scientists. Both
investigators are female scientists and they actively mentor scientists from
underrepresented groups. All data and code developed during this project will be
open-sourced to benefit the broader geospatial
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Significant challenges exist in successfully
applying GeoAI to terrain analysis, including the complexity and diversity in
landform features, the dearth of training data, the lack of spatial knowledge in
model design, and the limited understanding of machine inferential processes.
This research will tackle such challenges by developing (1) a comprehensive
terrain dataset GeoNat to support terrain analysis and various machine learning
tasks; (2) a machine learning model TerrainAI that injects key spatial
principles (spatial autocorrelation and spatial heterogeneity) to enable cross-
scale deep learning from multi-source, georeferenced data; and (3) an
interactive visualization tool that opens up the "black box" of the machine's
learning and decision process. Relying on these tools, three research questions
will be answered: (I) What are the unique spatial structures, patterns, and
spatial scale that a machine learns to differentiate landform features? (II) How
do human and machine recognition processes compare? And (III) How can the
underlying geomorphological processes that yield certain forms of a feature in
different landscapes be predicted? The identification of process-form
relationships significantly impacts the agenda of geographical, spatial
scientific and related sciences such as geomorphology in fostering the creation
of a community-consensus landform classification system. The TerrainAI model is
not limited to the study of landforms but is generalizable and applicable to
detect any geographical objects, both natural and human-
made.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.