* 1853618
* Collaborative Research: Laboratory Measurements of O and N2 Ultraviolet (UV) Cross Sections by Particle Impact for Remote Sensing of Thermosphere O/N2 Variation
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2018,03/31/2022
* Richard Eastes, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Tai-Yin Huang
* 03/31/2022
* USD 197,602.00

This award would advance the capabilities for UV remote sensing by targeting a
laboratory goal, which is centered on the determination of the UV emission cross
sections (Qem) needed for remote sensing observations of the Earth's dayglow. In
the dayglow a unique signature of the O/N2 density ratio, from satellite-based
UV observations, comes from measuring the intensity ratio of the OI (135.6 nm
(3P2-&gt; 5So2)) and N2 Lyman-Birge-Hopfield (LBH) band (125-250 nm) emissions.
This O/N2 density ratio is a key to understanding the ionosphere and
thermosphere composition changes on a global scale under all geomagnetic
conditions. However, the total emission cross sections of these two sets of
spectral transitions have not been measured. Each of these two total emission
cross sections is a sum of a direct excitation emission cross section and a
cascade cross section. The cascade cross sections are about 30-50% of the total
cross section. As the column density ratio O/N2 plays a key role in Space
Weather studies, accurate absolute measurements of Qem for both OI and LBH
emissions are vital for explaining both the magnitude and temporal evolution of
thermosphere composition (O/N2) changes. Similarly, the energetic proton (H+)
and H atom impact laboratory measurements of Qem needed for auroral remote
sensing are inadequate. The main focus of this is two-fold. One graduate student
(UCF) and one undergraduate student would be supported in this
effort.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first goal of the award project would be to
measure the absolute direct electron, H+, and H impact Qem for both the LBH band
between 125 nm to 250 nm and OI (3P2--&gt;5So2) at 135.6 nm from their emission
thresholds to 500 eV by electron-impact, to 50 keV by H+ and H atom impact,
using the team's experimental facilities located at Caltech/JPL. The team would
also measure at the University of Colorado the cascade processes from these
upper states. Aeronomers at the University of Central Florida (UCF) and
Computational Physics Inc. (CPI) would model the remote sensing data using two
classic particle transport codes that are paramount to the US space mission:
AURIC and GLOW.