* 1853949
* RUI: Evolutionary origins of the vertebrate paired appendage gene regulatory network
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Marcus Davis, James Madison University
* Standard Grant
* Anna Allen
* 09/30/2022
* USD 184,754.00

The fins of fishes and the limbs of terrestrial (land living) vertebrates are
anatomically distinct: Fins are 'capped' in a series of rays, while limbs
terminate in an autopod (hands/feet). These differences support the view that
fin rays and autopods are patterned by distinctly separate genes and genetic
'circuits'. If this were true, studies of fin ray growth and regeneration may
not be directly transferable to studies of limb birth defects and regeneration
research, including in humans. However, preliminary data from this project shows
that the same genetic circuits do form the skeletons of both fins and limbs.
This project will confirm this common fin/limb building program, first
characterizing the activity of key genes in the developing fins of two fish
ideally suited to address these questions, the American paddlefish and the small
spotted catshark. These results will then guide experiments to test gene
function, which will be compared to known data for developing limbs. Outcomes
will show that a shared genetic program regulates formation of fins and limbs
and demonstrate that fish fins are a powerful research tool for the study of
limbs. Part of the success of this program will be the training of new
researchers - a diverse group of graduate and undergraduates will bring their
talents to this project and contribute to public outreach experiences in the
Atlanta area public school system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
developmental basis of the fin-to-limb transition remains a longstanding
question in evolutionary biology. In current models, fins are patterned by
distinct proximal and distal developmental modules, generating adult skeletal
compartments containing endochondral or dermal elements respectively. Emphasis
on skeletal type led to the hypothesis that fin-folds and autopods are not
homologous, patterned by different modules, despite similar distal positions.
However, new findings raise an intriguing alternative hypothesis: that autopods
share a deep regulatory homology with dermal fin rays. This project will build a
model for the evolutionary origin of the distal paired appendage gene regulatory
network (GRN), expanding on discoveries in two phylogenetically well-positioned
vertebrates, the American paddlefish (Polyodon spathula) and the small spotted
catshark (Scyliorhinus canicula). To test this model, RNA-seq will be used to
build a comprehensive transcriptional map in the fin compartments of paddlefish.
These datasets will be compared to existing transcriptomic resources to identify
candidate distal appendage GRN genes, which will be tested via pharmacological
perturbation assays in paddlefish and complementary gene expression assays in
catshark. CRISPR-Cas9 mediated gene knockdowns will test HoxA gene function in
paddlefish fins. Together, the outcomes of this project will elucidate key
components of the distal appendage GRN, catalyze new research directions that
regulate early skeletogenesis, and reinvigorate interest in the use of fins for
the study of limb birth defects and regeneration studies. The proposed work will
train a diverse group of graduate and undergraduate students, including those
recruited through minority participation programs. The PI and students will
collaborate on outreach programs to Atlanta area public high schools through
virtual access to the PI's lab, classroom visits, and summer intern programs.