* 1853342
* Multi-timescale Analysis of Cellular Electrical Activity
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* Theodore Vo, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 07/31/2023
* USD 369,445.00

This project will use mathematical and computational analysis to understand
patterns of activity in hormone-secreting endocrine and cardiac cells. Numerous
cells in the body are electrically active. They produce electrical impulses, and
these impulses through which nerve cells code and transmit information,
endocrine cells secrete hormones, and muscle cells initiate contraction.
Understanding the electrical activity of these cells is fundamental to
understanding their behavior. This is, no easy task, since the electrical
activity is mediated by ion flow through several types of ion channels in the
cell membrane interacting in nonlinear ways through the membrane potential.
Adding to this complexity, there are numerous intracellular signaling molecules
acting on some of these channels and modifying their behavior. This project
focuses on oscillations in the membrane potential of insulin-secreting cells of
the pancreas, stress-hormone-secreting pituitary cells, and cells of the cardiac
ventricles. These oscillations can be beneficial or pathological, depending on
the cell type. One objective of this project is to understand why the
oscillations happen and, in the case that they are pathological, to determine
how they can be terminated. Another objective is to train undergraduate and
graduate students in the theory and application of sophisticated mathematical
techniques that are directly applicable to biological systems. This training is
facilitated through the interaction with several experimental
labs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The variables that describe an electrically excitable
cell often vary on significantly different times scales. Some variables adapt
quickly to changes in the cell's membrane potential, while others adapt more
slowly. In such cases, oscillations in the membrane potential can occur at the
level of the subsystem of fast variables, or at the level of the slow subsystem,
or at some intermediate level that involves variables from both subsystems. To
understand the basis of the oscillations, system variables should be partitioned
in an appropriate way, facilitating the use of geometric singular perturbation
analysis, or fast/slow analysis. This project employs fast/slow analysis in the
examination of bursting oscillations in pituitary corticotrophs and pancreatic
beta-cells, and pathological early after depolarizations (EADs) in ventricular
myocytes. The former drive the secretion of hormones, while the latter can lead
to, at the tissue level, ventricular tachycardia. The fast/slow analysis of the
different models will uncover the mechanisms through which modulators of cell
behavior, such as corticosteroids or glucose or hypokalemia, act to move the
cell among distinct behaviors, some rhythmic and some not. It will also be used
to understand the effects of different stimulus frequencies on EAD production in
ventricular myocytes, which normally receive periodic stimulation from the
sinoatrial node in situ. This project is supported by both Division of
Mathematical Sciences/Mathematical Biology and Molecular and Cellular
Biology/Cellular Dynamics and Function programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.