* 1853192
* SBIR Phase II:  Affordable Remote Cardiac Monitoring Device For Improved Firefighter Safety Outcomes
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2019,11/30/2022
* Chandana Weebadde, Avidhrt Inc
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 11/30/2022
* USD 1,018,628.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is the development of a comprehensive
physiological monitoring platform that provides individuals working in hazardous
occupations, such as firefighters, with longitudinal and real-time physiological
monitoring that includes predictive diagnostics. Because existing physiological
monitoring products are cost-prohibitive for most fire and emergency service
agencies, and 50% of firefighter deaths are due to sudden cardiac events, this
technology offers fire-service agencies an affordable mechanism for addressing
this critical problem. Multiple studies have shown that early detection of an
irregular heart-rate event (arrhythmias) offers a significant advantage in
preventing and treating further CVD. The proposed technological innovation would
consist of a wearable physiological monitoring device, which will use a range of
networking mechanisms to communicate with a user-friendly analytical platform.
Further, the integration of a self-alert system into a wearable patch would
support a standalone operation even if there were to be a communication lag
between a firefighter and command center. Early detection of arrhythmias and
promoting corrective actions could reduce each individual cardiovascular
disability claim by about $325,000.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project
aims to reduce the economic and social costs associated with firefighter
injuries and fatalities due to underlying cardiovascular-disease and the extreme
physiological strain resulting from the hazardous occupational environments in
which fire services personnel work. The affordability of the proposed technology
would not only improve occupational safety in the industry, but also enable
scientists to further scientific knowledge about the interrelationships between
oxygen saturation, ECG values, and extreme heat and physiological stress by
using this technology to conduct experimental and field-based research. The
longitudinal analysis possible with this platform would also give scientists the
tools necessary to research the relationships between physiological stress and
human performance factors, to gain a deeper understanding about critical factors
in mechanisms such as decision making, risk perception, and communication. These
factors are frequently cited in National Institute for Occupational Safety and
Health (NIOSH) after incident investigations of firefighter fatalities, along
with playing important roles in the operating procedure standards set by the
National Fire Protection Association (NFPA).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.