* 1853459
* I-Corps Teams:  Minimally Invasive Ultrasound approaches for brain oncology
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2019,07/31/2019
* Amir Manbachi, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Pamela McCauley
* 07/31/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to ablate
brain tumors and other cranial soft tissues with less infection, better
outcomes, and reduced cost compared to current alternatives. Currently, there
are around 700,000 individuals diagnosed with brain tumor in the US, with
another 80,000 expected to be diagnosed this year (National Brain Tumor Society,
2017). Nearly two thirds, or 54,000, of these patients will undergo surgery as a
first course of treatment at one of 5,000 neurosurgical centers in the US. The
majority of patients are currently treated with invasive cranial flap resection
procedures. Furthermore, the proposed technology may offer a therapeutic option
for the 13,000 patients with high-risk primary malignant tumors that may be
considered inoperable with current surgical approaches. The thermal ablation
medical device market represents a $2.2B opportunity in the US, with ultrasound
thermal ablation technology valued at $334M with an annual market growth rate of
13.5% (BCC Research, 2017). This innovation would offer a unique tool for
neurosurgeons apart from cranial surgical navigation tools with a $459M US
market, which are currently considered the standard of care for cranial
surgery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project will explore a minimally
invasive high-intensity focused ultrasound (HIFU) device to ablate brain tumors
and other cranial soft tissues, which features a hybrid transducer tip to apply
therapeutic ultrasound to the targeted anatomy while simultaneously using
ultrasound imaging to visualize the surgery site. Our simulation modeling
determined the appropriate parameters for an initial prototype to precisely
focus ultrasound and create a lesion using a flexible transducer phased array in
a heterogeneous medium volume simulating cerebrospinal fluid and brain tissue
(Zhang et al., 2017, AAPM Annual Meeting). These data showed that our system
could provide the same efficacy of treatment with two orders of magnitude less
power than non-invasive, transcranial HIFU devices. The project team then built
a prototype based on the simulation results, and showed proof-of-concept
functionality using a bovine serum albumin protein phantom. One of the primary
challenges of this project will be to maintain the acoustic performance of the
probe as the project moves toward miniaturization of the technology to fit the
probe within the brain ventricles. The team will pursue further customer
discovery to gain a deeper understanding of the clinical workflow, revenue
streams, reimbursement, and regulatory aspects, with the goal to build an
evidence-based business plan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.