* 1853388
* Crystal Buoyancy in the Deep Magma Ocean
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2023
* Lars Stixrude, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Hearn
* 03/31/2023
* USD 458,000.00

Present-day Earth is the product of an evolutionary process which began with a
largely or completely molten planet. This project aims to constrain the iron
contents of solid and liquid phases in the early magma ocean. Whether solids
rise or sink in a magma depends on their density contrast with the liquid, which
is a function of their relative iron contents. The distribution of iron between
phases is called partitioning. Quantifying iron partitioning in the early magma
ocean is critical to model Earth's mantle evolution toward its present-day
structure and composition. Here, the researcher uses computational physics to
model at the atomic level the chemistry of iron in the magma. The simulation -
called "ab initio" because it relies on quantum-mechanics first principles -
accounts for the extreme pressures prevailing in the deep magma ocean. The
team's state-of-the-art code includes developments which allow calculating the
affinity of iron with solid and liquid phases, thus whether minerals rise or
sink. This project promotes the training of a graduate student in computational
Mineral Physics. It impacts the adjacent fields of Experimental Petrology and
Geodynamics, with strong implications for the interpretation of modern
geochemical and seismological observations. It also has broad impacts in
Materials Science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous work has shown that whether
crystals rise or sink in a magma ocean depends critically on the partitioning of
iron between liquid and crystalline phases. Yet, the sign of the liquid-crystal
density contrast and the vector of geochemical evolution is unknown at the
conditions of the deep magma ocean. Here, the PI and his team calculates ab
initio the partitioning of iron among coexisting phases throughout the pressure
regime of the lower mantle. The project represents a major expansion for the
application of density functional theory to the magma ocean. It encompasses
studies of end-member compositions and the chemical interaction between liquids
and crystals. The team build on their accomplishments in ab initio simulation of
Earth's iron-bearing systems - including strong correlation and magnetic entropy
- by broadening the scope to account for free energies and element partitioning.
Using first principles molecular dynamics coupled with adiabatic switching, they
will predict iron partitioning between: 1) liquid and crystalline (Mg,Fe)O , 2)
liquid and crystalline (Mg,Fe)SiO3 and 3) a liquid approximating bulk silicate
Earth composition and (Mg,Fe)O ferropericlase and (Mg,Fe)SiO3
bridgmanite.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.