* 1853495
* Incorporating Immunity into Epidemiological Infectious Disease Models: Bridging Multiple Scales
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Lauren Childs, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Amina Eladdadi
* 07/31/2023
* USD 179,999.00

Emerging and on-going infectious disease outbreaks significantly impact the
health and economic stability of a population. Understanding and predicting the
course of such outbreaks is challenging due to the variability of individuals,
particularly with respect to their levels of protection against various
infections. This work will address three infectious diseases of worldwide
interest: dengue, malaria and whooping cough. Simple mathematical models have
been successful at describing the epidemics of and suggesting intervention
strategies for simple infectious disease. More complicated diseases, however,
require the development and analysis of more complicated models, particularly
linking multiple scales - organismal, temporal, and spatial. The novel models
and quantitative tools will provide insight into the reason for observed
patterns of outbreaks as well as guide strategies for combating these
complicated diseases. This work will provide interdisciplinary training for
undergraduate and graduate students, and the results of the work will be
disseminated to a broad audience through the development of infectious disease
based outreach activities and peer-reviewed publications and
seminars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the role of variable
immunity within populations is crucial to accurately determining the dynamics of
epidemics and to effectively slowing and stopping their spread. This work
includes the development, analysis, and simulation of multi-scale models with
variability of the individual host immune response. Detailed within-host immune
dynamics will be incorporated into population-level epidemiological models of
dengue, malaria and pertussis (whooping cough) to evaluate population-level
disease dynamics. The aims of this work are three fold: determine the role of
within-host viral and immune variability on epidemiological dynamics of dengue;
determine the role of adaptive antigen-specific immunity on malaria prevalence
and transmission potential; and develop a model of waning and boosting of
immunity to determine optimal primary vaccination and booster dose timing for
pertussis. This work furthers the mathematical theory of multi-scale systems of
differential equations motivated through the incorporation of within-host
heterogeneity in population models. It will build upon mathematical theory from
differential equations and non-linear dynamical systems. The main challenge will
be analyses of non-linear systems with variable time scales and large
dimensionality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.