* 1853681
* Visualizing Motion: A Framework for the Cartography of Movement
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Somayeh Dodge, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 02/29/2024
* USD 328,756.00

This project will examine how motion as a phenomenon, with complex space and
time dimensions, is effectively represented in geographic visual displays. It
will develop visualization methods and tools to map movement patterns and
interaction between individuals. These tools are essential for hypothesis
generation and visual communication for studying a variety of applications
related to social and ecological systems. Vast amounts of information on bodies
and objects in motion is now collected at very high spatial and temporal
resolutions. These data have the potential to inform critical areas related to
global movements of humans and goods, disease outbreak, impact of transportation
changes on urban traffic, or effects of human activity on endangered species.
Effective visual representations of motion are needed to reveal and communicate
complex patterns and processes of societal importance. This project will
contribute insights into how humans perceive movement patterns and advance
knowledge on the effectiveness of different cartographic techniques in mapping
interaction in motion. The theory, methods, and tools developed by this project
can be used broadly to map and study movement across diverse disciplines such as
geographic information science (GIS), ecology, transportation, and health.
Through collaboration with industry, this study will bridge the gap between
academic research and industry by contributing new cartographic techniques to
existing commercial GIS software products which are used by researchers, policy
makers, students, and others worldwide. Undergraduate and graduate students will
be trained for research in STEM, partnering with industry, writing scientific
publications, and developing geographic visualization tools. The visualization
methods and tools will be made publicly available and used for training students
to develop maps in motion through classroom settings and outreach
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will create a new theoretical
framework for the cartography of movement and test it on examples taken from
movement ecology and human mobility. It will investigate two overarching
research questions: (1) What are fundamental visual principles and design
elements for representing motion in accurate and effective ways? (2) How can
representation of motion advance our knowledge and understanding of interaction?
By addressing these two research questions, this research will contribute new
cartographic methods to facilitate effective transformation of raw movement data
into useful knowledge of motion in different contexts (i.e. animal and human
movements). To assess the efficacy of the proposed framework and the usability
of developed methods, a series of evaluative user studies and eye-tracking
experiments will be conducted. User study experiments will generate guidelines
on effective and more plausible ways of communicating movement patterns. As a
research use case, this research will investigate the question of how
visualization of motion helps to understand species interaction, in this case
endangered tigers in Thailand. Although this research focuses on the cartography
of motion, it will contribute methods and techniques to advance the
understanding of interaction between individuals in dynamic social and
ecological systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.