* 1853832
* A Colloquium and Field Study on Sustaining Rural Systems: July 2019: St Paul, MN
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2019,09/30/2020
* Holly Barcus, Macalester College
* Standard Grant
* Scott Freundschuh
* 09/30/2020
* USD 25,000.00

This project supports the 2019 Colloquium and Field Study of the Sustainability
of Rural Systems Commission of the International Geographical Union (IGU-CSRS),
which will be hosted jointly by Macalester College and the University of
Wisconsin at Eau Claire. The Colloquium fosters collaboration and information
exchange specifically focused on concepts of economic, social, and environmental
sustainability of rural systems. This Colloquium engages scholars, civic
leaders, and local communities in discussions and place-specific examples of
community and farmer initiatives highlighting innovative models and technologies
related to sustainable rural communities in the U.S. The collaborations and
partnerships include opportunities for student participation, training, and
potential internships related to these themes. This forum also provides
participants with an opportunity to develop a variety of perspectives on rural
sustainability and bolster relationships between the universities and local
communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The U.S. Midwest region is the living
laboratory in which participants will examine the diverse economic and social
trajectories of rural communities. Globalization and economic development
manifest differently at local levels and impact rural communities
differentially, depending on linkages within global trade networks. This
Colloquium and Field Study is organized around four sub-themes highlighting the
importance of the local while interrogating the relationships between local
social and economic vitality and national and global trends. The first sub-
theme, "Rural Innovations: Entrepreneurship and Rural-Urban Partnerships,"
highlights conventional and perceptual barriers between rural and urban regions
and examines activities and opportunities for building healthy and sustainable
regional networks. Theme two, "Recognizing rural demographic diversity,"
highlights the rapidly changing rural demographic landscape, including issues of
aging, population decline, and increasing ethnic diversity. The third and fourth
themes, "Land Use Transitions" and "Agricultural Transitions" focus on the
restructuring of rural economies, including small and large-scale agriculture,
new business, and innovative technologies. This project investigates rural
social, economic, environmental systems through a colloquium focused on
exchanging research and experiences between scholars from around the world, and
with an in-depth field-based study of rural communities in Minnesota and
Wisconsin.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.