* 1853587
* Approximating Dynamics of Stochastic Contact Networks: Ebola Model
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Grzegorz Rempala, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 06/30/2023
* USD 349,920.00

This project will develop mathematical and statistical tools to integrate
complex, changing connections between infected and susceptible individuals to
make simple predictions regarding size and scope of disease outbreaks. An
important feature of the dynamics of diseases transmitted on contact is that the
contact patterns change in response to infection and progression of symptoms:
infected individuals curtail contacts with their regular community due to
illness (e.g. being too sick to go to school or work) but increase their
contacts with other segments of the population, such as healthcare workers or
caretakers in the home. The recent Ebola outbreak in West Africa provides a
stark example, but there have been many others, for instance in the waves of
HIV-AIDS epidemics in various parts of the world as well as new, smaller
outbreaks of Ebola in remote parts of the Congo. Although the question of how
evolving contact network structure and infection status affect disease outbreaks
seems basic, theoretical treatments have been very limited. The main objective
of this project is to help address this knowledge gap by developing mathematical
results and tools for simple approximation of these complicated dynamics. The
research will be of interest to many individuals and organizations inside and
outside of academia including the Centers for Disease Control, the Biomedical
Advanced Research and Development Authority, and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo Ministry of Public Health. Training will be provided for a PhD student
from the Kinshasa School of Public Health via annual monthly visits to Ohio
State University and ongoing international collaboration; a US graduate student
will also be trained in interdisciplinary
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop a general
Approximate Markovian Computation (AMC) framework for approximating complex
stochastic SIR-type disease models on evolving, large, multi-layer networks in
which each layer corresponds to an interaction type (also referred to as
multiplex or multi-relational network). The idea of AMC is that for a large
random configuration network one may often construct Markov jump process closely
tracking the outbreak dynamics on the original network despite averaging out
some network features (e.g. number of contacts or drop/activation rates). If
both processes share the same mean field limiting equations, they also share the
same set of limiting parameters; hence the Markov process may also be used for
consistent parameter estimation. On the one hand, AMC bears some conceptual
resemblance to the popular ABC method in Bayesian inference, although, unlike
ABC, it explicitly approximates the likelihood of the SIR process of interest.
On the other hand, AMC may also be viewed as a generalization of quasi-
equilibrium approximations for stochastic complex systems. In addition to
developing relevant theoretical results, the investigators plan to develop
software to apply AMC to real field data from contact epidemics in Africa and
elsewhere. It is hoped that methods developed in this project will improve
predictive modeling for infectious diseases and provide essential insight into
key contact epidemic features such as invasion probability, persistence, and
outbreak size.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.