* 1853705
* Benchmarking Spatial Patterns of Glacier Change
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2019,11/30/2022
* Joerg Schaefer, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 11/30/2022
* USD 395,669.00

This research will investigate global patterns of past glacier advance and
retreat to analyze regional patterns of environmental variability. During times
of global glacier recession, glaciers in different parts of the world behaved
differently. The rate of glacier retreat varied through time, and in some cases,
glacier retreat was interrupted by short intervals of glacier growth. These
differential spatial patterns can help scientists predict future patterns of
regional response to global environmental variability. In this project, using
various earth science techniques, investigators will analyze glacial landforms
in Alaska to affirm regional differences in rates of past glacier change. Alaska
is a region where past glacier change is less well understood than other parts
of the world, but one where regional glacier change was different from global
patterns. Findings will contribute to an improved understanding of past regional
environmental variability and thereby be an important data source for future
modelling. The project's broader impacts include the career advancement of a
scientist from an underrepresented group and includes the training of graduate
and undergraduate students. Dissemination will include academic publications and
public-oriented materials disseminated via national parks and native communities
in Alaska. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To better understand the trajectory of future
glacier change, and related environmental variability, better regional
influences on glacier behavior across the planet must be elucidated. For this
reason, detailed knowledge of regional glacier change and their deviations from
the global pattern are critically needed for paleoclimate and glacial-
geomorphology communities. Carbon dioxide changes during the last deglaciation
were tightly coupled to mountain glacier change. Yet, this compilation lacked
data from the high latitudes. Recent research hypothesizes that carbon dioxide
in modern times has overwhelmed regional drivers and has become the dominant
control on glacier change. The proposed research aims address these ideas by
filling in a key data gap. The investigators will test two hypotheses that are
at the forefront of paleoclimate and glacier science. (1) Atmospheric carbon
dioxide is the primary forcing mechanism of mountain glacier change. (2)
Glaciers outside the North Atlantic region advanced during Heinrich stadials,
but retreated prior to their terminations. The researchers will reconstruct a
highly detailed mountain glacier record from the high northern latitudes,
temporally spanning from the last deglaciation to the present. Because
continental ice sheets covered most of the high northern latitudes during Ice
Ages, there are few accessible sites that offer detailed glacier moraine
sequences with materials that can be precisely dated. Because Alaska remained
largely untouched by continental sheets during the last glacial period and was
instead dominated by mountain glaciers, this is an ideal location to benchmark
and develop a record of glacier change since last deglaciation. The PIs will
combine cosmogenic Beryllium-10 dating of an exceptional moraine sequence in the
Revelation Mountains in western Alaska with digital mapping and glacier
equilibrium-line altitude analysis to test their hypotheses and to benchmark a
regional record of mountain glacier change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.