* 1853365
* Mathematical Modeling, Computational and Experimental Investigation of the Dynamics of Heterogeneity in Breast Cancer
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2023
* Hexin Chen, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 03/31/2023
* USD 209,999.00

Despite aggressive clinical treatment including surgical resection, radiation,
and chemotherapy, tumor recurrence is essentially universal. Therapeutic failure
is due, in part, to tumor cell heterogeneity, derived from both genetic and non-
genetic sources, which contributes to therapeutic resistance and tumor
progression. Understanding this heterogeneity is the key for the development of
targeted cancer-preventative and -therapeutic interventions. One of the
currently prevailing models explaining intratumoral heterogeneity is the cancer
stem cell (CSC) hypothesis. Oncogene HER2 is a well-studied oncogene known for
its role in promoting cancer cell survival and proliferation, and recently
implicated in generation and maintenance of CSCs. Thus understanding the HER2
signaling is critical for development of novel strategies for cancer treatment,
while tumor growth is a very complicated phenomenon involving many inter-related
processes across a wide range of spatial and temporal scales, which makes the
mathematical modeling and computation very challenging. This research seeks to
employ modeling techniques and computational studies to address complex issues
arising from tumor growth at the interface of mathematics, chemical engineering
and biology. Successful completion of this project will also have a significant
impact on public health, as the research findings can be used to develop
diagnostics, prognostics, and therapeutics to more specifically target cancer
stem cells. The proposed research of mathematical modeling and experimental
studies for cancer cells creates a unique multidisciplinary research environment
that attracts both undergraduate and graduate students (especially women and
minority students) from all disciplines to join our research
team.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With a close integration with experiments, the PI
will perform multi-scale modeling and computational investigation of HER2
signaling in modulating CSC population in cancer tumor growth with spatial-
temporal dynamics. To better explore HER2 signaling for better understanding the
heterogeneity in breast cancer, PI shall develop a multi-scale model coupled
cell signaling with cell population to study the dynamics control of CSCs. This
control mechanism capitalizes on emerging evidences in literature, and
correlates with recent findings from new observed experimental data. It is
widely believed that a key mechanism for proper maintenance of a cell lineage to
occur is the formation and substance of the stem cell niche, a microenvironment
where stem cells reside in a tissue. To explore the CSCs' spatial patterns for
tumor growth, PI will also develop a continuum PDE model coupled HER2 signaling
with multistage cell lineage models and spatial effects of nutrients. Specific
tasks are: (1) to investigate the roles of HER2 signaling in controlling and
maintenance of CSCs, and develop and evaluate multi-scale models to explore
underlying mechanisms and biological factors to control the balance of tumor
growth; (2) to further develop continuous mathematical models to better
understand the spatial structures of CSC populations during tumor growth with
different effects of various biological factors; (3) to design fast and
efficient numerical methods for solving the mathematical models with moving and
complex domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.