* 1853339
* Applied Space Environments Conference (ASEC) 2019; Los Angeles, California; May 13-17, 2019
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2019
* Linda Neergaard Parker, Universities Space Research Association
* Standard Grant
* Mangala Sharma
* 12/31/2019
* USD 16,499.00

This award provides support for organizing a meeting of space environment
engineers and applied space scientists to discuss recent advances in space
environment hazard research and identify gaps in knowledge and technology needs
to fulfill future space exploration goals. Space environment hazards are an
important consideration for all phases of human and robotic space exploration.
By bringing together scientists and engineers, the conference will enable
fruitful interactions between scientists and engineer on topics related to space
environment observations, modeling, and impacts on spacecrafts. The conference
will also provide professional development and networking opportunities for
students and early career scientists and engineers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award will support the Applied Space Environments Conference (ASEC) 2019 to be
held May 13-17, 2019 in Los Angeles, CA. This is the second conference of the
series and it will facilitate presentations and discussions on research advances
in topics related to the satellite environment and its impact on lunar,
planetary, and heliospheric missions. The conference is currently planned for
five (5) days with two (2) evening poster sessions. By bringing together
scientists and engineers working on space environment hazards on human and
robotic space exploration, the conference will facilitate innovative insights
into both fields, provide new opportunities of interaction between scientists
and engineer, and develop recommendations to mitigate space environment hazard
on spacecrafts. The conference will include a dedicated student poster session
highlighting research and scientific interests of current and possibly early
career professionals. The ASEC conference will also provide professional
development and networking opportunities for students and early career
scientists and engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.