* 1853759
* Understanding the Use of Ecosystem Services Concepts in Environmental Policy
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2019,12/31/2023
* Pamela McElwee, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 12/31/2023
* USD 390,183.00

This project will examine how and why the concept of ecosystem services (ES) has
become an important component of environmental policy. Ecosystem services are
broadly defined as the benefits humans obtain from ecosystems and the services
they provide. This research will investigate what institutions and policymakers
are using the concept of ecosystem services and how this use differs from
previous ways of conceptualizing the environment in policy. It will also explain
the potential successes and failures of this new approach in improving
environmental management. Understanding the important role that social and
technical factors play in shaping these concepts and use in policy is important
as payments for ecosystem services have been promoted as a solution to a variety
of environmental problems. This research explores how ecosystem services are
used in diverse policy settings, and how the translation of ecosystem functions
into monetary valuation has evolved in different contexts. The project will
benefit society by highlighting what types of policies are more effective in
engaging stakeholders in more appropriate ways. The project will also strengthen
social science research on environmental policy-making while building improved
global scientific understanding among undergraduate and graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Despite the growing attention to ecosystem
services (ES) concepts, there remain major challenges regarding clarifying the
values underlying the concept and translating it into policy. These challenges
include identifying what counts as an ES, ranging from physical goods like
timber to regulating services like soil erosion control to more intangible
"cultural ES"; how ES can be valued in ways that incorporate diverse viewpoints
and understandings of nature; and how payments or compensation for provisioning
of ES can be designed and delivered in ways that are socially beneficial. This
research project will aim to answer two key research questions: (1) How are ES
defined, measured, and prioritized by different actors in policymaking? (2) How
are different ES turned into economic values and through what means, and why are
some ES paid for, while others are not? The research project will use mixed
methods, including focus groups, participatory mapping, and interviews to assess
local understanding, use, and valuation of ES in three watershed-based case
studies, as well as interviews with national and international policymakers and
scientists to understand the uptake of ES concepts, culminating in the
construction of an ES database. While this project will assess these questions
using case studies from Southeast Asia, the findings are highly applicable
outside the region, and can illuminate ways to improve environmental policy-
making and ecosystem benefit sharing in the US and
beyond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.