* 1853608
* Collaborative Research: The Physical Biology of Leaves in Wind and Waves
* MPS,DMS
* 04/15/2019,03/31/2023
* Shilpa Khatri, University of California - Merced
* Continuing Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 03/31/2023
* USD 109,865.00

Mathematical, numerical and physical modeling will be applied to reveal the
morphological and mechanical adaptations of broad leaves that allow them to
survive extreme fluid environments. For example, the principal investigators
will determine how the shape and structure of tulip poplar leaves enhance
cooling on nearly-stagnant hot summer days while also reducing drag in tropical
storm or even hurricane force winds. The models and tools developed in this
project will also be applied to determine under what conditions the waving
motion of seagrass augments waste removal and enhances photosynthesis. The
scientific results of this project will inform the selection of plants that can
survive extreme environmental conditions, including low levels of CO2, high
temperatures, or strong wind and wave forces. The significance of the proposed
also work extends beyond gaining insight into mechanical adaptation of plants in
the natural world. The physical principals discovered could drive innovations in
the engineering design of flexible structures such as sails, flags, and cables.
Furthermore, the computational tools developed in this project will find
immediate application in other systems where exchange occurs across flexible
structures in air and water, including gas exchange in the lungs, odor capture
and pheromone release in a variety of animals, nutrient uptake in the gut, and
heat loss in appendages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Flexible plants, fungi, and
sessile animals are thought to reconfigure in strong wind and floodwaters to
reduce the drag acting upon them. In fast flows, for example, leaves roll up
into cone shapes that reduce flutter and drag when compared to paper cutouts of
similar shape and flexibility. In light breezes and currents, leaf flutter can
be beneficial to heat dissipation and gas exchange. It is not clear how the
shape and mechanical structure of broad leaves results in different passive
movements across this range of flows. The specific goals of this project are to
determine the mechanisms by which 1) single leaves flutter in low winds and
flows and roll up into drag reducing shapes in strong flows, 2) leaf flutter
enhances heat dissipation and photosynthesis in light winds and flows, and 3)
some leaves, such as the touch-me-not, actively reconfigure by changes in turgor
pressure initiated by electrical signaling. A combination of numerical
simulations and laboratory experiments with real and artificial leaves will be
used to quantify both passive and active movements as well as the concentrations
of gases and heat. The fluid-structure interaction problem will be solved using
the immersed boundary and inviscid vortex sheet methods. A new immersed
boundary-style method for modeling the leaf as a source or sink of gases or heat
will be developed. Hyperelastic material models will be developed and
implemented in the immersed boundary framework to determine how strain-softening
or strain-hardening elasticity affects leaf
performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.