* 1853632
* An Innovative Hybrid Ultrasonic Resistance Welding Process for Joining Advanced Lightweight and Dissimilar Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2023
* Avraham Benatar, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 03/31/2023
* USD 358,037.00

Lightweight structures are highly desirable for improving fuel economy and
reducing carbon emissions. As key lightweight enablers, successful utilizations
of advanced lightweight materials and multi-material structures rely on
economical and reliable joining processes. Resistance spot welding (RSW), as one
of the most extensively used technologies in the automotive industry, is not
suitable for joining dissimilar materials due to their different physical
properties and metallurgical differences. In addition, RSW faces challenges in
joining the newest generation of advanced high strength steel and aluminum
alloys. In comparison, ultrasonic spot welding (USW) shows several advantages,
but its applications are limited by the output power of generally available
ultrasonic transducers. This award focuses on an innovative hybrid ultrasonic
resistance welding (URW) process, which effectively integrates ultrasonic and
resistance welding, maximizing the advantages of each process. Preliminary
results show promising enhancements of joint mechanical performance with URW.
The research will deeply advance the scientific understanding of the complex
coupling mechanisms between electrical and acoustic fields. Since this
technology has wide applicability to the automotive, aerospace and defense
industries, the project directly impacts the economic welfare and national
security of the United States. The successfully-developed URW process will
significantly benefit manufacturing and assembly of lightweight, and especially
multi-material structures. The inherent similarities of ultrasonic and RSW
system make it naturally convenient to adapt existing RSW robots and equipment,
facilitating widespread industrial applications of URW. The obtained knowledge
on ultrasonically induced physical phenomena will deeply contribute to
developing and improving various advanced manufacturing processes. One specific
example is ultrasonic resistance additive manufacturing. The URW process and
microstructural evolution model enhances applications of integrated
computational materials engineering (ICME) in the field of solid-state
manufacturing. Finally, the multidisciplinary educational program as a result of
the award will empower next-generation engineers and researchers in the fields
of mechanical, material, metallurgy, control, and data processing.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this research are to advance the
knowledge of multiphysical thermo-mechanical-electrical-acoustic coupling
mechanisms involved with the novel hybrid URW process, to reveal the fundamental
physics of weld structure evolution and to optimize URW for joining advanced
lightweight and dissimilar materials. Ultrasonic vibration is hypothesized to
affect RSW in three stages: modifying contact resistance through removal of
surface coatings and contaminations, influencing thermodynamic and kinetic
conditions during melting through acoustic streaming and cavitation effects, and
refining microstructure during solidification. The scope of this research
includes: (1) A comprehensive experimental study of URW at various conditions,
followed by mechanical testing and multi-scale characterizations of the welds.
Process-structure-properties relationships will be established; (2) In situ
analysis of the URW process through high speed and thermal imaging, as well as
multiphysical modeling to determine the thermo-mechanical field during the
process. Al-Fe interfacial reaction model will also be developed, which will be
verified through physical simulations of the inter-metallic compounds (IMC)
formation and growth under a controlled thermo-mechanical testing environment.
(3) Optimization of the URW process in terms of process parameters, electrode
geometry along with the synchronization between acoustic and electrical fields
for desirable joint performance with the minimum amount of input process
energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.