* 1853246
* SBIR Phase II:  Temblor--an innovative, mobile source of seismic risk understanding and solutions for the public and providers
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2019,02/28/2025
* Ross Stein, Temblor, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 02/28/2025
* USD 1,300,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is to attempt to reduce the largest financial
protection gap in the world: the impact of a great earthquake on a major
population center. The public is woefully unprepared for such an event, banking
on government assistance in lieu of personal resilience. Worldwide, there is
$400 billion in uninsured global disaster risk. Even in California, there are
3-4 million uninsured seismically vulnerable homes and a million uninsured
vulnerable businesses. People need to understand their vulnerability in terms of
dollars and safety, they need to learn how they can protect themselves and their
families, and most important, they need to be inspired to take action. This
project's free mobile app and blog use public data and models to explain a
home's seismic risk, and to show the benefits of buying a seismically safer
home, retrofitting an older home, or buying earthquake insurance. Most
important, the app and blog do so without scaring, soothing, or snowing the
user. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase
II project is building a suite of global seismic hazard and risk models that
enable the company to forecast the consequences of earthquakes to any building,
anywhere on Earth. At every step in the process, the technology rids the models
of bias, judgment, or expert opinion, relying instead on algorithmic,
reproducible and testable constructs. The company provides insurance agents with
sales tools, giving a home or building owner's earthquake score and financial
losses in the largest likely earthquake. It provides insurance companies with
the means to underwrite (price) insurance, to assess the average annual losses
of their portfolios, or to assess portfolio losses at any likelihood of
occurrence. For a catastrophe bond whose payment is triggered by a shaking
intensity, the company provides the likelihood of attachment over any time
period. For a reinsurance company, it provides the ability to compare losses at
any or all locations. For a mortgage lender, it provides mortgage portfolio
losses, and an estimate of mortgage defaults in the scenario earthquakes to
which the lender is most vulnerable. For a multinational company with globally
distributed facilities, the technology assesses and ranks their worldwide risk
to enhance their resilience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.