* 1853265
* SBIR Phase II:  Novel Dynamic Elastomer System For Additive Manufacturing
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2019,03/31/2021
* Cora Leibig, Chromatic 3D Materials Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 03/31/2021
* USD 1,397,386.00

This SBIR Phase II project will create a material, printer, and software system
for printing a novel set of flexible, durable materials for additive
manufacturing technologies. Additive manufacturing, or 3D Printing, is a rapidly
growing $7bn industry, which enables small and medium enterprises to
competitively manufacture new and innovative products. It is a key to
strengthening the US manufacturing economy. Continued growth and health of the
3D printing industry, particularly for manufacture of functional parts for
finished goods, will depend upon an expansion of the available material library.
3D printing materials are limited to a small segment of the plastics in common
industrial use today. This project will expand that material library with
development of printable polyurethane elastomers with a broad range of
flexibilities. These materials will be particularly relevant for markets that
demand personalization and customization, such as patient-specific medical
devices, sporting goods, and footwear. Manufacturers of flexible, durable
polyurethane goods for industrial and automotive products will also benefit from
low cost small-scale production of parts made from materials with performance
that match their product specifications. The printing system will enable
production of parts with user-specified geometry and flexibility, and will also
enable multi-material printing for novel product designs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase II project will produce a set of reactive
polyurethane precursor formulas which can be combined to form printable,
flexible polyurethanes with a broad hardness range. The Phase II project will
also produce an integrated system of printer control software and printhead
design for production of parts with the polyurethane precursor formulas. The
materials will be printed using extrusion 3D printing techniques, and customized
to handle liquid, reactive feeds. The research approach will include
determination of the starting materials to control reaction rates, rheology
development, and part solidification. Software development will incorporate
printing parameters for the spectrum of materials that can be produced from the
starting materials in order to produce a user interface where part flexibility
is specified as a function of part geometry, and the printer receives commands
for printing the desired object. The material will be parameterized to determine
space-filling properties of the material as a function of composition, print
speed, and printhead geometry. This 3D printing technology will overcome
challenges in part durability and printing speeds that are common to photo-cure
approaches to produce flexible parts, and will greatly extend the part
durability and flexibility available to extrusion 3D
printing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.