* 1853247
* SBIR Phase II:  A tool for estimating objective outcome measures in clinical speech applications
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2019,12/31/2022
* Harry Schmitt, AURAL ANALYTICS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 12/31/2022
* USD 1,424,285.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is to introduce a set of powerful neurological
health metrics for objective and reliable tracking of patient outcomes,
clinician performance, and therapy efficacy. Significant societal benefits may
be realized from the introduction of this technology in the clinical
applications and clinical trials markets. The company's technology is easy to
use, reliable, objective and cost-efficient. No other existing technology for
tracking neurological health or patient outcomes shares this set of features. In
the company's clinical application, the company can close the gap on current
health disparities and access for 1) those in rural communities, 2) those living
in urban islands with limited healthcare workforce, and 3) those too sick to
travel. It enhances the practice of speech-language pathology, enabling rapid
objective characterization of speech production to document treatment effects.
In the clinical trials market, potential impact is enhanced by the aging of the
global population, and the increasing prevalence of diseases such as Parkinson's
and Alzheimer's disease. The company's technology holds promise for early
detection and sensitive tracking of disease progression that provides the
opportunity for global-scale impact in drug development for slowing or curing
neurodegenerative disease. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project aims to address the serious challenge of
tapping into brain health without expensive and invasive technologies by using
speech analysis. Speaking is a deceptively complex task. Elaborate brain
networks translate thoughts and ideas into sequences of movements that produce
the sounds of speech. Any disturbance in these networks can lead to changes in
how we speak and what we say. Research shows that subtle changes in speech
precede diagnosis of many neurological diseases. Leveraging this research, the
company built proprietary metrics that use speech to capture changes in
neurological health. Here the company extends the analytics to detect changes in
cognitive health as possible early indicators of Alzheimer's disease. The
company will develop 1) a series of simple tasks to elicit speech from an
individual using our app; 2) a custom speech recognition platform to
automatically generate a transcript of what the person said; 3) algorithms to
automatically analyze the transcript and output clinically interpretable
measures of cognitive performance. Finally, the company will evaluate the
validity/usability of the app in clinical settings. The product of this research
is a platform ready to move toward commercialization to realize its maximum
potential for health and societal impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.