* 1853194
* SBIR Phase II:  An Automated Platform for Rapid Discovery in Cell Biology
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2019,09/30/2022
* Paulo Garcia, Kytopen Corp
* Standard Grant
* Alastair Monk
* 09/30/2022
* USD 948,152.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is to develop a fast, efficient, and scalable
cell engineering technology that is easily automated through integration with
liquid handling robots. Currently, there is a bottleneck in the process of cell
engineering, especially in the engineering of cells for discovery of new
therapeutics. The field of delivery of genetic or other material to cells has
not kept pace with advancements in genetic modification and high-throughput
screening technologies. The proposed platform will offer an alternative to the
time-consuming and labor-intensive methods of transfection including lentiviral
transduction and cuvette-based electroporation, which are difficult to automate.
Applications of cell engineering technology range from fundamental research in
cell physiology to the discovery of new targets for cellular therapies. The
platform will allow scientists and clinicians to more rapidly and reliably
engineer immune and other cells for discovery of new therapeutic targets and
therapeutics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this SBIR Phase II
project will be to develop a scalable, automated, non-viral cell engineering
platform with the potential to operate up to 10,000 times faster than
conventional electroporation using high-throughput liquid handling. Using the
core cell engineering technology developed in Phase I, the goal is to develop an
automated protocol for gene transfection on a liquid handling robot compatible
with 96 or 384 well plate technology. The first objective is to demonstrate the
manufacturability of cell engineering devices for high-throughput cell
engineering. Preliminary work in this area has shown that these devices can be
injection molded, thus reducing cost while increasing the potential for
production at scale. In the Phase II project, injection molded prototypes of the
cell engineering devices will be developed to prove manufacturability and
determine the cost to manufacture at scale (millions of parts per year). Second,
there are several supplemental systems that must be integrated with a liquid
handling apparatus to enable the proposed high-throughput cell engineering.
Supplemental systems include a power source and power distribution manifold that
interacts with each sample of the 96 or 384 well array. In this project, these
systems will be integrated with the cell engineering devices and automated
liquid handling robot. Third, the integrated system will be used to generate a
large library of primary human T cell variants as proof-of-concept to
demonstrate the potential for high-throughput cell engineering for therapeutic
target discovery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.