* 1853521
* Superdeep Diamonds from the Transition Zone and Lower Mantle
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2024
* Steven Jacobsen, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Hearn
* 01/31/2024
* USD 472,282.00

Diamond is a remarkable material for its ultimate physical properties and
technological applications. Natural diamonds also reveal physical and chemical
processes in the Earth's deep mantle from where there are few direct samples.
Mineral inclusions in diamond reflect reactions involving high pressure, high
temperature, fluids, melts, and dynamic interactions between the Earth's surface
and interior. This project will support technological development to investigate
tiny mineral inclusions in diamonds. A new suite of more than 150 diamonds of
deep origin, which formed at depths greater than 410 km in the transition zone
and the lower mantle, will be investigated. 3D imaging, diffraction, and
spectroscopy of the hosted inclusions will be carried out at national X-ray and
infrared facilities. Up to a thousand micro-mineral inclusions will be
identified and characterized by fast, high-throughput methods. Results of this
research will improve our understanding of the mineral diversity in the Earth's
interior, with special focus on water and hydrous phases. The goal is to reveal
the mechanisms by which water recycles between the crust and mantle through
plate tectonics, a process at the origin of numerous natural hazards. This
project will foster collaboration with two local high-school teachers to
introduce a geophysics curriculum to their physics courses. It will also promote
the training of several graduate students for future careers in academia,
federal agencies, industry, and the national laboratories.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The high strength and stability of diamond make it a
perfect vessel for transporting minerals and geochemical information from the
deep mantle to the surface as part of the crust-mantle carbon cycle. This study
will examine a new suite of superdeep diamonds from Juina, Brazil, which host
mineral inclusions from the transition zone and lower mantle. One of the major
challenges pertains to determining the depth origin of the diamonds which often
lack a complete suite of mineral inclusions to pinpoint their formation
conditions. Up to a thousand inclusions will be analyzed potentially promoting
the discovery of new mineral phases and providing information about how deeply
water is transported into the mantle. New micro-analysis techniques will
increase the rate and decrease the size of inclusions that can be studied, thus
broadening the database of mantle mineralogy. Spectroscopic methods will probe
various types of atomic-scale defects in diamonds as tracers for their depth of
origin. Separately, the sound velocity of diamond will be measured at high
pressure in all directions of the structure to determine diamond elastic
properties. This will improve the geophysical modeling of seismic wave velocity
in the deep, crustal roots below continents. Other experiments will examine the
decompression behavior of hydrous minerals at upper mantle temperatures to
elucidate diamond ascent pathways. Ultimately this research will improve and
potentially modify the textbook picture of the structure and dynamics of Earth's
interior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.