* 1853183
* SBIR Phase II:  Force And Impedance-Based Exoskeleton Robots For Seamless Assistance And Neurologically Sound Rehabilitation
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2019,12/31/2023
* Bongsu Kim, LinkDyn Robotics Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Alastair Monk
* 12/31/2023
* USD 1,042,931.00

The broader societal impact/commercial potential of this project centers on
improving rehabilitation outcomes for individuals suffering from motor
dysfunction due to stroke, spinal cord injury, and other conditions. In the US
alone, there are 600,000 new stroke patients each year who rely on conventional
one-on-one therapies for recovery. Due to cost and labor limitations they do not
receive consistent, frequent, and intensive training needed for full recovery
and optimal quality of life. As a result, stroke care guidelines recommend
robotic rehabilitation in all care settings. Providing robotic rehabilitation
using the proposed exoskeleton robots is a compelling solution for hospitals,
rehabilitation centers, and senior living communities. In addition to providing
frequent and intensive therapy, the devices can accurately measure patient
progress and performance for personalized care. The exoskeletons are also a
powerful research tool into effective rehabilitation methods and have the
potential to transform the manufacturing sector by providing a solution for
industrial processes that are too complex for full automation and too physically
demanding for humans. The proposed exoskeleton devices reduce the risk of injury
from accidents and overexertion for individuals performing repetitive, high-
stress tasks. Additional results include increased productivity and decreased
absenteeism and turn-over.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project advances the development of exoskeleton robots
targeted at rehabilitation. A substantial portion of the US population requires
intensive rehabilitation services for neuromuscular impairment. Robotic
rehabilitation has attracted attention due to the potential for better patient
outcomes. Current robotic solutions lack the anatomical mobility and compliant
dynamic behavior to produce neurologically-sound therapeutic behaviors. The
proposed project addresses these deficits and will result in exoskeleton robots
capable of essential advanced rehabilitation behaviors. During the Phase I
project, a high-performance, force-controlled actuator was developed and will be
the core component enabling the desired behavior. In this project, the physical
structures and control algorithms of the exoskeletons will be designed and built
with a focus on dynamic transparency and kinematic compatibility with the human
body to capitalize on the capabilities of the actuator. Additionally, the
control software will use feedback loops and a visually interactive environment
with performance metrics to keep patients engaged.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.