* 1853456
* Syntheses and Structures of [n]Cyclophenacenes and Related Carbon Nanobelts
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Kung Wang, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Jon Rainier
* 06/30/2024
* USD 490,028.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Kung K. Wang of the Department of Chemistry at West Virginia
University is developing efficient synthetic routes using organic reactions for
the construction of carbon nanobelts as repeating belt-like segments of carbon
nanotubes. The current interest in carbon nanobelts is due, in part, to the
possibility of using them as templates for growing carbon nanotubes which are of
significant importance in microelectronics and nanotechnology. This synthetic
approach offers the potential advantage over the existing empirical methods in
producing carbon nanotubes with uniform diameter and orientation of the carbon
hexagons, two factors of critical importance for applications in advanced
manufacturing. Personalized educational and mentoring program is developed for
each graduate or undergraduate student who participates in this research.
Development of well-trained synthetic chemists adds to the human resources for
the chemical industry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Functionalized carbon nanobelts are
potential templates for growing carbon nanotubes of a uniform diameter and
chirality. They have also been shown to exhibit unique size-dependent
optoelectronic and redox properties. The Diels-Alder reactions are used to
prepare key precursors for macrocyclization leading to carbon nanobelts. The
high stereoselectivity and versatility of the Diels-Alder reaction could provide
easy access to a variety of belt-like structures. Synthetic pathways to
1,4-diaryl-1,3-butadienes with new structural features and functional groups are
developed for cycloaddition with dienophiles to allow for the easy assembly of
major components of carbon nanobelts. The functional groups could also serve as
hinges to connect two units of functionalized carbon nanobelts together to form
structures that could better mimic those of carbon
nanotubes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.