* 1853034
* SBIR Phase II:  Low-cost polymer films for foldable cover lenses used in flexible displays
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2019,05/31/2022
* Radu Reit, Ares Materials, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 05/31/2022
* USD 1,425,997.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II
project is to provide the $4B/year cover lens market an economically viable
material for the upcoming form-factor it must address: foldable displays. While
this market size currently represents displays that employ rigid LCD or OLED
technologies, major handset manufacturers are looking to move to highly
differentiated form-factors such as foldable phones to gain market share in the
competitive flagship smartphone tier. To do so, the entire display module must
be foldable and one of the last components to allow for this behavior is the
cover lens. Foldable displays therefore must eliminate hard, brittle materials
such as glass and utilize materials with the same excellent scratch-resistant
properties of glass, but with the flexibility and durability under folding of
polymers. This project develops a novel polysulfide thermoset for this
application.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase II project aims to develop the first low-cost, high-performance foldable
cover lens technology using polysulfide thermosetting polymer films. Currently,
the amorphous polysulfide thermosets can yield the excellent optical properties
and folding durability required for application in foldable display
technologies. However, these materials are as of yet unable to meet the strict
hardness requirement set by manufacturers looking to replace rigid glass cover
lenses. In this work, the expansion of the polysulfide thermoset family of
materials will be undertaken to introduce chemical and physical modifications
which allow for the resultant thermosetting films to possess the requisite
hardness. The resultant resin materials will then be converted using standard
wet-film extrusion and curing tools commonly found in the printing industry,
allowing for cost-competitive production of the resulting
films.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.