* 1853969
* Improving the STEM Higher Education Research Workforce: Examining Motivation as a Predictor of Faculty Research Development and Productivity
* SBE,SMA
* 05/15/2019,04/30/2023
* Robert Stupnisky, University of North Dakota Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Mary Feeney
* 04/30/2023
* USD 347,930.00

Faculty research productivity in STEM disciplines drives scientific advancement,
university-industry knowledge transfer, innovative economic activity, and data-
driven government decision-making. In recent decades, however, USA STEM research
productivity has plateaued despite increases in federal research funding,
leading to questions of how to maximize productivity in the STEM academic
research workforce beyond financial means. The objective of this project is to
investigate the role of motivation in STEM higher education faculty research
productivity and development. Motivated faculty are expected to be more
productive and stay in the higher education workforce, particularly if they are
from populations traditionally underrepresented in the STEM research workforce.
Results of the current project will inform higher education institutions,
particularly universities striving to increase scholarly productivity, as to
specific strengths and deficits in STEM faculty motivation that relate to
measurable gains in research productivity. This is a critical step toward
designing research development interventions from university-based induction
programs to NSF training grants aimed at bolstering motivation to enhance the
productivity of STEM faculty researchers. Findings will provide guidance to
universities on best practices and policies for supporting STEM faculty in
producing innovative basic and applied scientific knowledge, tackling key social
and economic challenges with their research, and training the next generation of
flexible, knowledgeable, and diverse STEM researchers. This project is jointly
funded by the Science of Science Innovation and Policy Program and the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research.

This multi-institution project will be the first to pair STEM faculty
psychological surveys responses with bibliometric indicators of research
productivity (publications, citations, social media attention). These data will
be used to test a conceptual model hypothesizing how faculty characteristics
(demographic, employment) and institutional qualities (research resources,
social-environmental factors) relate to motivational variables (autonomy,
competence, relatedness, interest, control, value, self-regulation, grit) that,
if supported, should yield optimal intrinsic motivation and positive emotions,
and result in enhanced research productivity (e.g., bibliometric, self-report).
Structural equation modeling will be used to analyze the posited relationships
cross-sectionally and predict the development of STEM faculty researchers
longitudinally over a three-year period. Additionally, the project will examine
hypothesized relationships among traditionally underrepresented groups in STEM
fields based on gender, race, and ethnicity. This research will improve our
understanding of the STEM higher education research workforce in several ways.
First, this project represents the first interdisciplinary study pairing faculty
survey data with independent, bibliometric indicators of research productivity.
Second, these studies will utilize reliable and valid measures of variables
relating to faculty research outcomes and evaluate the generalizability of the
hypothesized model in a large USA sample of ~1,400 faculty across 10 higher
education institutions. Third, this research will expand upon limited empirical
findings investigating psychological variables associated with faculty research
productivity and development, and explore the interplay with faculty
characteristics (e.g., underrepresented minority groups in STEM) and
institutional qualities. Fourth, the project will utilize established motivation
theories rarely applied to faculty research productivity and development to
generate new knowledge and best practices in this under-examined domain. As
such, the current project will guide the establishment of critical variables and
benchmarks for STEM faculty motivation to predict research productivity and
development over time. This project is jointly funded by the Science of Science
Innovation and Policy Program and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.