* 1853220
* SBIR Phase II:  Interface for connecting high temperature solar collectors to legacy thermal systems
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2019,12/31/2022
* Arun Gupta, Skyven Technologies
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 12/31/2022
* USD 1,475,999.00

Fuel burned for industrial process heat accounts for 20%-30% of all carbon
emissions on the face of the earth. Yet no emissions-free solutions for process
heat are commonly available today. Thermal energy requires burning fuel. Beyond
the impact to local air quality and climate change, the need for fuel creates
energy poverty both domestically and abroad. When fuel supplies are threatened,
it can endanger the livelihoods of those that depend on the fuel.&lt;br/&gt;The
impact of Skyven?s solution is to turn the sun into a viable, practical source
of high temperature thermal energy. It has the potential to dramatically reduce
CO2 emissions, improve local air quality, reduce energy poverty, and diversify
America?s energy supply. Just a single Skyven project of 500 collectors will
offset 29,900 gallons of diesel fuel, equivalent to planning 4,400 trees. Skyven
envisions doing thousands of projects across the USA and tens of thousands
across the globe. One day IMA technology may even enable rural areas and
developing nations to leapfrog natural gas distribution infrastructure in the
same way that cellphones have leapfrogged landlines. This project is an
opportunity for the United States to take a leadership role in technology to
enable these societal changes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research Phase II project will address a key barrier to solar thermal
deployment in the industrial sector: lack of an effective interface to connect
high temperature solar thermal system with legacy fuel-fired thermal systems.
Existing interfaces are limited to low temperatures (below 100?C) and utilize
costly plumbing schemes that are prone to failure. They suffer from poor
reliability and create severe maintenance headaches, rendering them unusable in
the industrial sector. These systems also typically require the host facility to
be take offline during installation ? an costly sacrifice in the industrial
sector. The temperature limitations are particularly problematic, as many
industrial facilities operate high temperatures condensate return systems that
rarely drop below 100?C. &lt;br/&gt;Skyven?s system-level innovations solve
these challenges, making its high temperature solar thermal collectors a
practical and financially-attractive option for industries such as food
processing. Phase II research will implement two innovations in particular: (1)
solar steam injection into a traditional fuel-fired boiler; and (2) wireless
control with automated optical calibration/commissioning algorithms and failsafe
stagnation/overheat protection. In addition, the project will prove out high
temperature operation up to 200C, both in outdoor laboratory-scale testbed and
later in a real-world industrial facility. It will also utilize advanced
reliability engineering concepts to show long-term (20 year) reliability without
requiring unlimited test time and testing resources. The project will also
advance knowledge in the space of industrial controls engineering, showing that
new industrial systems can be integrated with existing controls through
innovative controls interfacing, without require rework of the existing control
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.