* 1853051
* SBIR Phase II:  A Chemical Detection Platform to Decode Human Olfaction
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2021
* Charlotte D'Hulst, Yesse Technologies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 04/30/2021
* USD 1,432,163.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is to ultimately develop a nose-on-a-chip to
establish the first-ever digital database of smell. By interfacing the biology
of the human nose with a read-out platform, it will be possible to decode the
human sense of smell and open up new possibilities. Such a nose-on-a-chip and
its associated smell database has multiple commercial applications in the
fragrance and flavor industry including increasing the efficiency of developing
aroma chemicals for food, personal hygiene or household use, and fine perfumes.
Also, it may be possible to identify specific malodor receptors and developing
compounds that block repulsive odors or modulate olfaction (boost smell capacity
and/or suppress odor cravings). In addition, the smell database can be employed
to develop algorithms that predict how new aroma chemicals will smell before
making them. There is an additional opportunity for the nose-on-a-chip in the
healthcare industry when applied to sniff out disease-associated odors, such as
Parkinson's disease. Odor-based disease detection may revolutionize biomarker
discovery and may have a significant impact on R&D spending in the
pharmaceutical industry and ultimately decrease treatment cost for patients.

The intellectual merit of this SBIR Phase II project is to produce an odor-
specific nose-on-a-chip assay containing a subset of odorant receptors that can
report the presence of a specific odor (odor MS1) and its derivatives. This
minimal viable platform is based on a well-validated need in the fragrance and
flavor industry and needs to demonstrate sensitivity, specificity, selectivity
and intensity (S3I) of odor activation. The goals are to identify a set of high-
affinity odor MS1 receptors, generate engineered mice for each receptor through
this validated platform technology and demonstrate S3I using an established ex
vivo bio-assay. Engineered mice form the basis of the proposed commercial
platform. They are the bioreactors producing the olfactory extracts that are
used in the ex vivo bioassay and, ultimately, are integrated with a silicon
chip. As such, optimized generation of mice is key to cost-efficient scaling of
the proposed commercial chips and is a primary objective of the project. The
plan is to develop a high-throughput method of generating any receptor in mice.
Then, the goal is to develop an optimized gene-targeted line that will serve as
a standardized template for future knock-ins of any odorant receptor gene,
providing a streamlined, standardized and scalable method to ultimately
establish the complete library.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.