* 1853032
* Collaborative Research: Efficient Methods for Identifiability of Dynamic Models
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Marisa Eisenberg, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 06/30/2024
* USD 248,987.00

The goal of the project is to analyze and improve the calibration of dynamic
models developed by researchers in biology and other sciences to model real-
world processes. Mathematical models are used broadly across biology to
understand mechanisms, make predictions, and guide intervention strategies. To
do so, the model parameters often must be calibrated using data; the estimated
parameters can have significant implications for reliability of insights
generated from the model and data. This raises the important question of whether
the calibration process is well posed, i.e. is it possible to uniquely estimate
model parameters from a given type or set of data? Identifiability analysis is
the study of these issues, and this project will improve and expand the
currently available set of algebraic identifiability methods to set them on a
firmer theoretical basis and address new types of models used broadly in many
biological settings. Beyond academia, the algorithms to be developed will allow
researchers to successfully link models and experiments to generate model-based
insights that improve real-world treatment strategies. Training will be provided
to two Ph.D. students working on research for this project. The training
component will also include interdisciplinary course development as well as a
conference with tutorial lectures and problem sessions to educate industrial and
academic participants in the theory, algorithms, and software developed in this
project. This project is supported jointly by the Division of Mathematical
Sciences Mathematical Biology and Division of Computing and Communication
Foundations Algorithmic Foundations programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More
specifically, the investigators will develop, analyze, and implement symbolic
and symbolic-numeric algorithms that perform identifiability analysis of dynamic
models (including ordinary differential (ODE), delay, and difference equation
models) that appear in biology and other sciences. Using these algorithms, they
will also carry out identifiability analysis for a range of models drawn from
cellular signaling and physiology applications. The proposed algorithms will be
based on differential-difference algebra, which connects to identifiability in
the common case of rational ODEs/delay/difference equations by applying
differential-difference elimination algorithms to the model equations. Such
symbolic methods for ODE models have proven to be productive in the area of
parameter identifiability. The proposed methods would allow a large class of
models to be analyzed for structural identifiability, allowing one to assess
which parameters can be estimated and tailor experiment design to answer the
questions of interest for treatment strategies and mechanistic insights. For the
first time, rigorously justified and analyzed efficient algorithms will be
available for identifiability problems in delay and difference equation models.
Certified and more efficient algorithms will appear for global identifiability
problems in ODE models. To carry out the proposed research, new advances in the
algebraic theory of differential/difference equations will be
made.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.