* 1853519
* EAGER: Documenting Epigenetic Influence on Plant Quantitative Phenotypic Variation
* BIO,IOS
* 11/15/2018,10/31/2021
* Sally Mackenzie, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 10/31/2021
* USD 300,000.00

A major challenge to the stability of US and worldwide agricultural is the
increasing variability of weather conditions coupled with diminishing water
availability. These challenges require the development of greater plant
resiliency that, in an agricultural context, can be scaled to meet US needs and
can be implemented in multiple crops. Conventional breeding enhances plant yield
by selecting for enhanced genetics that can withstand various environmental
stresses (e.g., drought). Similar gains might also be influenced by epigenetics
(modifications to DNA). However, using epigenetics to enhance plant resilience
requires formal demonstration and the development of appropriately sensitive
computational technologies to monitor epigenetic changes across the plant
genome. This project tests using epigenetics to enhance plant by using a new
genetic mutation that leads to epigenetic changes in plants. Some plants with
this mutation show enhanced growth and resilience that is maintained after the
mutation is removed and this project will generate new computational tools to
analyze these long-lasting (multi-generational) effects. Due to the potential
for transferring this technology to crop species, this technique will have broad
impacts on plant research and crop improvement. Accelerated plant adaptation to
environmental change requires adjustment of gene expression in a manner that is
ultimately heritable to offspring, yet little is known of the mechanism of
transgenerational epigenetic behavior. This project addresses this gap by
exploiting the MSH1 system in Arabidopsis for inducible transgenerational memory
and phenotypic plasticity. A novel Methyl-IT program for genome-wide methylation
analysis will be used to contrast DNA methylation patterns in full sib progeny
with and without induced epigenetic memory effects to test for a direct
relationship between cytosine methylation behavior and phenotype emergence.
Graft progeny out-comes from wild type scion/msh1 rootstock will be tested for
epigenetic effects by introducing mutations for sRNA production to the rootstock
genotype and assaying progeny for alignment in sRNA, methylome and phenotype
changes. Outcomes from this study will permit assessment of epigenome-phenotype
relationship by direct testing. Breaking through this barrier has the potential
to dramatically alter current thinking in the field, and designing experimental
methods for the detection of subtle, gene-associated cytosine methylation
variation would impact epigenomic re-search in both plant and animal systems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.