* 1853701
* Integrating at Sub-Cellular Level the Biochemical and Biomechanical Signals with Stochasticity to Study the Regulation of Tissue Growth
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2023
* Weitao Chen, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 06/30/2023
* USD 226,542.00

The goal of this research is to understand how the biochemical signals and cell
mechanics coordinate with each other to regulate tissue growth in achieving
specific shape and robust size during the development. Growth regulation remains
an unsolved mystery and a grand challenge for both developmental biology and
regenerative medicine. Uncontrolled tissue growth can result in abnormal
development and fatal diseases including cancer. Mathematical models offer an
important new tool both to simulate biological systems and to test hypotheses in
growth control mechanisms, currently difficult or impossible for experiments
alone. This project will investigate mechanisms in growth regulation, including
those that are difficult to test by using existing models, by developing a novel
mathematical model incorporating biochemical signals and cell mechanical
properties, as well as the interaction between them. By applying this model to a
classical biological system, it will provide novel insights into the fundamental
principles of growth control. UC Riverside is a Hispanic-serving institution
with diverse student background. This research will engage undergraduate and
graduate students in interdisciplinary projects and incorporate emerging results
into coursework. Outreach activities, including seminars, workshops, and summer
research programs, will be coordinated with department of mathematics,
Interdisciplinary Center for Quantitative Modeling in Biology at UC Riverside,
and community colleges in the area of southern California. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Cells response to both chemical and mechanical signals to coordinate
the growth and proliferation during the tissue development, such that the
overall shape and tissue size can be obtained precisely with robustness. The
Drosophila wing disc, an epithelial primordial organ that later forms the adult
fruit fly wing, features a relatively simple geometry, limited number of cells,
rapid growth, and a well understood molecular signaling network based on
molecules conserved in other developmental systems. Studying this classical
biological system can reveal underlying general mechanisms of growth regulation,
applicable in other developmental systems. The main goal of this
interdisciplinary research is to develop a coupled mechanochemical model at sub-
cellular level in a mechanistic way for the wing disc tissue. Different
morphogens acting in orthogonal directions as well as an intracellular gene
regulatory network will be considered. Sub-cellular mechanical properties will
be taken into account by using an advanced subcellular element model involving
different cell types. The interaction between cell stiffness, cell-cell adhesion
and biochemical signals will be included in this multiscale framework. This
model will be applied to test the hypothesis that the rate of cell growth is
determined by the temporal change in biochemical signals and the hypothesis that
uniform growth is achieved by molecular cues and mechanical feedback, suggested
by experimental data. This coupled model will allow exploration of the new
mechanisms for spatially homogeneous growth and the asymmetric shape of the wing
disc pouch, as well as investigation of the effects of stochasticity in
biochemical or/and biomechanical signals on growth control mechanisms. This
project is funded jointly by the Division of Mathematical Sciences Mathematical
Biology Program and the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences Cellular
Dynamics and Function Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.