* 1853713
* Core Support for the Geographical Sciences Committee: Using Geographical Sciences to Support Research for Decision-Making
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2019,02/28/2023
* Kara Laney, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 02/28/2023
* USD 384,378.00

This award will provide continued core support for the Geographical Sciences
Committee (GSC) of the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine
(NASEM). This support will permit the committee to address how the geographical
sciences contribute to societal well-being, security, and prosperity by
highlighting issues that connect communities with geography, such as natural and
human-induced hazards, population growth and change, and changes in physical and
social infrastructure. Geographical science research can help address the
interactions and feedbacks between humans and the physical environment for more
informed decision-making and can contribute to strategies developed together
with urban or rural planners, natural resource managers, and policy makers to
address individual and community vulnerabilities in the places where people
live. Support for the GSC will provide an immediate access point for federal
agencies to engage with the geographical science community of practice and will
provide the geographical sciences community with a direct interface to inform
government and policy. The Geographical Sciences Committee brings emerging and
relevant research to the forefront of decision-making, amplifying the
intellectual merit of individual topics in a range of issues to increase
societal impact. This award brings together different generations of
researchers, including students and early-career professionals, for constructive
dialogue at the interface of geographical science and policy.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As extreme weather events, hazards such as wildfires, and
economic and population changes displace people from their homes and cause
people to make critical decisions about where and how to live, challenges will
exist to satisfy human health, energy, water, transportation, infrastructure,
and other needs in ways that are safe and economically and environmentally
viable. The core activities of this award will develop and oversee new
activities to address human vulnerability to natural and human-induced hazards
(such as wildland fire, particularly at the wildland-urban interface); to
address questions related to changes in physical infrastructure and communities
(such as coastal development and flood risk or energy transitions in rural
regions); and to examine emerging fields of interest to the geographical
sciences (such as access to volunteered geographic information or advances in
geospatial data for commercial applications). This award will address these
questions by bringing a geographic perspective to these problems; by fostering
cooperation among government, academia, industry, and other stakeholders; and by
helping to ensure that the geographical sciences remain an important area of
growth for the nation. Support for the GSC will enable the use of modes and
methods of knowledge generation that converge around convening information and
input from different constituencies. The activities of the award will generate
new knowledge on the basis of dialogue, information exchange, and consensus. The
award will also ensure that the information is shared with government, academic,
non-governmental, industry, and public audiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.