* 1853147
* SBIR Phase II:  A platform for identifying antibodies that modulate human membrane receptors involved in disease
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2019,12/31/2023
* Monica Schwartz, Abalone Bio, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 12/31/2023
* USD 1,599,997.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is to develop a drug discovery platform that
will identify novel types of antibody therapeutics. The goal is to use
antibodies to increase or decrease the activity of a type of cell signaling
receptor called "G protein-coupled receptors" (GPCRs). There are more than 400
non-olfactory human GPCRs that are involved in all aspects of health and
disease, including cancers, autoimmune diseases, pain, inflammation, and others.
About 25% of GPCRs have been targeted by approved small molecule drugs, but
efforts for the remaining have often failed because of the inability of small
molecules to distinguish between similar GPCRs. Antibody drugs can overcome this
hurdle because of their much higher specificity for their targets. This project
will bring to commercialization the first technology that directly identifies
antibodies that modulate GPCR function. These antibodies will impact healthcare
by enabling therapies for diseases with poor or no current treatments. They also
will impact scientific understanding by enabling the study of GPCR-related
physiology and disease. The commercial impacts are potentially very large. The
GPCR drug market is over $100B, and most antibody therapeutics have annual sales
over $1B. The platform described here could enable dozens of novel GPCR antibody
therapeutics, creating value for patients, society, and co-development
partners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this SBIR Phase II
project is to develop a drug discovery technology for discovering antibodies
that modulate G-protein coupled receptors (GPCRs). Current methods are limited
because GPCR antigens are often not properly folded, and because antibodies are
selected by how tightly they bind GPCRs, rather than by the effect they exert.
Those that bind typically do not have any effect at all. This project will build
on the successful proof-of-concept from Phase I that demonstrated the platform's
ability to identify directly functional antibody agonists for a human GPCR. The
proposal addresses the four main technical requirements that pharmaceutical
customers cite as important: Ability to work on many types of GPCRs, ability to
isolate antibodies with varied modulating effects, use of a highly diverse,
high-quality scFv library, and a workflow that can quickly isolate, optimize and
characterize dozens of candidates. The goals of this project are to improve how
the platform's yeasts express GPCRs and functionally couple them to different
selectable readouts, construct a proprietary scFv library, and optimize the
workflow by incorporating sequencing bioinformatics and antibody
characterization, including flow cytometric analysis of cell-binding and
functional assays on cultured mammalian cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.