* 1853911
* Global P, SV, and converted wave measurements for improved lower mantle P and S structure studies
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/2019,02/29/2024
* Edward Garnero, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 02/29/2024
* USD 275,045.00

This proposal seeks to measure every possible observable seismic wave on
seismograms recorded across the globe. Measuring all possible waves involves
documenting their travel times and wave shape information. These data can then
be used to bolster seismic imaging efforts of Earth's mantle which currently do
not routinely use multiple bouncing or echoing of waves, especially P waves.
Using these waves ensures better sampling of the entire volume of the Earth's
mantle. Otherwise, the southern hemisphere in particular is poorly sampled.
Better imaging of Earth's mantle is important because it allows for more
accurate determination of earthquake properties as well as the dynamic
convection of the interior which drives plate tectonics at Earth's surface. A
complete dataset of a subset of seismic waves will allow benchmarking
tomographic models of different research groups, as well as permit a more direct
comparison of P and S wave models of significant heterogeneities of the deep
mantle. In particular, this work will study two massive low seismic wave speed
structures: one beneath the Pacific Ocean, and one beneath the Atlantic Ocean
and Africa. These huge structures are the largest anomalies in the planet which
are unknown in nature. Resulting models will be rendered in 3D and shared with
the public via the 3D Marston Theater at Arizona State University, which
regularly gives science shows to the general public. The project will also
support and train two students at ASU. Training the undergraduate student will
involve the creation and regular updating of a data acumen training document,
which will also be shared via the web. Students will be involved in data
analysis, interpretation, and writing papers to be published. Scientific
renderings (e.g., models and schematics) will be shared via the PI's website, as
well as via direct email.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will measure and
quantify travel time behavior of a global seismic dataset of high quality P-wave
phases, S-wave phases on the SV component of motion , phases having both P and
SV legs in the mantle, and depth phases of P, SH, SV, and P-SV waves. The
adopted approach incorporates two novel tools recently developed: (1) empirical
wavelets (EWs) are constructed from the average shape of S and P waves on an
event-by-event basis, which are adaptively adjusted to match variable pulse
widths prevalent in data, thus minimizing travel time estimation errors; and (2)
virtual stations which are built from localized geographical bin stacks of
stations for phases of interest, making measurements possible for data with
event-station corridors typically too low in amplitude for confident
measurements. The new seismic measurements proposed here will document travel
times along with several attributes of all measured waveforms, including wave
shape information (amplitude, waveform broadness, waveform misfit compared to
the best fitting EW), signal-to-noise ratios (SNRs, measured multiple ways), and
cross-correlation coefficients (CCCs, between phases of interest and best-
fitting EWs). The investigators will measure minor and major arc data at
relatively short periods (10-16 sec). The new datasets aim to improve resolution
in P and S seismic imaging of the Earth's mantle, with the goal of improving
understanding of the structure, dynamics, and evolution of the Earth. These data
will improve wave path coverage in the southern hemisphere, be applicable to
imaging studies of the entire mantle, and be made publicly available along with
a recently completed SH dataset using the same methodology. The data will be
used for imaging large-low velocity provinces, with a focus on comparing P and S
velocity heterogeneity, which bears upon the nature of heterogeneity. This work
will fund a PhD student and an undergraduate student to collect, process,
measure, and review P and SV seismic data. The PI will mentor the students
within a broader perspective of the multidisciplinary nature of mantle
heterogeneity, particularly the dynamics and evolution of the mantle, with
participation in ASU's multidisciplinary geophysics group (seismology, mineral
physics, geodynamics, and planetary geophysics). All data measurements, models,
and codes will be openly shared with the community via the web, as well as
IRIS's tomography model portal. All measurements will be shared with the 3D
Reference Earth Model project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.