* 1853386
* NSF's National Optical-infrared Astronomy Research Laboratory (NOARL) Transition Planning and Preparation Project
* MPS,AST
* 10/01/2018,06/30/2021
* Patrick McCarthy, Association of Universities for Research in Astronomy, Inc.
* Cooperative Agreement
* David Boboltz
* 06/30/2021
* USD 4,497,034.00

The NCOA Transition Planning and Preparation Project encompasses the planning
and preparation necessary to complete the transition from operating the Gemini
Observatory, the National Optical Astronomy Observatory (NOAO), and the Large
Synoptic Survey Telescope (LSST) as independent observatories to operating them
under a single, integrated National Center for Optical-Infrared Astronomy (NCOA)
supported by centralized services and a matrix management structure for
operations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NCOA will: (1) be the U.S. national Center for
ground-based, nighttime optical and infrared (OIR) astronomy; (2) operate and
maintain OIR observational research facilities and related data systems; (3)
develop, build, coordinate, and integrate observational, technical, and data-
oriented capabilities available throughout the U.S. OIR System of federal and
nonfederal assets; (4) initiate, develop, and sustain domestic and international
collaborations and partnerships to advance ground-based OIR facilities and
capabilities; and (5) develop and advance a strategic vision for NSF-funded OIR
capabilities in collaboration with community scientists, partner organizations,
other U.S. OIR System operators, and NSF.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.