* 1853698
* Collaborative Research: Quantitative Principles behind the Spatio-Temporal Oscillation of Intracellular Calcium
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2024
* Xinping Cui, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 06/30/2024
* USD 715,032.00

This project will study how calcium ions in cells sometimes undergo rapid
oscillations in space and time during polar cell growth, a mechanism that is
extremely important during pollen tube tip growth during plant fertilization,
extension of fungal hyphae, and tumor cell metastasis. Spatiotemporal calcium
ion image data will be collected from growing Arabidopsis pollen tubes and the
investigators will undertake an iterative modeling-experimental testing
approach, drawing on joint expertise from cell biologists, mathematicians and
statisticians, aimed at discovering the unknown quantitative mechanisms that
modulate rapid and directed pollen tube tip growth. The fundamental knowledge
gained from this project may aid development for chemical or genetic disease
treatment strategies, since cell polarization is involved in many human diseases
and cancers. Results could assist with understanding fungal pathogens, because
pollen tube tip growth is analogous to that of invasive fungal hyphae. This
interdisciplinary project involves undergraduate, graduate students and
postdoctoral trainees. Computational and simulation tools and theoretical
results will be made publicly available to enable greater use and facilitate
other researchers in these fields. This project is funded jointly by the
Division of Mathematical Sciences Mathematical Biology Program, the Division of
Molecular and Cellular Biosciences Cellular Dynamics and Function Program, and
the Division of Integrative Organismal Systems Physiological Mechanisms and
Biomechanics Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Calcium is of broad biological
importance, needed not only for bone development but also as a signal to
regulate a vast number of cellular processes such as polar cell growth.
Intracellular calcium oscillation provides a key spatiotemporal calcium signal,
but the underlying mechanisms regulating mechanisms remain largely unknown. The
proposed project will use Arabidopsis pollen tube polar growth as a model
system. Experimental data suggests that oscillatory pollen tube tip growth is
controlled by the spatiotemporal oscillation of two intertwined key regulators:
the ROP1 GTPase activity localized to the apical plasma membrane (cell boundary)
and the tip-focused calcium gradient within the cell cytoplasm. To
quantitatively elucidate these interdependent relationships and the underlying
mechanism for the spatiotemporal oscillation of the system, we will develop a 2D
calcium gradient model to characterize the formation of tip-focused
intracellular calcium gradient and a reaction-diffusion activator-inhibitor
system of ROP1 and calcium gradients that generate spatiotemporal oscillations.
ROP1 and calcium dynamics will also be formulated in 3D to elucidate mechanistic
linkage between rapid tip growth and growth redirection. The proposed research
will establish new design principles underscoring rapid spatiotemporal
oscillations that serve as a common regulatory mechanism and organize
developmental strategies for many cell functions. This work will also
characterize the quantitative mechanisms underlying the generation of calcium
gradients and oscillations that are common calcium signals in all cellular
organisms, with significant impact on a broad range of biological
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.