* 1853257
* CPS: Synergy: Collaborative Research: DEUS: Distributed, Efficient, Ubiquitous and Secure Data Delivery Using Autonomous Underwater Vehicles
* CSE,CNS
* 08/31/2018,08/31/2021
* Yahong Zheng, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2021
* USD 164,753.00

Ocean Big Data (OBD) is an emerging area of research that benefits ocean
environmental monitoring, offshore exploration, disaster prevention, and
military surveillance. It is now affordable for oil and gas companies, fishing
industry, militaries, and marine researchers to deploy physical undersea sensor
systems to obtain strategic advantages. However, these sensing activities are
scattered, isolated, and often follow the traditional "deploy, wait, retrieve,
and post-process" routine. Since transmitting information underwater remains
difficult and unreliable, these sensors lack a cyber interconnection, which
severely limits ocean cyber-physical systems. This project aims to providing a
viable cyber interconnection scheme that enables distributed, efficient,
ubiquitous, and secure (DEUS) data delivery from underwater sensors to the
surface station. The proposed cyber interconnection scheme features cheap
underwater sensor nodes with energy harvesting capability, a fleet of autonomous
underwater vehicles (AUVs) for information ferrying, advanced magnetic-induction
(MI) antenna design using ferrite material, distributed algorithms for efficient
data collection via AUVs, and secure data delivery protocols. The success of
this project will help push the frontier of Internet of Things in Oceans (IoTO)
and OBD, both of which will find numerous underwater applications in offshore
oil spill response, fisheries management, storm preparedness, etc., which impact
the economy and well-being of not only coastal regions but also inland states.
The project will also provide special interdisciplinary training opportunities
for both graduate and undergraduate students, particularly women and minority
students, through both research work and related courses on underwater wireless
communication, network security, and AUV designs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The DEUS
project provides a viable cyber interconnection scheme that enables distributed,
efficient, ubiquitous, and secure data delivery in underwater environment via
four synergistic thrusts: (1) integration of underwater wireless sensor and
communication systems, which will enhance the current MI and light communication
means of underwater sensors, integrate acoustic transmission systems for long-
range communications between anchor nodes and AUVs, and design energy harvesting
and replenishment solutions to prolong the lifetime of underwater sensors (30+
years); (2) distributed and ubiquitous data delivery via multiple AUVs, which
aims to collect the distributed data and deliver them ubiquitously throughout
the underwater network by employing ferrite material and triaxial induction
antennas and mounting them outside of the AUV body for MI enhancement, and
developing algorithms of multiple AUVs' path-planning, trajectory optimization,
etc. under dynamic network conditions; (3) efficiency and security in data
delivery, which designs network algorithms to improve the efficiency and
security of data delivery. Instead of collecting data from every sensor via
acoustic communications, the AUVs choose some sensors to collect data with the
high data rate transmission mode in near field (e.g., light), and allowing the
sensor far away from the AUVs to send its data either directly to AUVs via
acoustic wave or to its nearby chosen sensors via MI/light communications. A
secure data delivery scheme will also be developed to not only secure the data
delivery against typical malicious attacks and guarantee the integrity of
collected data, but also allow the data aggregation of one business entity
without knowing others' private business information; (4) experimental
validation and testing, which will verify the proposed data delivery schemes,
and quantitatively present the performance gains through simulations,
experiments and field test, based on existing facilities.