* 1853893
* Additive Manufacturing of Load and Energy Absorbing Materials through an Integrated Experimental and Modelling Approach
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/15/2019,04/30/2023
* Kathy Lu, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Chou
* 04/30/2023
* USD 604,229.00

This multi-PI advanced manufacturing project aims to understand and explore
phase transformation mechanisms of zirconia ceramic in copper and steel metal
matrices. Zirconia can convert large mechanical strain into heat recoverably but
this potential has not been explored for metal matrix composites. In addition,
the project studies a new friction-based additive manufacturing process, MELD,
with the goal of developing new energy- and stress-absorbing components. Multi-
scale computer modeling of the corresponding materials created through MELD will
be carried out. Simulation results will be compared with experimental data for
improved understanding of microstructure evolution during the MELD manufacturing
process and the component behaviors during infrastructure use. The integrated
understanding from the experimental and modeling efforts is expected to bring in
new capabilities for infrastructure improvement and repair. Because of its broad
applicability, this manufacturing process can directly impact the ability of
buildings, aircraft, and automobiles to withstand demanding loads, and therefore
directly impacts the economic welfare and national security of the United
States. The knowledge generated will be widely disseminated to the scientific
community, to the general public, and to K-12 students. We will also enrich our
current curricula by bringing the most relevant technical and societal issues to
classrooms/labs. The PI/Co-PIs will lead extensive outreach efforts to increase
the enrollment of females and minorities in STEM. Specific efforts include
participation in summer camps that focus on underrepresented students,
collaboration with a minority serving institution, and outreach activities
through Science Museum of Western Virginia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
will study a novel type of metal matrix composites by leveraging a unique stress
and energy dissipation mechanism based on zirconia martensitic phase
transformation. The fundamentals of a new and scalable additive manufacturing
process--MELD will be investigated, and multi-scale and multi-physics
simulations for enhanced microstructure-property understanding and prediction
will be integrated. The theoretical work will be correlated with both in-situ
and ex-situ microstructure characterization and property evaluation results. The
research approaches are: 1) study stress/energy dissipation mechanisms in metal
matrix composites to improve the resilience of structures at different length
scales, 2) understand the influence of the composite synthesis and additive
deposition variables, and develop fundamental understanding of the heat/mass
flow processes during MELD in order to create new structures and enable new
properties, 3) simulate mass and heat flows during MELD and predict
microstructure-derived performance at multi-scales under cyclic loading and
energy shock conditions, and 4) build quantitative relations between the
stress/energy absorbing capabilities and zirconia-enhanced metal composite
synthesis and MELD manufacturing. This project will provide detailed
understanding to the unique and reversible phase transformation of zirconia in
metal matrices, especially regarding its functions in energy and stress
absorption. It will also offer fundamental knowledge in MELD, an exciting and
scalable additive manufacturing process based on friction stir methods, and
create near net shape and fully-dense metal matrix composites. The research will
also advance multi-scale, multi-physics simulations of mass flow and heat flow
during the MELD process and after the MELD process while providing insight into
the structural behaviors of the MELD-enabled composites under complex loading
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.