* 1853226
* SBIR Phase II:  A mathematics communication and collaboration system
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2019,04/30/2022
* Andrew Randono, Alef Omega, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 04/30/2022
* USD 820,000.00

This SBIR Phase II project continues an ambitious project to create an entirely
new way of doing mathematics. It leverages off the recipients' previous projects
that resulted in an interactive equation manipulation system and a mathematics
communication system. This project expands the technology into a comprehensive
platform for learning, doing, and communicating mathematics. The innovation
directly addresses deficiencies in STEM education and educational technology
products by providing a tool whereby users can learn math by exploration and
rapidly develop an intuitive understanding of how equations work through
discovery. As such, it opens the creative doors to the world of mathematics to a
wide range of students who might otherwise slip through the cracks of
traditional mathematics education simply because they think differently. The net
impact on society is a lower barrier to entry to STEM fields and an increase in
math literacy - thus helping to maintain our standing as global leaders in
innovation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project researches and develops a
comprehensive modern mathematics system for students and professionals to
effortlessly explore and solve complex equations through a simple and artful
interface, elegant design, and powerful math engine. It expands on the
recipient's already unique product offerings to create a transformative
mathematics platform. The platform is an innovative new way of doing math that
allows users to enter any equation on almost any device, and solve it using
simple drag-and-drop gestures. Its freeform approach to computer algebra retains
the exploratory aspects of pen-and-paper calculations, while benefiting from the
computational prowess of the underlying math engine. With a unique user
interface and networked multiplayer support, it is also a powerful real-time
communication and collaboration tool. This project drastically enlarges the
breadth of the technology by focusing on critical tasks in three core areas of
development: expanding its core mathematics features, maturing its peer-to-peer
math communication system, and structuring its overall system architecture. The
project prepares the platform for a precise product-market fit to target school
districts for direct licensing, and online education companies for
partnership.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.