* 1853676
* Research and Development Support for Early Career Cartographers and Geospatial Scientists:Tokyo, Japan - July 2019
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Patrick Kennelly, Long Island University
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 08/31/2022
* USD 49,200.00

This award will support travel for early career researchers in the field of
cartography and Geographic Information Science (GIScience) to attend the 29th
International Cartographic Conference (ICC). This project targets the
professional development of early career scholars that are currently completing
a graduate degree, or are in the early stages of their academic, professional
career. The ICC provides a scientific venue that covers all aspects of
cartographic research, a venue that is ideal for young scholars to present their
research and to talk face-to-face with an international community of scientists.
Young scholars who have attended previous ICCs have demonstrated productive
research programs in cartography and GIScience, as evidenced by their scientific
publications and success securing funding to support their research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-term impact of this support for students and
early career scholars is research innovation and collaboration that promotes
future leaders in research in cartography and GIScience in the United States.
Participation in the International Cartographic Conference will lead to the
development of globally relevant cutting-edge research and will enable U.S.
scholars to take a lead in these endeavors. These young scholars develop new
research agendas that couple key scientific and societal challenges in
collaboration with the international community, and actively disseminate
technical and methodological advances in cartography through workshops,
seminars, and peer-reviewed publications. These young scholars benefit from
exposure to ideas from the international cartographic community, but also share
the American experience in this high priority research area for cartography and
GIScience. These accomplishments in turn result in the development of a creative
and productive workforce conducing innovative research in cartography and
geographic information science that serve the Nation's interests regarding
spatial information infrastructure. Although the conference is being held in
Tokyo, Japan, the event will provide new insights and approaches to cartographic
research throughout the world, including the United
States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.