* 1853260
* Youth Family Caregivers and the Geography of Childhood
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2019,01/31/2024
* Elizabeth Olson, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 01/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

This project examines the childhood geographies of youth caregivers under the
age of 18 years old. Every day in the United States, more than 1.4 million youth
caregivers support family members who have a chronic illness, disability, or
other health issue that requires help, supervision or support. Youth caregivers
often assume responsibilities such as cooking and cleaning. They may also
support basic activities of daily living such as assisting in mobility,
dressing, feeding, and administering medication. Like adult caregivers, youth
caregivers encounter a diversity of social, cultural, and geographic or spatial
impacts which vary according to the type and intensity of care they provide to a
loved one. However, unlike adult caregivers, youth in the United States tend not
to be recognized for the care that they provide. Furthermore, there are few
public programs that provide support for their distinct needs. As pressure upon
family caregivers intensifies in the U.S. with the aging of the population and
projected shortages of paid care workers, young people are likely to play a
larger role in providing support, comfort, and assistance to family members.
Results from this research will be widely disseminated to researchers, social
service providers and educational professionals, with implications for youth
caregiver health and wellbeing. Additionally, the investigator and a graduate
student will work directly with youth caregivers to support the creation of a
participatory digital caregiving project, creating opportunities for STEM
education related to digital design and production, technology use, and science
communication. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will contribute to
understanding how youth caregiving impacts childhood geographies. The project
will focus on three key objectives: 1) to understand the relationship between
youth caregiver recognition and identity; 2) to explore how youth caregiving
impacts childhood perceptions of time, space, scale, and place; and, 3) to
identify ways to better incorporate youth caregiving into future research and
policies of family caregiving in the United States. Youth caregivers will
participate in oral histories and a "care mapping" exercise to analyze the
relationship between caregiving identity and childhood geographies. Analysis of
project documents, and participatory digital projects with youth caregivers will
provide additional information about recognition and caregiver identity. The
research will take place with young people who receive support from the
Caregiving Youth Project, a nonprofit organization that works with school
districts to provide services to youth caregivers in Palm Beach County, Florida.
Though the work is limited to one geographic area in the United States, the
findings are relevant to understanding the experiences of family caregiving by
this largely hidden population. The theories and methodologies developed in this
research will provide new insights and approaches to research on childhood
geographies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.