* 1853888
* Innovative Postdoctoral Entrepreneurial Research Fellowship (I-PERF)
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Damon Tull, American Society For Engineering Education
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 08/31/2024
* USD 11,572,989.00

The broader impact of the proposed postdoctoral fellowship program will be an
increase in the number of persons from underrepresented groups such as women,
African Americans, Hispanic Americans, American Indians, and Hawaiian/Pacific
Islanders and those with disabilities who perform small business research in
support of the federal government and participate in technology development and
entrepreneurship in the private sector. This program is aimed at defining a new
career pathway for entrepreneurial-minded, underrepresented scholars. It is
proposed that the policies, planned interactions with program managers,
entrepreneurs and investors, professional development programming, and the
overall opportunity provided will succeed in this effort where other efforts
have come short. In addition, the program will actively engage underrepresented
groups and innovative start-up and small business companies in geographically
under-served states as defined by National Science Foundation (NSF) Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed postdoctoral fellowship
program will create new professional development opportunities for
underrepresented fellows in qualified innovative start-up companies and small
business that receive SBIR/STTR Phase II funding from NSF. On the long term, the
program is expected to expand the participation of underrepresented innovators
in the US innovation ecosystem, through the creation of new technology jobs and
more start-up companies. &lt;br/&gt;In FY 2013, the last year data was available
to the proposing team, the Small Business Administration (SBA) made 5,159 Small
Business Innovation Research (SBIR) and Small Business Technology Transfer
(STTR) Phase I and Phase II awards totaling $2.1 billion. Only 236 or 4.57%
awards were made to minority owned firms that year. For comparison, this outcome
is lower than the percent and number of Science and Engineering (S&amp;E)
doctorates awarded to under-represented groups that year, 12.64% and 2,897
respectively, and does not reflect the capacity of the more than 130,000
underrepresented S&amp;E doctorate degree holders in the U.S. workforce. A
similar problem is found in the private sector. In 2016, venture capitalists
invested $58.2 billion in 5,839 male-founded companies compared to just $1.46
billion in 359 female-founded companies; women represented 4.94% of the deal
flow. The percentages are lower among minority business enterprises. The
proposed postdoctoral fellowship program will directly address the
aforementioned challenges at a time in the 21st century where the primacy of
United States (US) innovation is facing unprecedented competitive
pressure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.