* 1853340
* Development of Mathematical Methods for Next Generation Stent Design
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Suncica Canic, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 06/30/2023
* USD 300,000.00

This project addresses a comprehensive development of mathematical methods for
next generation stent design. Stents are mesh-like tubes which are used to prop
diseased arteries open. Several generations of stents have been designed to
date. The currently used stents are drug eluting stents, and new generations of
bare metal stents. Despite the beneficial effects of stenting, persistent high
rates of complications such as in-stent restenosis and late stent thrombosis
call for novel approaches to stent design. Recent ideas based on nano-engineered
stents seem to be particularly promising. They include: (1) nano-engineered
stents, which are stents covered with nano-engineered surface that promotes
accelerated restoration of functional endothelium and provides a drug-free
approach to keeping stents patent long-term; and (2) ferromagnetic stents with
magnet-enhanced nano-particle drug delivery of anti-thrombogenic drugs for
improved arterial wall healing. This project will addresses the development of
new mathematical methods to guide and aid the bioengineering design of next
generation stents. The methods are based on partial differential equations,
particle-base kinetic methods, and artificial intelligence-based optimization
methods. The mathematical and computational results will be experimentally
tested in the Therapeutic Microtechnology and Nanotechnology Lab at UCSF. Two
students and a postdoc will be involved in the project, and topics from this
research will be presented in a new, interdisciplinary class at UC Berkeley,
cross-listed in three different departments (Mathematics, Bioengineering, and
Mechanical Engineering). Special attention will be paid to organizing a Summer
Workshop for High School Girls, and to promoting inclusion of women in STEM
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the development of a
unified platform for interdisciplinary, synergistic approaches to next
generation stent design based on novel mathematical, computational,
bioengineering, and experimental methods. The mathematical methods combine
macro-scale and micro(nano)-scale approaches to the modeling of: (1)
nanoengineered stents' surfaces covered with engineered nano-tube arrays; (2)
ferromagnetic nano-particle drug delivery; (3) optimal design of stent's
topology, geometry, and mechanical properties to minimize arterial tissue
injury; and (4) design of coating strategies for drug-eluting stents. The
mathematical models will be combined with high performance computing, and with
experimental validation in the Therapeutic Microtechnology and Nanotechnology
Lab at UCSF. The mathematical methods include a fluid-structure interaction
model involving multi-layered poroelastic media to model arterial walls, a
dimension reduction-based 1D hyperbolic net model describing stents' geometric
and mechanical properties, and a ferromagnetic nano-particle fluid-structure
interaction model. The computational methods will be based on a combination of
Finite Element Method approximations of the macro-scale continuum models, and on
Smoothed Particle Hydrodynamics approximations of the micro/nano-scale particle
models. Uncertainty Quantification and Artificial Intelligence (Deep Neural
Networks) will be used to study solution dependence on the parameters in the
problem, and to study optimal stent design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.