* 1853406
* Investigating the Role of Secondary Centers in Complex Non-State Social Systems
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* John O'Shea, University of Wisconsin-La Crosse
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2024
* USD 237,052.00

One of the most fundamental questions in the social sciences concerns the
development of social and economic complexity, particularly prior the emergence
to of state-level societies. Yet the models archaeologists typically employ are
strongly conditioned by a limited number of historical and ethnographic cases
that are inextricably linked to modern states. Archaeologists are now
recognizing great organizational variability among ancient complex societies,
and in the pathways by which societies become complex. This project will
investigate the varied roles that secondary centers play within the development
of complex, non-state systems, highlighting organizational postures not
documented in the ethnographic or historical present. This research will
contribute directly to the theoretical understanding of emergent social
complexity and the alternate pathways this development may take. It will also
provide international research experience for American students, training in
modern excavation and analytical techniques, and opportunities for student
research&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The site of Rabe "Anka Siget" (Serbia),
provides the opportunity to investigate these questions in the context of a
well-dated Bronze Age polity. The researchers will conduct a program of
excavation and analysis at this secondary center to investigate its position
within the Middle Bronze Age Maros (Mori) Group. The project will test
alternative hypotheses concerning the potential roles Anka Siget may have played
within the Maros polity. Activities and developments at Rabe with be compared
with those recently documented by the researchers' NSF funded project at Pecica
"Anul Mare" (Romania), the primary center of the polity. Additional lines of
evidence will evaluate the strength and nature of the connections between Anka
Siget and Pecica, with other Maros settlements, and with the wider set of peer
polities in the Carpathian Basin. This project will be the first community-scale
excavation of a Maros tell. The use of multi-tiered geophysical survey methods,
combined with targeted excavations, will produce an unprecedented view of the
internal organization of a Bronze Age settlement. Through this work, the
investigators will not only elucidate the development of a pivotal Bronze Age
polity, but also will contribute to the wider anthropological debate surrounding
emergent social complexity by providing an alternative case of organization
within a pre-state polity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.