* 1853948
* Collaborative Research: Analyses, Measurements and Modeling in Support of the Asian Monsoon Chemical and Climate Impact Project (ACCLIP)
* GEO,AGS
* 05/15/2019,04/30/2024
* Elliot Atlas, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 04/30/2024
* USD 948,999.00

This effort involves an aircraft study of the chemistry and dynamics of the
Asian Summer Monsoon (ASM). This atmospheric circulation takes place in the
upper troposphere and lower stratosphere and spans the Pacific Ocean east of
Asia westward to the Middle East. The vertical transport of pollutants within
the ASM can have a global impact on atmospheric chemistry and radiation. This
project includes the training of graduate students and post-doctoral
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The four main objectives of the project are:
(1) Investigate the transport pathway of the ASM uplifted air from inside of the
anticyclone to the global upper troposphere-lower stratosphere (UTLS); (2)
Sample the chemical content of air processed in the ASM to ascertain its role in
UTLS ozone chemistry, and in re-distributing active species and short-lived
climate forcers to examine the respective roles of Asian pollution and the
monsoon strength in chemistry and climate, and to understand two-way coupling
between chemistry and climate. Chemical tracers of different lifetimes can also
help characterize the ASM uplifting time scales, which are difficult for the
models to estimate; (3) Obtain information on aerosol size, mass and chemical
composition necessary for determining the radiative impact of the ASM, for
constraining models of aerosol formation and for contrasting the organic-rich
ASM UTLS aerosol population with that of sulfate-rich volcanic plumes and the
background aerosol population; and (4) Measure the water vapor distribution
associated with the monsoon dynamical structure to evaluate transport across the
tropopause, and determine the role of the ASM in water vapor transport into the
stratosphere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is scheduled to take place
during July-August 2020 and will establish and expand collaborations between
several academic institutions, government partners, and international
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.