* 1853142
* SBIR Phase II:  Point-of-Care Patient Photography Integrated with Medical Imaging
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2019,04/30/2024
* Carson Wick, Camerad Technologies, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 04/30/2024
* USD 759,942.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is the widespread adoption of an efficient and
accessible technology to integrate patient photographs with radiology images to
improve patient safety, increase healthcare efficiency, and reconnect
radiologists with their patients. A successful commercialization outcome is this
adoption leading to direct cost-savings in healthcare by improving patient
safety and hospital quality; even a 10% improvement in radiologists' efficiency
leads to healthcare savings of ~$900 million. The broader impact of this novel
technology is that it can provide patient authentication for the digital data
being generated by hundreds of new digital medical devices. Any of this digital
data could end up in the wrong patient's medical record and authentication is
crucial. Rapid advances in smart, telehealth systems present the danger that
patients can turn into mere data, but these photographs can return the
interpreting physician's focus to the patient, leading to improved outcomes
through patient-centered care. The technology achieves this by allowing doctors
to connect with the patient as a person before diving deep and exploring data at
anatomic, physiologic and molecular levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small
Business Innovation Research Phase II project will seamlessly and securely
integrate a radiology patient identification system to improve patient safety,
by avoiding preventable errors, and enhance throughput. This transformative
approach overcomes the failure of existing patient identification methods while
harnessing the power of an embedded camera system to improve patient care.
Technology to automatically and simultaneously obtain and embed audio and video
data of the patient during X-ray and CT acquisition will be developed under this
award. Specifically, the following objectives will be completed: 1) develop a
mature software framework for rapid system scalability to a large number of
hospitals, 2) expand the system to CT scanners and stationary X-ray machines, 3)
improve image quality by adding infrared stereoscopic image capture, to ensure
photographs add value even when obtained in low light settings, 4) enhancing the
cameras with video and audio capabilities, which will improve patient
identification, while simultaneously gathering rich clinical information, and 5)
refine the triggering method for photograph acquisition. The long-term
objectives are to increase the detection rate of wrong-patient errors by
embedding an intrinsic, externally visible biometric identifier with medical
imaging studies; and increase interpreting physician throughput by decreasing
interpretation time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.