* 1853209
* Formal Privacy for Complex Data Objects
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Aleksandra Slavkovic, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 08/31/2023
* USD 680,000.00

This research project will develop statistical methodology for preserving
privacy and sharing of large, complex, and highly structured data and models.
These types of data are commonly encountered in finance, longitudinal studies,
wearable device studies, medical imaging, and electronic health records. Complex
data present substantial challenges for preserving subjects' privacy while
making data that will advance scientific understanding and policy making
publicly available. The project will make major theoretical and methodological
contributions to statistical data privacy and to the fields it relies on, such
as statistics and computer science. Formal privacy tools now are being adopted
by major companies and government agencies for sharing data summaries. This
research will demonstrate how even large complex structures, such as human
faces, can be made private if that structure is properly exploited. The methods
to be developed will have applications in the social, behavioral, and economic
sciences, medical research, and industry. The investigators will mentor a post-
doctoral researcher, as well as graduate and undergraduate students. Open-source
software packages will be developed and made publicly
available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This interdisciplinary research project will
improve upon methods in statistical disclosure limitation, differential privacy,
and functional data analysis to develop formal privacy tools. These tools are
essential in the era of big data. The project will focus on three aims: (1)
Development of privacy tools for objects in infinite-dimensional linear spaces,
especially functions and surfaces. These tools will include non-Gaussian
perturbations, exponential mechanisms, and a special focus on functional
principal components and regression, given their prominence in functional data
analysis; (2) Development of privacy mechanisms for modeling and sharing of
objects in nonlinear spaces that can be described as Riemannian manifolds. Such
data arises naturally when working with 3D images, shapes, covariance matrices,
or large scale spatio-temporal data. The manifold structure will be used to
develop perturbation methods, especially Gaussian, that produce representative
sanitized estimates and data with greater statistical utility; (3) Development
of synthetic data mechanisms for samples from infinite dimensional linear spaces
or nonlinear manifolds. Synthetic data are becoming increasingly critical for
expediting scientific progress while maintaining data privacy. However,
producing synthetic data that properly mimics the complex structures described
here remains a major open problem. This project represents some of the first
work that exploits nonlinear spaces to increase the utility of the resulting
sanitized estimates and data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.