* 1853610
* RUI: Stochastic Interactions: Understanding Invasion and Extinction in Ecological Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Eric Forgoston, Montclair State University
* Continuing Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 06/30/2024
* USD 249,997.00

The goal of this project is to develop mathematical and statistical approaches
to understand how environmental disturbances or invading species affect
communities connected in large food webs. Biological systems are very complex,
involving a multitude of interactions among many components at different scales.
How ecological communities may be grouped to explain how they coexist and evolve
has been a subject of intense interest among biologists and ecologists. Even
after a century of research, the mathematical tools and models needed to fully
understand observed species invasions and extinctions do not exist. Moreover,
very few ecological studies have considered mathematical models with random
effects. Real world systems are inherently noisy, and only by including random
effects can one properly understand an ecological community. The work involves
collaboration with ecologists based at British Antarctic Survey in the United
Kingdom to create an interdisciplinary approach grounded in specific data. The
outcome of the research will be disseminated through seminars, presentations at
meetings, and publications in peer-reviewed journals. The project will train
undergraduate and graduate students in interdisciplinary mathematical research.
Many students at Montclair State University are members of underrepresented
groups in STEM (including women and minorities), and the research program will
leverage existing programs which support these students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project involves the use of theoretical, statistical,
and computational approaches to improve our understanding of how models of large
ecological systems respond to stochastic interactions and perturbations. Of
particular interest is the study of primary and secondary extinction cascades in
food webs as well as the susceptibility of food webs to invasive species. By
considering a variety of empirical and synthetic food webs and incorporating
full dynamics with stochasticity, the work will shed light on which ecosystem
mechanisms (e.g., self-regulation, interaction strengths, feedback loops) serve
to stabilize food webs against perturbations. The three major components of the
work are to: (i) perform comprehensive numerical studies of the stochastic
systems to improve our understanding of stochastic invasion, primary extinction,
and the resulting secondary extinction cascade; (ii) develop new approaches
using continuous Markov chain models to find the optimal path to extinction when
considering pairwise, three-way, and higher-order interactions between species;
and (iii) determine the vulnerability of an existing food web to invasion by
exotic species using innovative asymptotic analysis The results will be useful
in improving our understanding of biodiversity and the organization of living
communities as well as factors that can stabilize or destabilize
ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.