* 1853096
* Collaborative Research: Multi-distribution, Multivariate, and Multiscale Spatio-Temporal Models with Applications to Official Statistics
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2023
* Scott Holan, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 08/31/2023
* USD 625,046.00

This research project will develop statistical methodology for complex spatio-
temporal data. The project is motivated by common features found in many modern
federal datasets such as the U.S. Census Bureau's American Community Survey
(ACS) and the Longitudinal Employer Household Dynamics (LEHD) program. The
public-use ACS and LEHD datasets are enormous and have an overwhelming amount of
information on many different demographic and economic indicators, at different
U.S. regions and different time periods. This project will develop statistical
methods that are tailored to these types of federal data. The project will
advance knowledge within the statistical sciences, and the results of this
research will be of value to the work of government agencies. Because many
subject-matter disciplines, such as neuroscience, demography, and econometrics,
also deal with complex data, the results of this research will be broadly
useful. Software packages will be developed and made publicly available. The
investigators will educate and train both graduate and undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using a hierarchical approach, this research
project will develop Bayesian methodologies for computationally efficient
statistical models for dependent multi-distributional and multiscale (in space
and time) spatio-temporal data. The project has three aims. In aim 1, the
investigators will develop distribution theory that allows for computationally
efficient analysis of high-dimensional datasets that consist of data from
multiple distributions, such as Gaussian data, counts, and Bernoulli data. In
aim 2, the investigators will develop approaches to small-area estimation in the
high-dimensional, multi-distributional, and multivariate spatio-temporal data
setting. In aim 3, the investigators will develop approaches to mitigate
aggregation error in the high-dimensional, multi-distributional, and multiscale
spatio-temporal data setting. The methodologies developed in the project will
use basis functions and spatial change of support to facilitate dimension
reduction and to aid in computation. This project also will make use of vector
auto-regressive models, the Karhunen-Loeve expansion, and conjugate multivariate
distribution theory to develop principled methodologies that are useful for both
the scientific and federal communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.