* 1853024
* Collaborative Research:  Phylogenomics and Cytonuclear Coevolution of Papilionoid Legumes
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Robert Jansen, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Fujita
* 08/31/2023
* USD 478,439.00

Each plant species has three genomes housed in the nucleus, mitochondrion, and
chloroplast whose activities are tightly coordinated. Proteins encoded by the
chloroplast and mitochondrial genomes must interact with nuclear-encoded
proteins in order for essential processes, such as photosynthesis, to occur.
Consequently, mismatches among these interacting proteins may prevent
genetically divergent individuals from producing viable hybrid offspring. This
genomic coordination, or coevolution, is hypothesized to drive plant species
diversification but is largely uncharacterized among closely related species.
This project will examine this phenomenon using the papilionoid group of
legumes, which include economically important crops, such as soybeans, alfalfa,
and peanuts, and nitrogen-fixing species that have significant ecological
impacts. Researchers will resolve the evolutionary relationships among the major
lineages of this group using DNA sequence data from all three genomes and will
study the role of genomic coevolution during this lineage's expansion over time.
The project will provide training at the undergraduate, graduate and post-
graduate levels in genomics, plant biology, and evolutionary biology and will
recruit students from underrepresented groups. Outreach activities include the
development of teaching modules and job-shadowing experiences for K-12 students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide a robust framework to address
outstanding questions regarding legume systematics and genome coevolution.
Papilionoid legumes have accelerated rates of nucleotide substitution in
organellar genomes, highly rearranged plastomes that exhibit biparental
inheritance and plastome-genome incompatibility, which make them ideal models
for characterizing genomic coevolution during lineage diversification.
Phylogenetic relationships of the papilionoid legumes will be inferred using
plastid and mitochondrial genome data as well as nuclear transcriptomes for 56
species representing each of the 22 major clades, including early diverging and
poorly known lineages. Cytonuclear coevolution analyses will compare nucleotide
substitution rates between organelle and nuclear genes whose products interact.
Researchers will then determine whether coordinated changes among the gene
products are occurring on the same branch of the papilionoid phylogeny, which
would indicate coevolutionary coordination. The final aim of the research will
further test the correlation between high rates of sequence evolution in
nuclear-encoded DNA repair, recombination and replication genes and
mitochondrial and plastid genome complexity. Results of the research will be
shared widely in publications, public databases and other publicly-accessible
internet resources. Outcomes of the research will provide new insights into
possible genomic mechanisms that govern species boundaries and will strengthen
research infrastructure to support advances in phylogenetic biology and
agricultural improvement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.