* 1853136
* SBIR Phase II:  Novel Water Flooding Technique to Enhance Oil Recovery
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2019,12/31/2024
* Teresa Nealon, ESal
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 12/31/2024
* USD 1,352,424.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is to deploy a revolutionary water-flood technology to
increase oil recovery. The best current technology is limited to 30 - 50%
recovery leaving significant resources in the ground. The available methods to
further increase recovery are expensive, have limited application and can cause
environmental damage. The proposed method is much less expensive and has minimal
environmental impact. Our technique does not use chemicals or additives thus
avoiding the risk of contaminating ground and surface water resources. Rather
than drill thousands of new wells, our approach revitalizes old fields and
requires little modification to the existing infrastructure and operational
procedures. It would allow older fields to continue to operate, providing jobs
and taxes while increasing and further diversifying our domestic oil reserves.
Full success of enhanced oil recovery,could produce up to 21.7 billion barrels
of additional oil generating over $1 trillion for the US oil industry over the
next twenty-five years, thereby increasing the energy security of the U.S. and
creating more jobs while stabilizing domestic oil production at much lower costs
than other technologies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase II project
proposes to validate the technology to optimize wettability in existing oil
reservoirs through flotation experiments, computer modeling and field pilots.
Once we have achieved good pH control during the flotation experiments, we will
determine the impact on reservoir wettability, the effect of salinity on
wettability and the equilibrium constants for the surface complexation computer
model. Finally, we will conduct concept validation projects in field to verify a
minimum of 5% OOIP increase in oil production. Thus, we will provide producers
with a field-verified process operators can implement to yield significant
results for little cost.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.