* 1853881
* A Geospatial Analysis of Glacier Volume Change
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2019,10/31/2023
* Joerg Schaefer, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 10/31/2023
* USD 349,445.00

This project will provide a data-driven, global assessment of glacier volume
changes with objectively quantified uncertainties. Ocean thermal expansion (due
to increasing ocean temperatures) and mountain glacier ice loss (due to
increased glacier melt rates) have contributed most to global mean sea level
rise (SLR) and are expected to continue to dominate SLR over at least the coming
century. Unfortunately, the uncertainties in recent glacier contributions to SLR
and current volume of glacier ice remain high due, in part, to limited data on
glacier volume changes. The improved estimates of historical glacier changes and
current glacier volume from this project will provide a critical step towards
assessing changes in SLR, quantifying glacier sensitivity to environmental
variability, and providing accurate projections of future SLR and its associated
societal impacts. This project will involve undergraduate and graduate students
and will also develop educational lab kits for K-12 classrooms. These kits will
communicate the results of this research to school teachers and students, while
simultaneously providing hands-on, real world, geographical and spatial science
exercises. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work will quantify regional
glacier volume/mass changes over the past approximately 150 years to
significantly improve the spatial and temporal estimates of glacier changes and
the associated contributions to SLR. Investigators will include all mountain
glaciers and ice caps across the globe in their analysis. The investigators will
also quantify the current spatial distribution of volume of glacier ice using
observations from the initial phase of the research to constrain a glacier
model. This will be accomplished using a combination of techniques (automated
cloud characterization schemes, NDSI, photogrammetry, photoclinometry) applied
to a suite of remotely sensed data and historical imagery to map glacier area
and volume changes over the past several decades. The investigators will use
this information to constrain spatially-varying scale factors for a glacier
volume-area scaling model. This work will extend back in time to the Little Ice
Age (LIA) by compiling reliable moraine dates and maps, and automated mapping of
LIA moraines. The volume of ice around the end of the LIA will be calculated,
which will permit placing the spatial and temporal patterns in glacier volume
change into context relevant to assess anthropogenic changes. These new glacier
volume and volume change estimates will be used to estimate regional patterns of
past and future contributions of glaciers to SLR and identify specific regions
where glacier changes and contributions to future SLR are likely to be
significant. Thus, this research project will focus on glacier contribution to
SLR globally and will provide new insights estimating the impacts of SLR in many
countries, including the United States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.