* 1853927
* Collaborative Research: Articulating a Transformative Approach for Designing Tasks that Measure Young Learners' Developing Proficiencies in Integrated Science and Literacy
* EDU,DRL
* 12/15/2018,11/30/2019
* Christopher Harris, WestEd
* Standard Grant
* Amy Wilson-Lopez
* 11/30/2019
* USD 45,000.00

This is a 12-month collaborative EArly-concept Grants for Exploratory Research
(EAGER) proposal submitted to the Discovery Research PreK-12 (DRK-12), NSF
17-584. SRI International, University of California-Berkeley (Lawrence Hall of
Science), and WestEd will join efforts to articulate a potentially
transformative approach for designing new kinds of classroom-based, three-
dimensional assessment tasks that measure first graders' proficiencies in
integrated science and literacy learning. The main goal of this study will be to
conduct exploratory-design work to produce both the design approach and the
early-stage tasks that are critical inputs for creating a program of research
and development to more fully develop a suite of innovative assessment tasks for
the early grades. Specific goals of the effort will be: (1) to iteratively
develop and refine a design approach that enables assessment designers to
develop Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS)-aligned tasks and rubrics that
include a literacy component for the early grades; (2) to use this design
approach to create two exemplar assessment tasks that are feasible for classroom
use; and (3) to collect initial evidence that informs the promise of the design
approach. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work's research question will be: How can we
extend current methodology to create assessments that integrate the three
dimensions of the NGSS and literacy for early learners? The study will select
first grade as the learning environment and two of the NGSS first grade
performance expectations as the assessment targets. First grade students are
typically at a critical point in developing their language and literacy
proficiencies, which will allow the team to take on the challenges of variation
in language and literacy skills. Correspondingly, the study will select two NGSS
first grade life sciences performance expectations, because they include direct
ties to literacy practices in science: (1) From Molecules to Organisms:
Structures and Processes (Read texts and use media to determine patterns in
behavior of parents and offspring that help offspring survive); and (2)
Heredity: Inheritance and Variation of Traits (Make observations to construct an
evidence-based account that young plants and animals are like, but not exactly
like their parents). The design phase of the activity will consist of an
assessment of the learning context and targets of the study, and the development
of an assessment framework following the National Research Center's report,
"Designing Assessments for the Next Generation Science Standards" (2014),
including the principled assessment evidence-centered-design methodology. Data
gathering, and interpretation strategies will include Experts' Review of the
design approach, a focus group of teachers (n=8), and one-on-one cognitive
interviews with students (n=20), conducted by researchers, which will be
recorded to determine the quality and usability of the assessments using
qualitative methods. The ultimate outcome of the proposed work will be a design
approach for creating assessment tasks in a principled way across science
disciplines for early elementary grade students. An advisory board will provide
formative assessment feedback to the research team. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Discovery Research preK-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the
learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of innovative
resources, models and tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental
research in STEM education and prior research and development efforts that
provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.