* 1853922
* AGU Chapman Conference on Understanding Carbon-Climate Feedbacks
* BIO,DEB
* 04/15/2019,03/31/2020
* Pranoti Asher, American Geophysical Union
* Standard Grant
* John Schade
* 03/31/2020
* USD 20,000.00

Atmospheric CO2 concentrations continue to increase, mainly from burning of
fossil fuels and land use change (e.g., conversion of forest to farmland).
Atmospheric CO2 is, however, only growing at about half the rate expected given
human emissions. This difference is largely due to the removal of carbon from
the atmosphere by terrestrial ecosystems and the oceans. This carbon-climate
feedback is limited by how much CO2 the land and oceans can absorb from the
atmosphere. This amount is, in turn, influenced by changes in the Earth's
climate and its variability, raising questions about how the long-term potential
for carbon removal may change. Large uncertainties remain in the direction and
magnitude of future carbon-climate feedbacks and in projections of future
atmospheric CO2 concentration. This project takes a step towards filling this
gap in knowledge by bringing together scientists from many disciplines to
integrate knowledge that has traditionally been developed independently. In
particular, this project will target early career scientists from
underrepresented groups to participate and bring new perspectives to bear on
this problem. The products of this conference will also be essential for policy
makers and the development of climate adaptation plans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
AGU Chapman conference in San Diego titled Understanding Carbon-Climate
Feedbacks, will be instrumental in advancing the field by addressing the
following key questions: &lt;br/&gt;1. How can carbon-climate feedback processes
be detected in the face of natural interannual, decadal, and centennial
ecosystem variability?&lt;br/&gt;2. What are the critical ecosystem processes,
scales, and regions that control the total impact of carbon-climate feedbacks on
the atmospheric CO2 inventory?&lt;br/&gt;3. To what degree are global carbon-
climate feedbacks dominated by sensitive ecoregions?&lt;br/&gt;4. How can the
contemporary knowledge of ecosystem process controls on carbon-climate feedbacks
be used to improve predictions of climate systems?&lt;br/&gt;The participants in
the meeting will discuss and establish the top priorities for ecosystem science
development to reduce the uncertainties of climate predictions and support an
improved response to a rapidly changing planet. This conference will provide key
input and guidance for new research directions within ecosystem studies that
will yield direct benefits to climate science, as well as broader benefits to
global society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.