* 1853063
* SBIR Phase II:  A carbon selective detector for liquid phase chemical detection of organic molecules
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2019,12/31/2022
* Andrew Jones, Activated Research Company
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2022
* USD 1,044,983.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is the potential to directly and positively
impact the speed of chemical analysis leading to cleaner and more advanced
products. Technology resulting from the proposed activity will solve several
pain points in the chemical analysis industry, including non-linearity, small
dynamic range and variable, sometimes negligible, detector response. As a
result, the technology will have broad use and lead to improved detection in
pharmaceuticals, drug development, fuels, chemicals, renewables, foods, flavors,
and academic and industrial research. Uniform response to carbon from flame
ionization detection (FID) would be completely disruptive to the painstaking
methods of calibration of known compounds and the guesswork associated with the
quantification of unknowns. The benefits of this technology are expected to
result in immense improvements in the speed and accuracy of high-performance
liquid chromatography (HPLC) analysis, thereby leading to better and safer
products, with faster development times. Applied to the pharmaceutical and new
drug development industry, this technology will have lasting impacts on the
health and safety of society due to better and faster analyses
available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase II project aims to deliver a
carbon selective detector (CSD) to the global scientific market. The CSD is a
high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) detector that produces a linear
response to all organic compounds using a flame ionization detection (FID) and a
catalytic reactor. The key innovation is the novel development and use of a
catalytic reactor to transform organic molecules and remove solvent in liquid
chromatograph effluent streams. The FID, similar to those ubiquitous in gas
chromatography (GC) systems, yields a universal response to organic compounds
converted to methane with unparalleled linear range and robustness. The device
will overcome limitations of the FID that have prevented previous use in HPLC by
selectively removing solvents, oxidizing organic compounds to carbon dioxide,
reducing carbon dioxide to methane, and detecting the resulting methane with the
FID. The resulting product features, most notably a universal response to
carbon, will provide pre-clinical pharmaceutical researchers with a tool that
can quantify drugs and their by-products during screening, long before the
process has been scaled up for the production of calibration
standards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.