* 1853665
* Geographic Patterns and Spatial Scales of Alpine Plant Communities
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2019,12/31/2023
* George Malanson, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 12/31/2023
* USD 201,271.00

This project analyzes the way in which spatial scale changes how local habitat,
regional climate, and geographic separation affect plant community composition
and diversity. According to basic theory in biogeography, the relative
importance of the biological and environmental factors that affect species
coexistence, and thus diversity, varies with spatial scale. The research
assesses the relative importance of the controlling factors as well as specific
geographies of location within increasing spatial scales and among places that
vary in isolation. This change with scale and isolation is relevant to
fundamental understanding of how diversity arises and is maintained, and this
research helps guide interpretation of observations of current global change
impacts. For this project, the alpine tundra biome serves as a useful model
system because its plant community composition varies across and within mountain
ranges and regions. Project results will be shared with other researchers
working on such interpretation in global ecological monitoring programs, such as
the Global Observation Research Initiative in Alpine Environments, as well as
with the general public through outreach via the National Park Service's Crown
of the Continent Learning Center. The STEM workforce will be strengthened
through the training of a postdoctoral researcher and
undergraduates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research examines the role of spatial
scale in plant community biogeography. The investigator will assess the
variation in plant community composition in alpine tundra in relation to three
factors: local habitat (such as soils and topography), climate (biologically
relevant seasonal variables), and geographic distance (a proxy for past
dispersal). Which of the three factors, with multiple variables for each, is
most important to the patterns of diversity among plots within distances ranging
from 100 meters to greater than 1000 kilometers, will be determined
statistically. The pattern of changes in their relative importance along a
gradient of increasing distances will be analyzed. Specifics of isolation will
be evaluated through the inclusion of discontinuous ranges. These analyses test
the fundamental theory that the drivers change in a regular pattern as scale is
increased. The project increases knowledge of the importance of spatial
interpretation in biogeographic theory and its applications. The alpine tundra
found in an arc across southern-to-eastern Europe, from Spain to Romania, will
be studied because the species composition and environment has been recorded for
thousands of plots with the same methodology. Insights for biogeographic theory
and applications will be relevant to other alpine regions, such as those of the
western United States, as well as to other biomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.