* 1853184
* Collaborative Research: Theoretical and Experimental Investigation of Grain Damage and the Formation of Plate Boundaries
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2019,06/30/2021
* David Bercovici, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 06/30/2021
* USD 273,000.00

Plate tectonics describes the motion of Earth's upper-most rocky layers and
governs almost all geological activity on Earth, such as earthquakes and
volcanoes. Plate tectonics is only known to occur on Earth, but not on Venus and
Mars, and whether Earth always had plate tectonics in its 4.5 billion-year
history is unknown. The emergence of plate tectonics on Earth depends on how
rocks in the cold uppermost layers of the mantle - the lithosphere - deform. As
rocks deform they can weaken through the process of damage, which concentrates
deformation, resulting in more damage, and so on. This positive feedback focuses
lithospheric deformation into weak narrow plate boundaries, which are the locus
of most seismic and volcanic activity. This project will develop and apply the
physics of how mineral grains in rocks are damaged (termed "grain-damage")
through combined theoretical and laboratory approaches. When mineral grains are
deformed they accumulate defects, which eventually leads to grains breaking down
into smaller grains, and this in turn makes the rocks weaker. This process is
evident in rocks called mylonites that are often found at plate tectonic
boundaries. This project will use grain damage physics to understand how and
when plate tectonics arose on early Earth. The project will also study how
damage in grains influences cycles of earthquakes at plate boundaries,
specifically how rocks weaken, recover and transmit stress to other rocks and
eventually trigger more earthquakes. Plate boundary processes have a significant
human impact, including evolution of plate boundary fault systems and earthquake
recurrence. The project promotes diversity through the support and professional
development of two early career female scientists, specifically with
interdisciplinary training in theoretical and experimental methods. The project
will also involve organization of a symposium on the evolution of plate
boundaries for students and young scientists, and will contribute new scientific
materials to education and outreach activities at an established scientific
visualization facility. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will advance the
study of lithospheric grain-scale physics and deformation mechanisms, and their
application to the generation and operation of plate tectonics. The PI's will
extend the grain damage theory for lithospheric weakening and plate boundary
formation to include mineralogical phase mixing and dislocation dynamics in
polymineralic materials, with calibration and testing by rock deformation
experiments. These new developments are necessary to address two major
scientific questions:&lt;br/&gt;1. Emergence of plate tectonics: How did
tectonic plate boundaries form in the ancient Archean Earth? Did thermal and
petrological evolution in the early Earth, namely cooling, decreasing crustal
production, and changes in lithospheric composition, affect localization of
deformation in the lithosphere and the emergence of plate tectonics?
Specifically, the PI's hypothesize that temperature and melting affect mineral
composition, which can then influence rock weakening through the positive
feedback of grain damage and mixing between petrological phases.&lt;br/&gt;2.
Post-seismic creep and lithospheric shear zones: How does transient ductile
behavior in the lithosphere, with associated changes in microstructure like
grain-size and dislocation density, influence the accumulation, transmission and
release of stress following an earthquake? How does this response affect
earthquake recurrence cycles and triggering? Does inherited lithospheric
weakness, and thus age of a plate boundary, influence post-seismic recovery and
earthquake cycles?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address these questions, the
investigators will connect new developments in grain-scale physics to plate-
scale geodynamic models using experimentally determined rheological laws. These
multi-scale models will provide the platform for coupling plate-boundary
formation to thermo-chemical evolution of the upper mantle, and to seismogenic
behavior in the crust. The ultimate scientific goal of this project is to
understand emergence of plate tectonics on early Earth, and how plate boundary
evolution and behavior influences post-seismic response and earthquake cycles.
These issues span the time scales of the evolution of Earth's surface in deep
time, the development of the neotectonic environment, and the behavior of
seismically active zones. The proposed work will use theory and experiments to
better understand Earth's tectonic processes on the geological and human time
scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.