* 1853805
* Belmont Forum Collaborative Research: Scenarios of freshwater biodiversity and ecosystem services in a changing Arctic
* GEO,RISE
* 04/15/2019,12/31/2022
* Leslie Jones, University of Alaska Anchorage Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 12/31/2022
* USD 178,776.00

Innovative research on the complex interaction of socio-economic and global
environmental trends on biodiversity and ecosystem services is needed to help
develop more informative scenarios for addressing environmental and human
development challenges. To overcome these challenges coupled natural-human
systems approaches and analyses are needed. These provide improved scenarios of
biodiversity and ecosystem services that couple the outputs of direct and
indirect drivers such as land use, invasive species, overexploitation,
biodiversity, environmental change, and pollution. The resulting models provide
a methodological state-of-the art that results in more accurate quantitative
assessments, better land use, and more effective ecosystem services. Employing
this methodology, this research project, which is an international coalition
between US scientists and those from four other nations with Arctic territories,
seeks to evaluate freshwater biodiversity and food web dynamics in the
circumpolar Arctic region and their value for people, communities, and the
region. For this project, each country provides funds to support their own
investigators and their part of the research. This project characterizes the
current state of biodiversity along latitudinal gradients (north to south) in
the Arctic and uses experiments and computer models to develop change scenarios
in response to climate warming because Arctic warming can cause various physical
environmental changes, such as permafrost thaw, which can result in changes in
water quality, water temperature, food webs, and fish distributions. Shifts in
food resources that might result could have large impacts on far north human
populations (e.g., subsistence activities, commercial and recreational
fisheries, etc.). Through field studies, experiments, modeling, and forecasting,
this project develops linkages between climate change, freshwater biodiversity,
and consequences for ecosystem services in Arctic freshwaters, all of which have
potential socio-economic impacts. Although a large body of literature exists on
Arctic freshwater fishery economics, interactions between habitat conditions and
the socio-economic consequences of human- and climate-induced changes in the
productivity of Arctic lakes and rivers are poorly known. This study fills that
gap. Broader impacts of the research include international collaboration between
scientists in the US and Denmark/Greenland, Norway, Sweden, and Canada. They
also include identifying shifts in biodiversity to assist countries in
recognizing early warning signs of climate change-related ecological impacts in
the Arctic; assessing economic implications for changes in Arctic biodiversity,
something critical to managing regional resources and/or developing science-
based policies and regulations; enabling circumpolar harmonization of sampling
methods, data storage, and large-scale analysis to promote future circumpolar
assessments of biodiversity change; and improving our knowledge and
understanding of Arctic food security for native peoples and others in the
region who depend on freshwater fisheries. The project also supports a PI from a
gender underrepresented in the sciences at an institution in an EPSCoR state
(i.e., Alaska), thereby broadening participation of underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports US researchers participating in
a project competitively selected by a coalition of 26 funding agencies from 23
countries through the Belmont Forum call for proposals on "Scenarios of
Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services". The call was a multilateral initiative
designed to support research projects that contribute to the development of
scenarios, models, and decision-support tools for understanding and solving
critical issues facing our planet. The goal of the competition was to improve
and apply participatory scenario methods to enhance research relevance and its
acceptance and to address gaps in methods for modelling impact drivers and
policy interventions. It was also to develop and communicate levels of
uncertainty associated with the models, to improve data accessibility and fill
gaps in knowledge. Using this methodology, the funded project will address
knowledge gaps on the links between biodiversity and ecosystem services in
Arctic lakes and rivers. The approach undertaken includes using
physical/chemical climate change models to develop biodiversity change scenarios
which incorporate multiple trophic levels and predict consequences of
biodiversity scenarios to ecosystem services. Specific research objectives
include: (1) evaluation of biodiversity and functional trait patterns in
relation to environmental drivers and identify biodiversity hotspots in
freshwater ecosystems (lakes and rivers) across latitudinal gradients in the
Arctic; (2) insight into how direct and indirect drivers related to climate
change impact the biodiversity and trait composition of Arctic aquatic food
webs, and ultimately fish production; (3) quantifying uncertainty in
biodiversity scenarios for Arctic freshwaters through empirical observations and
experimental simulations; and (4) assessing the effects of nutrient enrichment
and terrestrial land change on community structural and functional measures
across latitudinal gradients in North America and Europe. Other approaches
include use of bio-economic models to evaluate socio-economic trade-offs and
potential shifts in ecosystem services in Arctic lakes and rivers associated
with climate change, nutrient enrichment, and resource exploitation; developing
assessment criteria that better quantify the ecological change in Arctic lakes
and streams and provide strategies for the early detection of new and/or
invasive species and that can feed into the development of biodiversity
scenarios; and providing information and research results that better inform
resource managers, regulators, and policy makers, as well as people who live in
the Arctic and the global community concerned about the ongoing change in Arctic
freshwater ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.