* 1853156
* SBIR Phase II:  Micro-Fluidic LiDAR for Autonomous Vehicles
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2019,03/31/2023
* Andrew Miner, Mirada Technologies Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ela Mirowski
* 03/31/2023
* USD 1,353,921.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is to hasten the
deployment of autonomous transportation systems, which stand to reduce driving
accidents and fatalities, enable new paradigms in urban design, reduce vehicle
traffic, increase automobile efficiency, and improve air quality, benefiting the
immediate health of drivers and non-drivers alike. A reduction in cost of
transporting people and goods would increase the profitability of nearly all
products and services, since nearly all activities require transportation in
some form. Advanced Driver Assistance Systems (ADAS) are simpler implementations
of semi-autonomous controls systems but are already saving lives by providing
intelligent cruise control, lane departure warnings, steering assistance, and
preemptive emergency braking. As ADAS improves through advanced sensor and
scanning hardware and becomes more widely deployed, more accidents will be
avoided, and lives saved. There are currently no LiDAR imaging sensors that can
sense greater than 200 meters and are automotive qualified due to limitations on
the scanning systems. The proposed innovation would be the first to enhance a
scientific and technical understanding of the reliability issues limiting wide-
scale sensor deployment and result in the first automotive qualified long-range
LiDAR sensors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research
(SBIR) Phase II project will result in an automotive-grade laser scanning system
that enables next generation LiDAR, a three- dimensional imaging sensor crucial
for the widespread adoption of autonomous delivery robots, drones, advanced
driver safety systems in vehicles, and autonomous vehicles. Survey-grade LiDAR
is a mature technology, but efforts to make it road worthy have failed due to
the harsher shock and vibration requirements and deployed systems fail within
two years and display image distortion under high-shock conditions. The proposed
innovation will result in the first automotive qualified long-range LiDAR sensor
by developing fluid stabilized opto-mechanical scanners that utilize buoyant
forces to counteract external accelerations. The novel scanner technology will
be simulated, fabricated, and tested against ISO specifications for automotive
qualification to demonstrate both accurate real time scanner stability and long-
term reliable operation. It is expected that the results will be scanners able
to pass ISO testing in a form compatible with high-volume, low-cost production
methods. Through collaboration with customers, this work will result in a new
class of vision systems that will bring a new level of efficiency and safety in
transportation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.