* 1853512
* Workshop: Ninth International Workshop on Modeling in Crystal Growth (IWMCG-9); Kailua-Kona, Hawaii; 21-24 October 2018
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2018,12/31/2019
* Jeffrey Derby, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 12/31/2019
* USD 10,000.00

The Ninth International Workshop on Modeling in Crystal Growth (IWMCG-6) will
bring together top senior and promising junior researchers of both academe and
industry from the United States, Europe, Asia, and other parts of the world to
identify common priorities, allow the exchange of new ideas, and foster future
collaborative work. This workshop, held from October 21-24, 2018, and ideally
situated mid-way between the United States and Asia in Hawaii, builds upon a
history of successful triennial meetings on this topic. This award will support
five additional U.S.-based young researchers (graduate students, post-doctoral
fellows, and young faculty) to participate in the symposium, where they will be
exposed to cutting-edge research and to the broadly-based, international
community of this field. The topic of the workshop addresses an area, crystal
growth, that has been identified by the National Research Council as
strategically important and in need of strengthening in the U.S. Advances in
this area will impact advanced manufacturing processes that affect electronic
and photonic devices for information, energy, defense, and detector systems, the
production of fine chemicals and pharmaceuticals, and more. Improvements in
these crystal-base systems will favorably impact wide-ranging domains relevant
to national prosperity, defense, and health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to
promoting discourse and collaboration among researchers in this area, the
support of this workshop will promote an important and timely research topic.
Crystal growth is itself profoundly interesting and significant, and modeling
such processes, the focus of this workshop, is inherently interdisciplinary and
demanding. From a fundamental vantage point, studying crystal growth yields
important understanding of thermodynamic phase change, associated self-assembly
and pattern-formation phenomena, and kinetic and transport limitations to
growth. From a technological viewpoint, a successful crystal growth process
represents a quintessential advanced manufacturing system, whose successful
modeling and subsequent understanding, control, and optimization are inherently
challenging and valuable. NSF support will allow young researchers in the U.S.
an opportunity to advance their careers through international exposure and
future collaboration in this area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.