* 1853652
* Examining Public Information Campaigns as a Strategy of Border Enforcement
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Jill Williams, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Koster
* 02/29/2024
* USD 393,408.00

This project examines the development, implementation, and geography of public
information campaigns (PICs) as a strategy of border enforcement. Managing the
transnational flow of people is one of the greatest challenges facing nation-
states in the 21st century, requiring governments to negotiate complex issues of
sovereignty, national security, and human safety and well being. PICs present a
potentially promising approach to regulating transnational mobility as they are
often less expensive and easier to implement than traditional enforcement
strategies. However, little is known about the use of PICs as a strategy of
border enforcement. This project contributes to research in the field of
political geography by producing new empirical data on an under-examined
enforcement mechanism, while also contributing to theoretical understandings of
how nation-states govern. The findings of this project will have implications
for national security, ensuring that border enforcement efforts are effective,
economically efficient, and safe. The dissemination plan, including a publicly
available website and StoryMap, will enable public engagement and science
communication while also providing easily accessible information for migration
research and education. Graduate research assistants within the project team
will also promote the development and training of a diverse and competitive
workforce in the geographical sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has
three objectives: 1) to trace the development of PICs as a strategy of border
enforcement; 2) to map the spatial and institutional frameworks through which
PICs have been created and distributed and how these distribution networks
relate to the form, content, and effectiveness of campaigns; and 3) to identify
the role PICs play in producing political geographies of border enforcement. A
mixed-methods, comparative approach is used to achieve these objectives.
Research methods include textual analysis, semi-structured interviews, and geo-
visualization techniques that combines quantitative and qualitative data sets. A
comparative approach is useful when examining border and immigration enforcement
strategies for it illustrates the nuances of enforcement in distinct contexts,
while also providing insight into how national governments communicate and
collaborate. Comparison of case studies in the US and Australia will enable the
researchers to explore how specific cultural, economic, political, and
geographic contexts affects the development and implementation of PICs as a
mechanism of border enforcement, illuminating the potential of this strategy
across contexts and providing insight on the best practices for effectively
mobilizing PICs as an enforcement strategy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.