* 1853520
* Spatiotemporal Interactions Among Biotic Disturbance Agents, Biological Legacies, and Compensatory Responses: Consequences for Temperate Forest Resilience
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2023
* Daniel Donato, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Kari Segraves
* 06/30/2023
* USD 324,215.00

Forests worldwide are changing rapidly because of increasing temperatures and
associated disturbances, such as insect outbreaks and wildfires. North American
temperate conifer forests are facing increases in biotic disturbances (e.g.,
insect and pathogen outbreaks), many of which are co-occurring in space and time
and with unknown ecological consequences. Many of these disturbances are native
to these ecosystems, such that the dominant trees have coevolved responses that
lead to ecological resistance or resilience following disturbance. However, key
mechanisms of forest recovery may be altered substantially if biotic
disturbances are interacting in novel ways, or if environmental conditions
following biotic disturbances are shifting. This study will evaluate ecological
mechanisms of forest recovery that are common across ecosystems; therefore,
results will be broadly relevant for informing theoretical frameworks of
ecological resilience as well as for guiding scientists and managers in an era
of increasing ecological disturbances. This project will recruit and mentor
diverse undergraduate students, create a curriculum module for high school
classrooms, as well as lead outreach efforts with land
managers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Synchrony in multiple biotic disturbance agents
across broad spatial scales in temperate forests of the northern hemisphere
affords a unique opportunity to test key hypotheses and inform ecological theory
about disturbance interactions, biological legacies, and compensatory responses.
Existing permanent-plot forest demography data will be integrated with newly
acquired remote sensing products to examine interactions among biotic
disturbance agents, as well as ecosystem resilience following single and
multiple biotic disturbances. Across spatial scales from trees to sub-
continental regions, two primary research questions will be addressed: (1) Is
the nature of spatiotemporal interactions among biotic disturbance agents
changing during a period of warming climate? (2) How does the nature of
biological legacies left by biotic disturbances influence forest regeneration?
Field and remotely sensed data will be used to build models of "hotspots" of
biotic disturbances (i.e., spatial synchrony in two or more biotic
disturbances), and test hypotheses about the conditions that create interactions
among biotic disturbances. Multiscale data will be used to test hypotheses about
how different biological legacies from disturbance hotspots affect compensatory
responses across levels of biological organization. These multiscale data will
answer key questions about how biotic disturbances and ecological responses are
changing with warming temperatures, and contexts under which forest resilience
may erode.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.