* 1853977
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Paleoarctic Human Adaptations
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2019,02/28/2021
* Frank Goebel, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/28/2021
* USD 15,957.00

A fundamental question driving anthropological science today asks how humans
spread across the Earth and adapt to the world's varied environments. This
research arena is an important theoretical and methodological marketplace where
geneticists, biological anthropologists, paleoecologists, and archaeologists
work to explain the process of global human dispersal. This is especially the
case in the Americas, where genetic models predict that humans of the late Ice
Age rapidly filled the Western Hemisphere, originating in greater Northeast
Asia, spreading to Alaska, and reaching the Southern Cone of South America,
between 24,000 and 12,000 calendar years ago. Archaeological evidence is
required from these scattered regions to empirically test the genetic-based
theory of how early hunter-gatherers dispersed. One of the most visible
components of the archaeological record is the variable forms of weapons and
projectile points that prehistoric hunters across northern Asia and America
used, specifically stone lanceolate points versus bone/antler/ivory points, the
latter sometimes inset with stone microblades. The functional, environmental,
and social factors that influenced these weapon designs remain unknown. Why did
ancient foragers of Siberia and Alaska employ different weapon systems as they
entered the Americas? How did these variable weapons facilitate settlement of
every ecological niche in the Western Hemisphere? The new research will offer
insight into the use of major projectile-point technologies and human decision-
making processes as early Americans dispersed through different environments, at
the end of the Ice Age when dramatic climatic and ecological changes were taking
place, broadening knowledge of human adaptability, especially in northern
landscapes. The international context of the research will foster relationships
between a new generation of American, Canadian, and Russian archaeologists
investigating human behavioral change and adaptation in the circumpolar Arctic.
The project will engage Alaskan Native communities through educational
demonstrations of projectile systems traditionally used in subsistence
activities, promoting positive relationships between archaeologists and the
public. Understanding the functions of these important artifacts will help
sustain traditional subsistence practices among Native Alaskans and will help
reveal the reasons for ancient assemblage differences and ultimately how these
differences relate to the colonization of Beringia and the
Americas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Joshua Lynch, PhD candidate at Texas A&amp;M
University, will examine variability in projectile technologies Ice Age Siberia
and Beringia by examining the range of morphological and functional variation in
lithic, osseous, and composite points to test hypotheses explaining why
different projectile technologies co-occur in the early archaeological record of
the far north. This will be achieved through a series of experiments employing
projectiles reflective of archaeological examples used in three different weapon
systems (hand-thrust spear, bow and arrow, and spear thrower) to generate a new
standard of breakage and use-wear patterns for ancient weapon technologies. By
establishing the functions of specific point forms, project results will improve
interpretations of Ice Age archaeological assemblage variability as it relates
to foraging behavior, landscape use, site function, and cultural variability.
Further, macro- and microscopic analyses of projectile points from more than 40
pivotal Siberian and Alaskan archaeological sites will be conducted and compared
to the results of the experimental testing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.