* 1853261
* The Ecology of Critical Transitions in Pest Control in The Coffee Agroecosystem
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2024
* John Vandermeer, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Porras-Alfaro
* 04/30/2024
* USD 699,875.00

The inevitability of surprise is a characteristic of ecological systems. While
most sciences are founded on a regular set of laws or principles such that a
particular input results in a predictable and consistent output, one of the key
ideas of ecological systems is that this inherent predictability is frequently
violated, mainly because of the complex interconnections they contain. Thus,
while physics and astronomy, for example, rightly celebrate their ability to
make precise predictions about what happens at extremely large (e.g., the
universe) and extremely small (e.g., atoms) levels, ecological systems are known
for their inherent unpredictability, one aspect of which is sudden, drastic, and
at times unexpected change. Such events are frequently referred to as a
"critical transition." An evident example is the sudden outbreak of pests in
agricultural systems. This project seeks to understand the structure of these
unexpected changes in the pest systems that have generally plagued food
production since times immemorial and that currently threaten one of society's
favorite beverages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses the coffee
agroecosystem as a model ecosystem, to ask how classical ideas of critical
transitions (in this case, sudden pest outbreaks) reflect theoretical constructs
that emerge from basic ecological theory. Pest outbreaks in managed systems are
potentially driven by critical transition phenomena; rather than a slowly
accumulating increase in pest problems in response to management decisions,
frequently they seem to suddenly jump from one relatively stable system (low
pest population) to another one (high pest population). In addition, managers
seeking to reverse this process, may face the related problem of hysteresis: the
sudden pest outbreak when a management threshold is reached does not reverse
itself in the same way when that threshold reverts to its previous level. The
three major pests on the coffee farms of southern Mexico are all connected in
subsystems that have theoretical structures (modules), each of which suggests
conditions under which critical transitions will occur. The research seeks to
determine whether these three well-defined modules (subsystems) demonstrate
critical transition behavior. Furthermore, the work aims to understand
implications at a larger scale when these three subcomponents, each of which
separately can be expected to show critical transition behavior, are coupled as
they obviously are in reality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.