* 1853719
* Signaling Mechanisms that Regulate Axon Guidance at the CNS Midline
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Greg Bashaw, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Quentin Gaudry
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,300,000.00

In all bilaterally symmetric animals, the ability to coordinate the left and
right sides of the body is critically important for sensory perception, motor
behavior and cognitive function. The midline is an important organizing center
for the development of nerve connections between the two sides of the body; many
nerve cells grow connecting axons that cross over to the other side of the body
through the midline only once, innervating targets on the opposite side of the
body. The proposed research will enrich scientific understanding about the
guidance molecules involved in this process, which are very similar between
vertebrate and invertebrate animals, and work in the same ways. These
experiments will also provide new and more detailed information about how
signaling molecules modulate nerve fiber growth by changing the expression of
genes that code for nerve fiber structural molecules. An integral component of
the proposal will be to expand the high school outreach initiative established
as a part of previous research. This expansion will include training and co-
teaching with 15 Philadelphia public high school teachers, and is designed to
increase high school scientific literacy and aptitude. The program is based on
the researchers continuing collaboration with a handful of outstanding
Philadelphia public high school teachers, who have worked in the investigator's
laboratory over multiple summers. The focus is to develop simple experiments
that can be performed with fruit flies and that illustrate key concepts in the
formation and function of the nervous system, and at the same time, to raise
awareness of the power of animal models for the study of biology.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Determining the cell and molecular mechanisms that control the
assembly of neural circuits is a central problem in developmental biology.
Insights into these mechanisms promise to have important impacts on human health
since many signaling molecules that contribute to wiring the nervous system are
implicated in developmental disorders and cancer. In addition, understanding how
axon growth and guidance are controlled during development may suggest
strategies to promote neuronal regeneration after injury or disease. We propose
to study the signaling mechanisms that promote axon attraction. The midline of
the Drosophila embryonic CNS is an ideal system to dissect these signaling
mechanisms. Like the vertebrate floor plate, the fly midline is an intermediate
target for navigating axons, which must decide whether or not to cross. Netrin
attracts commissural axons to the midline in both vertebrates and invertebrates
through receptors of the Deleted in Colorectal Carcinoma (DCC) family (encoded
by frazzled in the fly). However, it is unclear how Frazzled/DCC signaling leads
to axon attraction and what additional mechanisms contribute to midline circuit
assembly. We propose 1) to engage undergraduate researchers to continue an
established genetic screen to identify new players in the regulation of midline
axon guidance, 2) to conduct a genetic and biochemical characterization of roles
of the Scar/WAVE complex and the microtubule binding protein Mars in Fra-
mediated axon attraction and 3) to determine how the recently discovered role of
Fra in activating gene transcription is spatially and temporally regulated by
proteolytic cleavage of the Fra receptor.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.