* 1853242
* SBIR Phase II:  OCT-Compatible Imaging Adaptor for Precision Vascular Access via Hollow-Bore Needles
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2019,09/30/2022
* Thomas Mowery, WestFace Medical Device
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 09/30/2022
* USD 972,753.00

This SBIR Phase II project supports development of a commercially viable real
time optical imaging device to address the problem of failed first time vascular
access. Peripheral IV access (PIV) is the most common invasive procedure for all
ages, races and clinical settings. In the United States alone, there are an
estimated 230 million PIVs placed per year. First time IV access has a
shockingly high failure rate of 35%-50%. Multiple attempts result in pain and
emotional distress, especially in the pediatric population where the failure
rate is highest. The average cost of placing an IV on the first time is $69.76.
Three or more attempts doubles the cost to be greater than $125 per IV. When PIV
access cannot be obtained the more invasive, risky and costly central IV access
is used which increases the risk of blood borne infections as well as other
complications. One central IV sourced infection can add 7-20 additional days of
hospital length of stay and $56,000 of additional (unreimbursed) cost, adding as
much as $2.3 billion in increased US intensive care unit costs each year. These
failure rates occur even though ultrasound and near infrared devices are
available to improve first time IV access. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In phase II,
the project team will refine the hybrid Optical Coherence Tomography tipped
imaging probe, customized for vascular access, and integrate it into a
commercially viable system to fulfill goals not supported by any other imaging
system: finding and recognizing veins; guiding the angiocath needle to the vein;
acquiring intra lumen access on first attempt; and confirming intra lumen
placement. The system needs to be cost effective, durable and acceptable to a
multitude of diverse clinicians. The disposable adapter probe will connect to a
hand piece that will tactilely enable the clinician to actuate rotation and
advancement of the optical probe to acquire data necessary to create clinically
relevant 3D real time images. The data are transmitted to a control unit for
processing and then presented to a small form display such as smart phone.
Research activity will be focused in developing the egonomically acceptable hand
piece that does not interfere with variable angular approaches to the vein. A
critical part of the ongoing research will focus on software design for creating
an optimal graphic user interface (GUI). Multiple form factors of the hand
piece, the GUI, and visual display will be evaluated by practicing clinicians
for final production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.