* 1853039
* Coastal SEES: Coastal fog-mediated interactions between climate change, upwelling, and coast redwood resilience: Projecting vulnerabilities and the human response
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Joseph Berry, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 08/31/2022
* USD 1,240,734.00

Coastal upwelling in eastern boundary currents drives some of the Earth's most
productive and biodiverse marine ecosystems. While the contributions of
upwelling to marine ecosystems are well-recognized, critical implications of
upwelling for coastal terrestrial ecosystems are not. The main hypothesis of
this study is that ocean-atmosphere-land interactions, mediated by coastal fog,
cause upwelling to drive one of the Earth's most productive terrestrial
ecosystems, coast redwood forests. The study further hypothesizes that learning
about climate change impacts to this iconic species can influence perceptions of
climate change. The future resilience of coast redwoods is now of critical
concern due to the detection of a decline in coastal fog that may be associated
with anthropogenic climate change and expanding urban heat islands. However,
this coastal ocean-atmosphere-land system has received relatively little
attention. This is largely due to the fact that until recently, earth system
models were not capable of simulating the coastal fog that links the component
systems, making it difficult to interpret historical observations or to project
climate change impacts on these integrated systems. Furthermore, fundamental
ecological measurements are obscured by the presence of fog, making it very
difficult to understand how coast redwoods will respond to changes in fog.
Understanding this coastal ocean-atmosphere-land system will not only provide
much needed information for coast redwood resilience, but will also establish a
foundation for future work on critical fog-mediated vulnerabilities to a range
of coastal terrestrial, riparian, and intertidal ecosystems, and human-affected
sectors including irrigated agriculture, wildfire management, public health, air
and ground traffic, tourism, and urban energy and water
consumption.&lt;br/&gt;In this project, an interdisciplinary team will leverage
recent advances in regional ocean-atmosphere-land modeling and laser
spectrometry to provide an unprecedented exploration of this coastal integrated
natural-human system. Activities to broaden the impacts of the project include
outreach to land managers and interpreters, interactions between modeling and
public outreach, participation in a climate change documentary, media outreach,
and interdisciplinary training of Hispanic Serving Institution undergraduates
and two postdoctoral scholars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this project
will be (1) a process-level understanding of the coastal fog-mediated
interactions between ocean-atmosphere circulation and coast redwood
ecophysiology, (2) projections of fog, coast redwood resilience, and upwelling
under anthropogenic scenarios of global greenhouse gas forcing and local urban
heat islands along with the ocean-atmosphere-land feedbacks to this forcing, and
(3) an understanding of how the projected vulnerabilities of this iconic coastal
species can influence human perceptions about climate change and climate-
friendly behaviors. The project will focus on three activities with essential
linkages across the team: (1) U.S. Pacific Coast simulations of ocean and
atmospheric circulation will be used to understand how the timing and strength
of upwelling interacts with the atmosphere and coastal land systems to produce
and maintain coastal fog (Samelson, Skyllingstad, de Szoeke, Oregon State Univ.;
O'Brien, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory). (2) Laser spectrometer
measurements of atmospheric carbonyl sulfide in coast redwood forests will
provide the unique capability of measuring primary productivity and
physiological regulation in the presence of fog (Campbell, UC Merced; Berry,
Carnegie Institution; Dawson, UC Berkeley; Seibt, UCLA). The resulting
ecological information will be used to develop regional simulations of coast
redwood physiology under current and projected fog regimes. (3) The new
scientific understanding of coast redwood resilience will form the foundation of
surveys measuring human attitudes, knowledge, values, place connections, and
current climate-related behaviors with regard to coast redwoods (Ardoin,
Stanford Univ.). These survey data, along with the ecological data from ongoing
research, will create a foundation for educational interventions that build on
people's current place relationships, understandings, and existing behaviors.