* 1853968
* Estimating Probabilities of Rare Events in Interacting Particle Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Amarjit Budhiraja, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2023
* USD 165,000.00

Estimation of probabilities of rare events is an important topic in many
different areas. For example, quantification of risk of extreme outcomes is of
central concern in many problems in finance, economics, environmental science,
geophysics, and engineering. The mathematical framework for studying such
problems is given by the theory of large deviations which is concerned with the
characterization of decay rate of probabilities of deviations of a system with
uncertainties from its nominal expected behavior. In the last twenty years a new
approach to the study of large deviations problems, that brings to bear
techniques from the theory of stochastic control, has become prominent. The goal
of this research is to develop a systematic framework based on stochastic
control ideas for an important and challenging class of large deviation problems
that arise in the study of interacting particle systems. Interacting particle
systems considered here are motivated by phenomena in Natural Sciences. Some
examples include models for chemotaxis of biological particles, reaction-
diffusion systems arising from ecological models, and crystal growth models from
chemistry. In addition to developing the mathematical machinery for providing
asymptotic bounds on decay rate of rare event probabilities, this work will
develop accelerated Monte-Carlo methods for estimating probabilities of interest
using methods of importance sampling that are inspired by a large deviation
analysis of the underlying systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will study four different families of particle systems: (A) Weakly interacting
diffusions with a small common noise; (B) Microscopic particle models for
Patlak-Keller-Segel equations; (C) Brownian particle systems for reaction-
diffusion equations; (D) Locally interacting jump-diffusions. Under topic (A),
the focus will be on large deviation asymptotics as the number of particles
becomes large and the intensity of the common noise becomes small. The goal is
to characterize different forms of large deviation behavior as the two
parameters approach limits at different relative rates. Patlak-Keller-Segal
equations in topic (B) are nonlinear non-local PDE that model active chemotaxis
of biological particles. Interacting diffusive particle systems that are fully
coupled with the evolution of the underlying chemical field have been used to
give a mesoscopic description of the phenomenon. Goal of the proposed research
here is to study large deviation problems aimed at understanding the long time
behavior of such particle systems. In particular, this work will study invariant
measure asymptotics and metastability behavior near a rest point. Under topic
(C), large deviations behavior of particle systems of reaction-diffusion type
will be studied. Of particular interest are annihilating Brownian particles
approximating reaction diffusion equations with a polynomial reaction term in
which the interaction becomes singular in the limit. Finally topic (D) is
concerned with locally interacting particle systems on discrete lattices with a
suitable temporal and spatial scaling. Such systems arise, for example, as
crystal growth models in chemistry. The goal is to develop stochastic control
methods for studying large deviation properties of such
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.