* 1853196
* Phase V: Development of the Core Fluid Dynamics Laboratory at UCLA
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2023
* Jonathan Aurnou, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 01/31/2023
* USD 702,610.00

Researchers in UCLA's SpinLab (http://spinlab.ess.ucla.edu/) will expand the
realm of laboratory-theoretical simulations of the magnetohydrodynamic processes
that generate the geomagnetic field within Earth's molten iron core. Further,
this project will provide training in laboratory experimentation, numerical and
theoretical modeling to three graduate students, at least two undergraduates and
one postdoctoral researcher. This funding will also allow for the expansion of
the PI's outreach efforts, most recently developing new do-it-yourself
experimental STEM tools that can be used in classrooms with students of all ages
(https://diynamics.github.io/).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will provide
fundamental laboratory data characterizing and quantifying multi-scale core-
style convective turbulence. These data are necessary to benchmark and validate
advanced theories of core flow and to build predictive models of turbulent
planetary dynamo generation in liquid metals. Thus, the results are useful to
models of Earth's core and other planetary dynamos, fluid turbulence, solar and
stellar convection zones, as well as oceanic and atmospheric dynamics. This
project is comprised of four main tasks. In Task 1, the investigators will
continue a series of rotating convection experiments in water that are
elucidating principles about turbulent core convective flows. These experiments
will be conducted using the recently completed, NSF-funded NoMag device that
exists in the PI's lab at UCLA, and that allows investigators to image and
quantify polar convective velocity, vorticity and thermal fields. For Task 2,
the team will continue a series of liquid metal convection experiments, enhanced
by closely-coupled numerical simulations. The data will allow the team to
quantify and diagnose the complex magnetohyrdrodynamics occurring in a simulated
polar parcel of Earth's core fluid. Task 3 will carry out coupled laboratory-
numerical simulations of rotating convection occurring at low latitudes in
Earth's core via the development of a new parabolic free-surface convection
device. Lastly, Task 4 will further the geoscience educational outreach efforts,
by testing and developing plans for a 1-meter diameter, affordable rotary table
that can be easily assembled and used for fluid dynamics demonstrations in all
STEAM settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.