* 1853954
* Flow and transport in the spinal canal
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Antonio Sanchez, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 06/30/2023
* USD 325,100.00

Intrathecal drug delivery (ITDD) is a medical procedure used for treatment of
some cancers, infections and pain, involving the delivery of a drug to the
central nervous system by direct injection into the cerebrospinal fluid via the
lumbar route. Although ITDD is currently used with satisfactory results, the
drug dispersion rate along the spinal canal is rather unpredictable and not
thoroughly understood. The principal aim of this project is to better understand
flow and transport in the spinal canal to help predict the dispersion of the
drug in ITDD procedures, accounting for the anatomy and physiology of the
individual patient as well as for the molecular characteristics and injection
rate of the drug. The project includes an important educational component
involving one Ph.D. student and several undergraduates from diverse backgrounds.
Besides, a series of outreach demonstrations entitled "Fluid flow in the central
nervous system" will be used to attract broader public awareness of the problem
and to promote STEM careers in the local school
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Improved understanding and quantification of the
flow and transport processes occurring in the spinal canal will be sought by
combining asymptotic methods based on the disparity of length and time scales
with numerical simulations of the fluid-structure interaction problem and
experimental measurements of oscillatory and bulk velocity in in-vitro control
experiments. The present investigation specifically aims at increasing knowledge
regarding (i) the roles of steady streaming, Stokes drift, and Taylor diffusion
in drug dispersion, (ii) the effects of geometry and elastic properties of the
spinal canal on the flow, (iii) the buoyancy-induced motion associated with
density differences between the drug and the cerebrospinal fluid, and (iv) the
interaction of local anatomical features with the time-dependent flow and its
effect on the transport rate. The results will help to unveil influences of
heart rate, stroke volume, posture, and spinal-canal compliance on the drug
dispersion rate. The fluid-mechanical description resulting from this analysis
will increase understanding of the normal physiological functions of
cerebrospinal fluid circulation and will have potential application in future
quantitative studies of intrathecal drug delivery, enabling patient-specific
predictions of drug dispersion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.