* 1853175
* SBIR Phase II:  Reconstructing Consistently Detailed City-Scale Environments From Incomplete 2D and 3D Data
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2019,04/30/2024
* Christopher Mitchell, Geopipe, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 04/30/2024
* USD 1,300,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is the ability to more completely understand
the real world through a perfect virtual copy. This SBIR Phase II project makes
it possible to create virtual reproductions of real cities that not only show
how the world looks, but reproduce every object and every detail perfectly,
allowing users to interact with it. These virtual copies make it possible to
quickly and effectively train soldiers and first responders, train autonomous
ground and flying vehicles, place new construction into a dense city, simulate
the effects of catastrophic weather, and explore imaginary scenarios through
games. Billions of dollars are already spent mapping and 3D modeling the real
world for these and many other applications, but these virtual cities are
created through painstaking manual methods that can take months to years, or
lack necessary information about what is in the world. This SBIR Phase II
project will make it possible to rapidly and automatically create detailed 3D
copies of any area of the real world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will advance the state of the art in
reconstructing highly detailed 3D models of the world for diverse commercial
applications. This project introduces new methods for turning raw multimodal
sensor data into semantic information describing the world and immersive,
interactive-ready 3D models. It will remove the time, money, and manual effort
necessary to create accurate 3D models of real world areas today, by using
computer intelligence instead of human effort to parse sensor data like
photographs and laser scans. The resulting 3D models and underlying semantic
information describing the world will be used directly in game engines and
simulation software, in analysis tools, in rendering software, and beyond. This
research will build on the associated Phase I project, first improving the
detail that can be identified and reproduced in virtual copies of the real
world, then showing readiness for commercialization with paying customers. The
result of the project will be a market-ready product for an initial market
segment, capable of accurately reproducing real cities in 3D models that
customers can readily use, as well as traction that demonstrates customer need
for the product.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.