* 1853953
* IRES Track 1:  Secure Crowdsensing for Improving Smart City Applications
* O/D,OISE
* 03/15/2019,02/29/2024
* Brent Lagesse, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 02/29/2024
* USD 299,030.00

This project will send 3 cohorts of 5 students per year for 10 weeks each to
conduct research at the University of Bamberg, Germany. The University of
Bamberg operates a Smart City Living Laboratory throughout the university and
the city of Bamberg, Germany that is able to collect information such as noise
levels, CO2 levels, and the number of people in a particular area from sensors
throughout the city. Smart cities collect information and process it to help
decision makers make better decisions with a fuller understanding of the complex
interactions of people and services in a city. Some of the information comes
from sources that are considered trustworthy such as CCTV cameras deployed by
city workers; however, these trustworthy sources are often expensive to set up
and maintain. Crowd sourcing the information provides a cheaper and often more
efficient way of obtaining information; however, since people can lie or
malicious software could lie on their behalf, this information is significantly
less trustworthy. &lt;br/&gt;Our research examines the interactions between all
of the entities in such a smart city environment and develops methods for
utilizing crowd sourced information while protecting the city from malicious
users and protects users from people who might spy on them through their data.
Researchers will be implementing and testing their work in the Living Lab
Bamberg in Germany to validate the effectiveness of our security systems. It is
expected that this work will result in safer, more intelligent smart cities with
the potential to improve energy efficiency, communication, transportation, and
public health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will address several scientific
challenges in the security and privacy of smart cities. The site at the
University of Bamberg was chosen due to the smart city living laboratory that
the university operates on both the campus and city. The researchers will
address the following three scientific challenges: &lt;br/&gt;i) Utilization of
data from untrusted sources is critical because many of the data sources in a
smart city are the smart phones of users who can intentionally manipulate data
or who might have malware on their phone that is strategically manipulating
data. Students will build defense mechanisms using a combination of game theory
and machine learning. &lt;br/&gt;ii) Privacy of users is critical to the
adoption of crowd sensing for use in a smart city and to prevent the abuse of
the system by users and administrators alike. Students will build privacy-
enhancing technologies that use realistically generated cover traffic to
obfuscate user data and cyber-physical correlation to enable privacy-preserving
audits of the data collected by the city. &lt;br/&gt;iii) Secure incentives help
to protect the deployers of tasks from malicious users that are seeking to
optimize their gain without contributing to the system. To ensure that malicious
users do not exploit the incentive system, students will create spatio-temporal
models of context information that detect if a user was actually at the location
at the time they reported they were when contributing
information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.