* 1853303
* Collaborative Research: Multiscale Modeling of Intraocular Pressure Dynamics and Its Role in Ocular Physiology and Pharmacology
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2020
* Alon Harris, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 04/30/2020
* USD 89,999.00

This project will develop quantitative methods to combat vision impairment,
which is one of the most impactful factors affecting quality of life.
Specifically, this project will study the pressure of the fluids filling the eye
globe, also called intraocular pressure, whose control is crucial to maintain a
proper visual function. Chronically high intraocular pressure is associated with
high risk of developing glaucoma, a progressive optic neuropathy characterized
by a loss of retinal ganglion cells and permanent vision loss. Glaucoma
constitutes one of the leading causes of irreversible blindness worldwide.
Despite the importance of maintaining healthy levels of intraocular pressure, to
date, the question of what is its optimal range for a given individual remains
unanswered. The variability in outcomes, side effects and hemodynamic impacts
following medications that lower intraocular pressure in glaucoma patients poses
an additional, and currently unresolved, challenge in preventing vision loss for
millions of individuals. The PIs will address this critical need by utilizing
the laws of physics to develop a virtual laboratory where the relationship
between intraocular pressure, medications, hemodynamics and ocular function can
be studied quantitatively, and the optimal target level for intraocular pressure
and the therapeutic strategy to achieve it can be theoretically estimated by
accounting for patient's specific conditions. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
development of a virtual laboratory to study ocular physiology and function
requires to account for multiple length scales simultaneously. Since the action
of medications occurs at the cellular level (approx. length scale: 100 microns),
even down to the ion exchangers across the membrane of the non-pigmented
epithelial cells within the ciliary processes (approx. length scale: 10 nm),
while the clinical assessments of ocular hemodynamics and function occur at the
whole organ level (approx. length scale: 3cm), it is necessary to adopt a
multiscale modeling approach. The main challenges of this project are: (i)
capturing the essential biophysical features of ocular physiology across length
scales that differ by 6 orders of magnitude, while maintaining the solution of
the overall model affordable; (ii) preserving the essential biophysical features
of ocular physiology when discretizing the multiscale problem in order to obtain
its approximate numerical solution; (iii) validating the model predictions with
a large and comprehensive clinical and experimental dataset. To best address
these challenges and successfully complete this project, the model development
is articulated into two specific aims: (Aim 1) Multiscale modeling of the
relationship between aqueous humor flow and medications for intraocular pressure
to theoretically investigate the hypotensive efficacy on patients presenting
different clinical conditions; (Aim2) Multiscale modeling of the relationship
between aqueous humor flow and ocular perfusion to theoretically investigate the
changes on ocular hemodynamics and function in patients presenting different
clinical conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.