* 1853055
* SBIR Phase II:  Online Game to Assess and Improve Behavioral Readiness and Social Emotional Skills  for Students in Kindergarten and First Grades
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2022
* James Thomas, Personalized Learning Games, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 03/31/2022
* USD 1,138,855.00

This SBIR Phase II project aims to create and test a game-based intelligent
tutoring system that both assesses and improves the behavioral readiness and
social emotional skills of Kindergarten and 1st grade students. Research has
shown that early intervention for children with social skill deficiencies is
critical for success in the classroom and success in life. Children from
vulnerable, underserved social niches are particularly likely to be 'less ready'
for school, including those who experience poverty, family instability, and
trauma, each of which disproportionately impact children from racial and ethnic
minority groups. The game being developed by this project empowers educators to
provide that much needed social emotional learning support for their young
students. First, it provides an affordable, feasible, and scaleable means for
identifying the social emotional needs of young students as they transition to
formal schooling. Second, it enables educators to quickly translate this
formative assessment data into personalized, digital intervention that can be
applied with K1 students on a much broader scale than is possible with
traditional, in-person services. And lastly, because this innovation is game-
based and fun, students are more likely to fully engage and fully benefit from
the embedded instruction. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
advance understanding of how an Intelligent Tutoring System (ITS) can be used
effectively to help educators provide social emotional instruction to all
students. Within academic domains such as science and mathematics, many
successful ITS implementations have employed learning models where answers to
problems and the knowledge being evaluated can be easily represented. However,
traditional ITS techniques have not been as effective in domains like social
emotional learning, where the connection between what a student does and what
the student knows is less well-defined. This project will develop several
significant innovations for ITS that apply to social and emotional learning, but
may also be useful in other, less well-defined learning domains. These
innovations are represented by our adaptive Student Model and Tutorial Manager
which collectively enhance student learning via personalization, pacing, and
engagement. As more student data is collected, the student model will become
increasingly accurate, leading to more intelligent choices from the tutorial
manager to better enhance the social tutoring of our innovation and thereby,
student learning. In addition to addressing significant societal and market
needs, research findings from this SBIR will be published to more broadly inform
the efforts of the ITS community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.