* 1853561
* Dynamics of Phytoplankton in Water Columns: Persistence, Competition, and Evolution
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Yuan Lou, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 06/30/2024
* USD 219,983.00

This project will develop models to predict how competition for light and
nutrients affect phytoplankton in lakes. Algae are microscopic organisms that
drift in the water columns of lakes and oceans. They form the foundation of the
aquatic food web and produce approximately 50% to 85% of the world's oxygen via
photosynthesis. Their population persistence is critical to ecosystem health.
However, harmful algal blooms are a serious problem in some bodies of water,
including Lake Erie. Blooms can be caused by the reversal of the competition
between toxin-producing algae and the non-toxic diatoms. In well-mixed
environments, cyanobacteria are competitively excluded by diatoms, but in poorly
mixed or stratified water the toxic cyanobacteria float upwards to form surface
scum and exclude diatoms. Hydrologic measures, such as altering the turbulent
mixing in lakes, can solve the problem under appropriate conditions. This
project will use mathematical models to understand the competition among
phytoplankton and help design more effective hydrologic control strategies.
Innovative mathematical analysis will be performed to quantify the effect of
various environmental processes in shaping the population dynamics of
phytoplankton. This project will provide research topics for PhD students and
undergraduate summer projects. The undergraduate mentorship will be leveraged
with the Summer Undergraduate Capstone Conference of the Mathematical
Biosciences Institute at Ohio State University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project aims to understand the effect of environmental drivers, including
spatial heterogeneity, non-uniform mixing, and light and nutrient availability,
in shaping the community structure of a diverse phytoplankton population. We
will develop phytoplankton population models of a single species, multiple
species, and a continuous spectrum of species to address four key biological
questions: (1) In eutrophic conditions nutrients are abundant, but light is
limited. How does water column stratification affect the persistence of a single
species? (2) Human activities have accelerated the eutrophication of many
freshwater lakes and coastal ecosystems, causing harmful algal blooms to emerge.
Can artificial mixing create a competitive reversal, allowing non-toxic diatoms
to competitively exclude the toxic algae? (3) Phytoplankton communities are
diverse and can be structured along various functional trade-offs. How do trade-
offs in light acquisition affect coexistence among phytoplankton species? (4)
How do nutrient dynamics influence phytoplankton competition in spatially
heterogeneous environments? For two-species competing in stratified water
columns, long-term dynamics will be classified by monotone dynamical systems
results. A significant methodological advance of this project is the game-
theoretical approach of using mutation-selection models. This approach captures
the surprising diversity of the phytoplankton by grouping various phytoplankton
species according to their functional traits. Finally, the effect of nutrient
dynamics will be addressed in a thin-layer limit, with emphasis on the
evolutionary stability of deep chlorophyll maxima. This project will further
understanding of population persistence, vertical distribution, and community
diversity of phytoplankton through mathematical modeling and
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.