* 1853505
* SBP:Collaborative Research: A Two-Part Project Examining Team Discrimination by Gender in STEM teams and a Way Forward
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Christina Lacerenza, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Songqi Liu
* 07/31/2023
* USD 119,852.00

Though gender issues are pervasive throughout STEM (i.e., science, technology,
engineering, and math) careers, representation of women is lowest in
engineering. A myriad of reasons for low female participation in engineering
have been investigated, such as pay and promotion opportunities and family-
related constraints. Attention has also been given to the role of workplace
discrimination, as women in STEM experience discrimination at higher rates than
women in non-STEM disciplines. However, few researchers have focused their
attention on how the day-to-day experiences of women in engineering might
facilitate or impede discriminatory behavior. While many of the existing studies
on workplace discrimination have focused on the individual or the organization,
we argue that teams play an overlooked role in women's experiences in
engineering. Taking a team-centric approach, we examine interpersonal
discrimination and its multi-level ripple impact on both individual and team
outcomes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The current project is designed to complete
three high-level objectives. Our first objective is to identify whether and how
engineering team experiences differ by gender, specifically in relation to team
discrimination. As a second objective, we will examine the effect team
discrimination has on engineering team outcomes (e.g., performance, creativity).
Finally, our third objective is to examine the impact team discrimination has on
individual-level outcomes and specifically the career trajectory of female
engineers. To effectively carry out the stated objectives, we will use
complementary methods to conduct two primary studies. We will begin with a
multilevel, longitudinal examination of discrimination in STEM teams,
specifically in relation to female team members. This first study will address
the concern regarding a lack of longitudinal, team-level data and provide
insight regarding an understudied phenomenon, team discrimination. We follow
with an experience sampling study examining team discrimination toward females
working within the STEM field and the effects of such occurrences throughout
their daily lives and long-term career aspirations and decisions. The
culmination of this program will provide a greater understanding of how team
experiences shape the career path for women in STEM, with the overall goal of
retaining women in STEM careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.