* 1853639
* Condensed-Phase Organic Photochemistry in Aerosol Particles and in Aerosol Liquid Water
* GEO,AGS
* 04/15/2019,03/31/2024
* Sergey Nizkorodov, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 03/31/2024
* USD 708,584.00

This project includes a number of laboratory experiments to study the fate of
small particles exposed to sunlight in the atmosphere. Exposure to sunlight can
cause chemical changes in the particles that reduces their atmospheric
lifetimes. This research will provide valuable information for predicting the
fate of aged organic particulate matter and is relevant to understanding the
health effects of fine particles in the atmosphere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objectives of this research are to: (1) systematically explore the dependence of
secondary organic aerosol (SOA) photodegradation rates on the type of SOA and on
the conditions of SOA formation; (2) investigate photochemistry of SOA in highly
concentrated solutions of inorganic electrolytes mimicking the conditions found
in aerosol liquid water; (3) investigate the relative importance of direct and
indirect photochemical processes in irradiated SOA; and (4) investigate
photodegradation and photosensitization processes in biomass-burning organic
aerosols.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of these experiments will be used to
model the effects of photochemical reactions occurring inside atmospheric
organic particles and inside cloud droplets containing dissolved organics on the
global atmospheric burden of organic aerosol. This effort will directly support
the training of at least two graduate students and at least six undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.