* 1853352
* Collaborative Research: Mathematical and Experimental Analysis of Competitive Ecological Models: Patches, Landscapes, Stage Structure, and Conditional Dispersal on the Boundary
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Ratnasingham Shivaji, University of North Carolina Greensboro
* Standard Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 07/31/2023
* USD 238,982.00

In our increasingly fragmented world, dispersal between habitat fragments is
essential for the long-term survival of a species. This project will integrate
mathematical modeling and experimental analysis of an insect commonly found in
stored grains to describe the effects of habitat fragmentation, conditional
dispersal (e.g. an organism?s decision to leave a fragment depends upon
competitor presence) and interspecific competition on population dynamics from
the patch level to the landscape level. Results from this project will answer
key ecological questions including: What effects do competitors have on the
emigration behavior of species at patch boundaries? How do relationships between
density and emigration affect regional population dynamics and competitor
coexistence? How does conditional dispersal affect competition-dispersal
tradeoffs that are thought to be a key to competitor coexistence? The project
will advance the analysis of mathematical models created to answer these
questions and better understand model dynamics. Finally, results from this study
will apply to conservation programs and habitat reserve design. Graduate and
undergraduate students will be trained through PI-hosted workshops and
mentorship of independent research projects. Project results will be
disseminated to both ecological and mathematical communities through peer-
reviewed journals, national and international conference talks, and a user-
friendly website. Additionally, an app that estimates key dispersal parameters
from field data will be created and made publicly available. This project is
funded jointly by the Division of Mathematical Sciences Mathematical Biology
program and the Division of Environmental Biology Population and Community
Ecology program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project will integrate
reaction-diffusion models, mathematical analysis, and experimental analysis to
explore the effects of habitat fragmentation, conditional dispersal and
interspecific competition on the population dynamics and species coexistence
from the patch to the landscape level. The PIs will use diffusive Lotka-Volterra
competition systems with nonlinear boundary conditions modeling density
dependent emigration (DDE) both at the patch and landscape levels and stage
structure. Ongoing research suggests that life-history traits, such as whether a
species is solitary or gregarious, can provide cues as to the form of DDE for
particular species. Knowledge of species' life histories, coupled with our
predictions regarding how different forms of DDE can affect species coexistence
and connectivity among habitat patches, can help determine whether existing
reserves are adequate for species coexistence. Dispersal experiments will be
performed using two Tribolium flour beetle species to parameterize the models
and compare model predictions about coexistence and stability with results from
long-term experiments. Innovative contributions will be made by providing (1)
experimental evidence that interspecific competitors affect within-patch
redistribution, boundary behavior and the strength and form of the DDE
relationship; (2) the first theoretical framework and empirical evidence for the
effects of conditional dispersal on the population dynamics and coexistence of
competing species in fragmented landscapes; and (3) novel analysis of elliptic
boundary value problems with nonlinear boundary
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.