* 1853060
* SBIR Phase II:  Wireless High Temperature Sensor for Real Time Monitoring of Power Generation Turbine Engines
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2019,12/31/2022
* Reamonn Soto, Sensatek Propulsion Technology, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2022
* USD 1,467,291.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is that unplanned outages of power generation
gas turbines are increasingly occurring which pose a risk of $1.6 billion to gas
turbine manufacturers across an average fleet of 500 annually on power services
contracts. Using these sensors to measure blade surface temperatures will
replace the significant cost of unplanned outages, by revealing when combustors
are over firing to enable operators to take corrective measures. According to
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, power generation gas turbines accounted
for 1.3 million tons of NOx and SOx emissions. NOx emissions are increased due
to erroneous combustor firing. This project would also lead to acceleration of
adoption for developmental engines owing to reduced cost and labor requirements
associated with measurement instrumentation installation. Also, this can be used
in monitoring harsh environment parameters in remotely inaccessible locations,
while providing insight to control systems increasing the efficiency of systems
in nuclear reactors and chemical processing plants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will develop a
polymer-derived ceramics (PDC) sensor system for gas turbine engine's blade
surface temperature measurement. Currently, no sensors exist that can survive
these harsh environments in-situ. This innovation combines unique, wireless,
passive, corrosion-resistant PDC-based resonators bonded directly on the blade
surface along with high temperature PDC-based antenna for operating in harsh
environments. The research objectives are to miniaturize &amp; optimize the
sensor utilizing different PDCs; fabrication &amp; validation of high
temperature antenna; characterization of PDC material properties,
microstructural changes, degradation of sensing performance, bonding mechanism
evaluation after long term exposure to high temperatures (~1000C) in a furnace
&amp; burner rig. The prototype, including integrated multiple sensors, high
temperature antenna &amp; user data interface, will be operated on a rotating
micro-turbine to demonstrate performance in actual operating
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.