* 1853068
* SBIR Phase II:  A Group Video Game Challenge for Integrated Applied Science Learning
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Lindsey Tropf, Immersed Games, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,444,730.00

This SBIR Phase II Project will produce a cooperative applied video game
challenge where students work together within an active, simulated environment
to collect and analyze data, construct explanations, then test and iterate
solutions to a problem. Only 22% of the United States? graduating high school
seniors are proficient in science. This is important due to the estimated 2.4
million unfilled jobs in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Math (STEM) in
the United States, to provide higher-paying STEM jobs to citizens, and promote a
scientifically literate citizenry. Recent research supports new approaches for
how to improve this scientific literacy, and states across the country are
adopting new science standards to support this effort. The outcome of this
project will support development of students' scientific literacy with a novel
approach which utilizes cooperative, interdisciplinary, problem-based learning
within a video game. Commercialization of this product will transform the
process of inquiry-based learning by putting the tools in the hands of student
scientists as they test their own solutions. The project supports the NSF's
mission by empowering students to develop strong science and engineering skills,
as well as supporting development of 21st century skills such as collaboration
and problem solving that are desired by employers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technology developed by this Phase II
project will produce a group problem-solving experience for up to five students
to analyze a problem and implement an engineering solution within a live
simulated environment, providing educators with a powerful curricula tool to
engage their students in the real problem-solving cycles a scientist would
engage in, within a feasible setting using the video game. The research goals
include creating a flexible content authoring tool that designers and educators
can use to generate their own unique scenarios and creating an easy-to-use
educator dashboard to accompany it. The content authoring and customization
options empower educators to reflect local context, student interest, and
student background knowledge, strategies which are essential for educators of
diverse populations currently underrepresented within STEM. The technology and
its dashboard will also serve as a powerful formative assessment tool, enabling
group assessment that is able to parse group and individual participation, and
is designed to promote balanced group problem solving. The result of this
research will create a uniquely flexible tool that will enable educators to
engage learners in deeper, contextual learning, encourage transfer of
information, cooperative learning, development of science and engineering skills
such as data literacy, and be utilized for assessment of these
skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.