* 1853212
* SBIR Phase II:  Helping Students Acquire 21st Century Skills Through Immersive Group STEM Simulations
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2019,01/31/2025
* Anthony Carr, INFINID LEARNING LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 01/31/2025
* USD 1,469,999.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project will contribute to the
introduction into the educational market of a product uniquely designed to help
educators prepare today's students for the challenges of tomorrow's workforce.
The ability to think critically and creatively, to communicate effectively, and
to solve problems in a collaborative, technology rich environment previously
defined 21st Century Skills. New research indicates that in addition to the need
for literacy, numeracy, and these advanced cognitive skills, students must also
be equipped with social and emotional skills. These social-emotional skills
range from self-awareness to empathy for others and from self-management to
leadership. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The demand for higher order skills
makes it more important than ever for school administrators and teachers to find
the answer for students who are disinterested and difficult to motivate,
especially in the areas of science and math. Students complain that they are
bored and do not see the purpose for what they are being taught; they desire
meaningful application for what they learn and the ability to direct their own
learning. Designed to address these needs, the proposed program offers students
a distinctly different learning experience. The immersive platform gives
students the ability to exercise autonomy and a new opportunity to interact and
work together. Important life skills come to the forefront as students begin to
understand how one's ability to negotiate interactions with others in socially,
ethically, and culturally appropriate ways is key to achieving one's
goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.