* 1853472
* A Workshop to Improve the Assessment of Professional Development in Technician Education
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2023
* Amy Gullickson, Edmonds Community College
* Standard Grant
* Connie Della-Piana
* 05/31/2023
* USD 190,099.00

The development of a well-qualified STEM-oriented technician workforce is
critical to the nation's continued economic competitiveness. A means for
developing this workforce is to provide professional development (PD)
opportunities to those who teach the technicians of the future. While
professional development opportunities flourish, an on-going challenge is
providing evidence that these types of activities make a difference in fostering
the growth of the knowledge, skills, and productive attitudes of students who
are pursuing technician careers in STEM fields. Building on a current system of
resources to improve the assessment of professional development activities, the
primary goal of the workshop and pre- and post-workshop activities is to refine
and test a set of professional development resources. Collectively, these
resources comprise the Formative Assessment Systems for Advanced Technological
Education (ATE) resources (FAS4ATE) toolkit. Testing of this toolkit involves
verification that the collection, analysis, and use of PD evaluation data are
feasible for all ATE projects and centers, and in turn improve the assessment
and reporting of student outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Drawing on current
literature and work on formative assessment and learning, the project will
revise and test the FAS4ATE toolkit for usability and scalability. The
combination of piloting the implementation of the toolkit with well-experienced
teams of principal investigators and evaluators with expert review of the
resources will investigate the underlying assumption that availability and
access to well-design resources to assess professional development will improve
the evaluation of PD activities and in turn lead to well documented and
evidence-based claims of the effect of PD on student outcomes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded by the Advanced Technological
Education program that focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-
technology fields that drive the nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.