* 1853259
* SBIR Phase II:  A Robust Indoor Localization System For Mobile Devices
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Patrick Lazik, Yodel Labs Inc
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 09/30/2023
* USD 734,023.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is to provide accurate indoor location services
to users via existing mobile electronic devices like smartphones and tablets.
This technology will bring many of the applications powered by GPS, like
navigation, tracking and location-based advertising to indoor markets. We
propose using a hybrid ultrasound and RF-based beaconing system to enable
sub-20cm location accuracy within large, GPS-denied environments. Our approach
is unique in that it is compatible with current smartphones by simply
downloading an app. The system uses an infrastructure comprised of beacons,
which can be powered through indoor solar energy-harvesting instead of requiring
expensive electrical wiring. Accurate indoor location-aware mobile applications
can enhance applications ranging from retail, healthcare and manufacturing, all
the way to building navigation, asset tracking and aiding the visually
impaired.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project aims to develop a robust
localization platform which can localize off-the-shelf devices like smartphones
and tablets as well as low-cost radio frequency (RF) tags to better than 20cm
accuracy in indoor locations that do not have access to GPS. Current indoor
localization technologies for smartphones often fall short in terms of accuracy,
especially in highly dynamic environments with obstructions. Our system utilizes
energy harvesting beacons with an array of speakers to transmit time-of-flight
ranging signals in the near-ultrasound spectrum. These signals can be recorded
and demodulated in software by commodity smartphones, while being inaudible to
humans. The research in this phase will aim to develop the methods and
technologies required to streamline installation to support large facilities
like airports and convention centers that would require tens to hundreds of
beacons. This involves the development of a mapping and commissioning system as
well as hardware beacon modules for integration of our technology into the
products of third parties (e.g. smart camera systems, building sensors, etc). We
will also integrate the ability to track tagged
assets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.