* 1853636
* Mathematical Modeling of Robust Spatiotemporal Dynamics in Epidermal Development
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Huijing Du, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 07/31/2023
* USD 179,198.00

The project will develop a new generation of multiscale and stochastic models
capable of integrating experimental data to study mouse epidermal development
that includes chemical regulation and mechanical aspects of the system in a
mechanistic, data-informed manner. Epidermal morphogenesis, which occurs during
the second half of embryogenesis, is the developmental process that generates a
skin permeability barrier essential for terrestrial survival. Defects with this
barrier are associated with common skin disorders such as atopic dermatitis.
Study of mechanisms that control epidermal development and differentiation is
therefore highly relevant to human health. Comprehensive knowledge about adult
epidermal homeostasis and regeneration, as well as adult epidermal stem cell
biology, has been accumulated for decades. However, embryonic development of the
epidermis, especially in the early period, still needs exploration. The overall
goal of this project is to help address this knowledge gap by developing
mathematical results and tools to unravel critical mechanisms underlying
epidermal development that are generally applicable to multiple organisms and
differentiation/developmental processes. The project will involve close multi-
disciplinary interactions among students and researchers in the fields of
biology, mathematics, statistics, and engineering cross colleges and
universities in Nebraska with a commitment to enhancing the recruitment and
support of female and underrepresented minority
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will investigate mechanical,
chemical, and gene regulatory processes in a comprehensive modeling platform to
understand how these processes influence epidermal development and its defects
that may lead to an improved understanding of skin and other epithelial systems
such as the tongue, esophagus, stomach, and the olfactory epithelium.
Interactions among three major biological scales will be investigated:
transcription factors within a cell, individual cells of different fates (or
different intracellular states), and the epidermis consisting of many cells and
diffusive regulatory molecules secreted from the cells. In order to do this, the
project will first develop a 3D spatial multiscale model based on a novel
anisotropic subcellular element method to account for structural aspects of the
epidermis for self-organization. The project will then use a hybrid model
consisting of a non-spatial cell lineage model with several cell stages and the
spatial model to investigate the coupling of the biochemical and dynamical
mechanisms of the organization with stochasticity that accounts for stochastic
gene regulation and the interplay between gene regulation and extracellular
signaling profile of the epidermis. Existing data where available will be used
to inform model development, and the results will identify experiments capable
of probing the mechanism responsible for robust epidermal organization. The
project will also develop a new unified computational toolkit for modeling and
simulating the interplay between discrete cells, biochemical signaling, gene
regulation, and continuum mechanics that will have broad applications. This
project is jointly funded by the Math Biology Program of the Division of
Mathematical Sciences (DMS) and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.