* 1853633
* Studies of the Maritime Atmospheric Boundary Layer during DYNAMO
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Richard Johnson, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 08/31/2023
* USD 626,639.00

The atmospheric boundary layer (ABL), typically the lowest kilometer or two of
the atmosphere, has an outsized influence on the development of deep convective
clouds over the tropical oceans. The role of the ABL in the development of the
Madden-Julian Oscillation (MJO), a large eastward moving region of convection
that forms over the Indian Ocean, was a primary focus of the 2011 Dynamics of
the MJO (DYNAMO) field campaign (see for example awards 1022899 and 1059899).
The campaign collected observations from four island stations and two ship
stations in the Central Indian Ocean. Work under this award uses the DYNAMO
observations to characterize the behavior of the tropical marine ABL and its
interactions with the underlying ocean. It also seeks to determine the extent to
which observations taken from the island stations are influenced by island
effects which do not represent the conditions over the surrounding ocean that
matter for the development of widespread convection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABL
properties to be examined include temperature, moisture, stability, winds, and
cloudiness, with a particular focus on the diurnal cycle of ABL depth. The
diurnal cycle is assessed from weather balloons launches that took place every
three hours during the intensive observing period of the campaign. The PI has
developed a method to determine the height of the ABL from the signal-to-noise
ratio of continuous observations from the wind profiler and Radio Acoustic
Sounding System (RASS) deployed on the islands and ships. The technique could
prove useful for filling in the gaps between balloon launches and verifying that
the balloon observations capture the full diurnal cycle of ABL depth.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Profiler and RASS data collected on the island of Diego
Garcia and the research vessel Revelle, at the same latitude and separated by 10
degrees longitude, are compared to detect island effects. Two of the islands
used for the campaign are atolls (the second is Gan Island in the Maldives),
which have minimal land area but surround lagoons with a relatively strong
diurnal temperature cycle which might influence ABL observations. Observations
taken from the Revelle and moorings deployed from the ship are used to
characterize air-sea interactions relevant to ABL development and subsequent
convection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work has societal value due to the many
ways in which the MJO affects weather and climate worldwide, including the
development of hurricanes in the Gulf of Mexico and extreme rainfall events in
California. The MJO presents a challenge to current weather prediction models,
and work performed here may lead to improved forecasts of the MJO and its
impacts. More specifically, the project generates forcing datasets that can be
used for model development. Products generated under this award are made openly
available to the research and operational communities through a website at the
National Center for Atmospheric Research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.