* 1853071
* SBIR Phase II:  Re-engineered skin bacteria as a novel topical drug delivery system
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2021
* Travis Whitfill, Azitra Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 03/31/2021
* USD 719,727.00

This SBIR Phase II project aims to develop a novel engineered microbiome as a
potential therapeutic for a rare skin disease called Netherton syndrome.
Netherton syndrome (NS) is a rare, severe skin disease with high mortality and
few treatment options. This proposal aims to develop a new therapeutic for this
disease, a microbe-based protein delivery system of LEKTI, the missing protein
responsible for NS symptoms. At the end of this project, a candidate live
biotherapeutic product candidate (LETKI-secreting strain of S. epidermidis) will
be nominated and the Company will have sufficient data with which to proceed
into formal preclinical studies and subsequent human testing. This proposed
product will have the potential to address thousands of patients in the U.S.,
and the broader proof-of-principle of this microbe-based technology offers
significant potential to treat millions of patients living with skin conditions.
This offers significant advances in innovation in addition to broad commercial
potential.

This project aims to develop a novel therapeutic candidate composed of an
engineered strain of S. epidermidis that secretes LEKTI protein to the skin for
the treatment of Netherton syndrome (NS). NS is a rare but severe autosomal
recessive disease that affects the skin, hair, and immune system. NS is caused
by mutations in in the SPINK5 gene encoding the serine protease inhibitor
lymphoepithelial Kazal-type related inhibitor (LEKTI), which contains 15 serine
protease inhibitory domains. The goal of this Phase II project is to demonstrate
a proof-of-concept therapeutic for NS: an engineered commensal microbe that
delivers discrete domains of LETKI to the skin. The proposed Phase II research
plan will establish critical criteria for nominating a potential live
biotherapeutic product (LBP) candidate composed LEKTI-secreting S. epidermidis.
This research will perform key activities in preclinical development of an LBP:
identify an optimal sequence of LEKTI; develop analytical methods for detecting
LEKTI secreted from an engineered strain of S. epidermidis; and develop
analytical methods for measuring biodistribution and adsorption of LEKTI
secreted by S. epidermidis in a human in vitro model.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.