* 1853937
* IRES: Track I: Insights into human evolution gained from genetic, morphological, and neuroscientific analyses at the Primate Research Institute of Kyoto University, Japan
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Richard Meindl, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 06/30/2024
* USD 298,686.00

This International Research Experiences for Students (IRES) Track I award will
provide 18 U.S. students with a rare and invaluable research opportunity at the
Primate Research Institute (PRI) of Kyoto University in Japan to conduct
research related to the use of nonhuman primate models to gain insight into
human evolutionary history. Modern humans are the sole remaining lineage of a
much larger radiation of bipedal apes that included multiple genera and a number
of species. Direct studies of human evolution, however, are severely limited by
an incomplete fossil record and the absence of a genetic record beyond modern
humans, Neanderthals, and Denisovans. Consequently, to gain insight into crucial
issues of human evolution, we must study living nonhuman primates. Humans are
unique in a variety of cognitive, behavioral, physiological, and social
characteristics. These variables also contribute to such things as feminized
canines, permanently enlarged mammary glands, relatively low sperm count and
motility in males, and susceptibility to diseases not documented in other
species, including schizophrenia and Alzheimer's disease. Comparative studies
that include nonhuman primates are pivotal for identifying the genetic,
neuroanatomical, and morphological features that define what it is to be human.
The Primate Research Institute (PRI) provides the ideal setting for
investigating these issues because it is arguably the most resource-rich primate
center in the world, and the research teams there conduct holistic studies of
human and nonhuman primates from mind, body, and molecular perspectives.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Kent State-Kyoto University IRES site will enable six
Kent State graduate students to travel to the PRI in each of the next three
summers (2020-2022) to conduct nine-week research projects under Japanese
mentors. This program will be a significant launchpad for the personal and
professional development of the students. They will develop basic language
competency in Japanese; they will gain an understanding of Japanese society,
especially scientific culture; they will build a network of international
collaborators very early in their careers; and they will gain increased mobility
and employability in a global labor market. The connections made by these
students will also serve to further strengthen ties with Japan, an important
political, economic, and scientific partner of the United States. More than half
of the student participants will be women, with a number from minority groups,
thus advancing societal goals of making the U.S. pool of researchers more
diverse and inclusive. Upon completion of this IRES program, a final report
describing intercultural successes and missteps, and how they were resolved,
will be prepared for the NSF and made available on the Kent State University
website. This report will help guide the development of similar U.S.-Japan
scientific collaborations in the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.