* 1853496
* RUI: Collaborative Research: What are the Mechanisms and Timescales of Contact Metamorphism in Long-lived Magmatic and Hydrothermal Systems?
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/2019,04/30/2024
* Michael Stearns, Utah Valley University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 04/30/2024
* USD 123,046.00

Researchers from Utah Valley University and University of Utah will reconstruct
the thermal history of a long-lived plutonic system to determine how pulsed
magmatism affects heat and mass transfer in the Earth's crust. Understanding the
movement of heat and mass in the Earth's crust directly improves the
understanding of other crustal systems such as geothermal systems, ore bodies,
and geological hazards associated with volcanism. Multiple mineral phases with
complementary strengths as geochronometers, together with multiple analytical
techniques, will be used to produce a high-fidelity temperature (T)-time (t)
record for the Alta-Little Cottonwood stock system, Utah, USA. In-situ
microanalytical techniques will be used to place analytical results (mineral
ages, chemistry) in textural and spatial context in order to connect these
analytical results to the geologic processes responsible for the evolution of
this magmatic-metamorphic system. The research outcomes could redefine our
understanding of both the magmatic and metamorphic processes in these systems
and in turn affect how we best utilize thermal and mineral resources and prepare
for volcanic hazards. This project will strengthen research at a primarily
undergraduate institution. In addition, a summer-school program will broaden
participation in Earth Science and disseminate scientific content to middle
school students in the context of the Utah Science Core curriculum.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will address fundamental questions of how
incremental pluton emplacement and evolving permeability structures govern the
temporal and spatial patterns of (hydro-) thermal metamorphism. Preliminary
petrochronology results indicate that hydrothermal alteration of the Alta stock
(AS), and possibly also growth of the contact aureole, occurred over ~10 Myr.
This project will reconcile the small size of the AS with the large areal extent
of its contact aureole (AA) and determine whether emplacement of the Little
Cottonwood Stock (LCS) instead drove protracted, episodic hydrothermal and
contact metamorphism in the adjacent AS and aureole. The researchers will apply
in situ (LASS-ICP-MS) and high precision (CA-TIMS) U-Pb dating of titanite,
zircon, and garnet in conjunction with thermal modeling to construct a robust
T-t history of the system. They will test whether 1) the AS was a conduit for
long-lived, episodic hydrothermal fluid-flow driven by emplacement of the LCS;
2) the hydrothermal system driven by emplacement of the LCS merely overprinted
the western portion of the AS; or 3) a younger intrusion is responsible for the
protracted hydrothermal systems in both stocks. The results of this project will
impact our understanding of the transfer, storage, and crystallization of
magmas, timescales of ore-body genesis, isotopic dating of major mineral phases,
the timescales of contact metamorphic reactions, heat and mass transfer in
orogens, and thermal modeling of magma and hydrothermal
conduits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.