* 1853114
* SBIR Phase II:  Development of a Stoichiometric, Direct-Injected, Soot-Free Engine for Heavy-Duty Applications
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2019,02/28/2023
* Julie Blumreiter, ClearFlame Engines, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 02/28/2023
* USD 1,396,629.00

Diesel engines remain critical to global economies, but are under threat from
increasingly-stringent emissions regulations. Many alternatives, like spark-
ignition and electric vehicles, sacrifice some of the performance or range
benefits of Diesel-style operation. This creates a market need for technologies
that can maintain Diesel engine performance while remaining decoupled from the
dirty emissions of Diesel fuel. This proposal centers on the development of the
?ClearFlame Combustion System? (CFCS): a novel combustion process that enables
Diesel-style engines to combust low-carbon alternative fuels like ethanol and
methanol without sacrificing the power possible with traditional Diesel
combustion. Further, the sootless nature of alternative fuels such as methanol
and ethanol obviates the need for a Diesel particulate filter, and enables
stoichiometric air-fuel ratios to eliminate the need for selective catalytic
reduction of NOx (smog). The engine technology has the potential to alter the
dynamics of any market dominated by Diesel engines (including heavy-duty
transportation, agriculture, rail, and power generation) and can be licensed to,
or jointly developed with, OEMs for simple integration into their existing
product lines. Phase I results have shown a 30% increase in engine torque at
increased efficiency, while engine-out soot emissions are more than 100x lower
than that of Diesel engines, falling under the 2010 EPA regulation limit without
aftertreatment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research
Phase II project will continue development of the CFCS. The Phase I results
showed that three critical CFCS subsystems?engine insulation, alcohol direct
injection, and a combustion chamber optimized for stoichiometric combustion with
exhaust gas load control?could be developed and integrated to achieve a
previously unattainable combination of strong performance and low emissions.
This Phase II effort will further advance these key components and demonstrate
the benefits of the CFCS on a commercial engine platform, using CFD modeling and
engine experiments to show the advantages of the CFCS compared to the Diesel
baseline. The goal is to show how the CFCS enables a multi-cylinder heavy-duty
engine to simultaneously improve power density by 30% at no loss of efficiency,
while also achieving sootless stoichiometric exhaust conditions that are
compatible with low-cost and highly-effective three-way catalysis (the same
system that enables gasoline and natural gas engines to be much cleaner than
Diesel). A Phase II prototype demonstration would realize a longtime industry
goal of integrating three-way catalysis with a Diesel-style engine, allowing
Diesel-style engines to achieve the emissions profile of the cleanest
alternatives (like natural gas).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.