* 1853794
* A multi-proxy approach to characterizing hurricane-derived deposits in coastal and inland environments
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2019,02/28/2023
* Kam-biu Liu, Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 02/28/2023
* USD 72,693.00

This project uses a multi-proxy approach to characterizing hurricane-derived
deposits in coastal and inland environments impacted, respectively, by
hurricane-related storm surge and river flooding processes. Hurricanes can
impact a region by causing storm surge flooding related deposition along the
coast as well as river flooding in inland areas due to heavy precipitation.
Description and analysis of hurricane-induced present-day coastal and inland
sediment deposits are vital for deciphering the origins of storm deposits and
understanding the relative contribution of a variety of sedimentary processes in
different environmental settings. By using multiple proxies, this study provides
accurate descriptions of the storm deposits generated by a recent intense
hurricane in both the coastal and inland environments. Results from this study
provide critical information for identifying ancient storm deposits in the
geological record, which advances the study of past hurricane activity in the
context of environmental variability at timescales of centuries and millennia.
From this analysis of hurricane impacts in deeper time societal benefits are
derived because long-term records of hurricane activity are vital for accurate
risk assessment for present and future coastal communities. The project also
provides educational and professional development opportunities for students and
faculty at a minority-serving institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of
this project is to assess key coastal and terrestrial environments along the
path of a recent hurricane, Hurricane Maria in 2017, and to identify and
characterize its coastal storm surge and inland river flood deposits. This
research identifies prominent hurricane-induced sediment deposition in coastal
and interior environments that sheds light on the severity and geographical
variation of storm impacts in different geomorphological settings, thus offering
a modern analog that assists the search for the evidence of ancient hurricanes
in the geological record. Short cores to be collected from a few coastal lagoons
and inland wetlands will be analyzed chronologically (using Pb-210 and Cs-137
radioisotopes), sedimentologically (using loss-on-ignition and grain-size
analyses), geochemically (using X-ray fluorescence analysis), and
micropaleontologically (using foraminifera and palynological analyses) to
identify and characterize the Hurricane Maria deposits. Chemical elemental
ratios (such as Cl/Br and Ca/Fe) and biological proxies (especially palynomorphs
and foraminifera) will be used to differentiate the effects of freshwater
flooding versus saltwater intrusion that represent two different types of
environmental impacts. Although this research project will focus on Hurricane
Maria related deposits in Puerto Rico, the research will provide new insights
and approaches for identifying the coastal and inland environmental impacts of
other intense storms in the continental U.S., which helps society better prepare
for these extreme events in the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.