* 1853106
* SBIR Phase II:  Bi-functional Surfactants Platform from Biomass-Derived Feedstocks
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2019,03/31/2023
* Christoph Krumm, Sironix Renewables
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 03/31/2023
* USD 773,522.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research Phase II project is to reduce the cost of formulating laundry
detergents by 30-50% through the development of a single detergent chemical that
replaces the need for numerous chemicals in existing detergent formulations.
Commercialization of the proposed dual-function detergent molecule eliminates
the need for chemicals commonly used to maintain the function in hard water
conditions. Reduction of the amount and number of chemicals needed in a
detergent formulation will enable production of 25% more concentrated detergent
products, reducing packaging costs and enabling easier formulation of single-
dose tablets. The technology offsets the carbon footprint of detergent chemical
production by using plant-based starting materials instead of the current
petroleum-based products, which currently dominate the industry. Additionally,
reduction in the amount of chemicals used in detergents reduces environmental
impact to water resources and wildlife. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase
II proposes to further develop a bi-functional surfactant chemical for laundry
detergent applications, including (1) identification of a best performing
surfactant for commercialization, (2) development of a scaled synthesis process
using a high-throughput automated reactor system, and (3) demonstration of the
performance of the material in laundry detergent formulations and measure the
cleaning performance of generated formulations. The technology will reduce the
cost of laundry detergent formulations by eliminating the need for chelating
agents, which are used to mitigate the negative effects of hard water common in
cleaning applications. The bi-functional surfactant molecules take the role of
both a surfactant and a chelating agent, thereby enabling more concentrated
detergents, especially for formulators of plant-based, environmentally-friendly
detergents. The technical objectives direct development of the new detergent
molecules through iterative design and testing of detergent structures,
resulting in identification of a first to market product, as well as reaction
engineering and optimization to direct efficient design of the process
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.