* 1853006
* From Cones to Clusters: Evolution of a Monogenetic Volcanic Field
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Elisabeth Widom, Miami University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 03/31/2024
* USD 305,000.00

Monogenetic volcanoes, those that erupt only once, are the most common
expression of magmatism on the Earth's surface, and they are found in every
tectonic setting, yet key aspects of the behavior and evolution of monogenetic
volcanic systems remain poorly understood. Understanding the processes that
govern evolution of monogenetic volcanoes, and the time scales over which these
processes operate, is critical for hazard and risk assessment in active
monogenetic volcanic fields. In particular, it is important to understand
whether magmas ascend rapidly from the mantle to the surface, or instead undergo
prolonged residence in the shallow crust, as this will influence the nature and
timing of potential eruptive precursors that might be monitored, including
seismicity, ground deformation, hydrologic changes, or gas emission. This
project will provide key constraints on the sources, processes, and time scales
of magma ascent and storage leading to eruption of monogenetic volcanoes in the
Trans-Mexican Volcanic Belt - the largest monogenetic volcanic field in the
world - and will provide an important framework for better understanding the
behavior of monogenetic volcanic fields globally. The project will support the
thesis work of a female graduate student in a STEM field where females are
underrepresented. Two female high school students will be recruited to
participate via internships. A colleague of Mexican heritage is co-PI an will
work directly mentoring students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
investigate recent, individual monogenetic cones and cone clusters linked
closely in space and time, to address the processes and timescales governing
magma evolution and temporal-compositional variations in the
Michoac?n-Guanajuato Volcanic Field (MGVF) in the central Trans-Mexican Volcanic
Belt. Primary objectives of the project include assessing the relative
importance of mantle versus crustal control on magmatism producing MGVF
monogenetic clusters, and evaluating the similarities and differences that lead
to formation of successive individual cinder cones versus small shield
volcanoes. Specific questions include: 1) are multiple magma sources tapped in
single eruptions?; 2) are the same magmas tapped in successive eruptions?; 3)
are magmas stored at crustal levels, and if so, for how long?; 4) do different
clusters exhibit common compositional progressions?; and 5) how do the processes
and timescales of small shield volcano evolution compare to those of cinder
cones? Target study areas include Late Pleistocene and Holocene cinder cone
clusters in the Tac?mbaro, Tanc?taro and Zacapu areas, and the Holocene El
Metate small shield volcano, all of which have recently been mapped in detail
and dated. These questions will be addressed through geochemical and isotopic
analysis at the mineral and whole-rock scales. The project will support the
research of a female graduate student and several undergraduate students,
including collaboration with a minority-recruiting organization on campus. Two
female high school students will be recruited to participate in a STEM outreach
effort. A colleague of Mexican heritage is co-PI an will work directly mentoring
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.