* 1853662
* Collaborative Research: Seismic Imaging of Mid-Mantle Reflectors Associated with Geodynamical Processes and Compositional Heterogeneity
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2019,11/30/2023
* Lauren Waszek, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 11/30/2023
* USD 279,688.00

The Earth is composed of several distinct layers: the crust at the surface, the
mantle which comprises the bulk of our planet, and the metallic core at its
center. Heat released from the core drives slow convection of the hot mantle.
This process results in the movement of tectonic plates, produces volcanism, and
reshapes continents. Recent geophysical studies have suggested that the pattern
of convection changes in the mid-mantle, from 800-1300 km depth. The upwelling
plumes and subducting slabs which dominate mantle convection appear in seismic
tomography images to become deflected in the mid-mantle. It is unknown whether
this is due to composition or viscosity. The upper mantle is known to have
similar seismic discontinuities that are thought to be caused by variations in
chemistry or mineral phase changes as the mantle gets hotter and pressure
increases with depth. The goal of this research is to use new methods to
understand the large reflectors in the mid-mantle by developing comprehensive
maps of the small-scale seismic properties, and comparing them to characteristic
signatures for different types of geodynamic flow domains, such as known slab or
upwelling regions. This project will support both graduate and undergraduate
student research. The project will foster new international collaborations
between New Mexico State University, a Hispanic-serving institution, and
universities in Europe and Australia. The work will benefit various other
disciplines across the wider Earth Sciences community, and promote Geophysics to
minority students in New Mexico. This project is jointly funded by the
Geophysics Program, and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research (EPSCoR). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will determine the varied
origins of mid-mantle seismic reflectors, ascertain their spatial relationship
to flow patterns in the mantle, such as downwelling cold slabs or upwelling
plumes, and investigate potential formative processes and compositional origins.
The work will generate comprehensive regional-scale seismic maps of reflectors
from 800-1300 km depth in the mantle. Novel and established analytical methods
will be applied to compile and evaluate complementary datasets (SS and PP
precursors; ScS and PcP reverberations; receiver functions), to constrain
reflector geometry, apparent impedance contrast, sharpness, and heterogeneity
across multiple length-scales of lateral resolution (100-1,000 km). These
observables will be tested and linked via forward modelling of synthetic
seismograms. Results will be analyzed in the context of global seismic
tomography and geodynamical models, using seismic velocity as a proxy for
geodynamical flow. This research will establish the characteristic signatures of
mid-mantle reflectors for several well-sampled velocity domains representative
of diverse geodynamical settings, incorporating statistical correlations and
clustering analysis. Reflector properties from each domain type will be assessed
within the framework of global geodynamical numerical simulations, and testing
against the influence of different scenarios of convection history.
Subsequently, this will inform regarding likely formative mechanisms and
thermochemical origins for the reflectors. Synthetic seismic data generated from
different geodynamical models will provide a direct comparison to seismic
observations. This multidisciplinary approach will inform regarding the
influence of seismic transitions on mantle convection and vice versa and
elucidate the role of flow for generating physical structures. The project will
help to map the seismic signatures of global mid-mantle circulation,
characterize thermochemical exchange between lower and upper mantle, and provide
insight into the history and style of mantle mixing and dynamics. The results
will provide valuable inputs for the next generation of geodynamical simulations
and mineral physics studies in the mantle, and have wide implications ranging
from the mapping of primordial unmixed mantle reservoirs, to tracing the deep
origins of continental volcanism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.