* 1853355
* Collaborative Research: Hominin diversity, paleobiology, and behavior at the terminal Pliocene
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2019,05/31/2021
* David Braun, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 05/31/2021
* USD 82,762.00

The period of time between 2.5 to 3.0 million years ago (Ma) has long been
considered one of the most critical in hominin evolution. At 3.0 Ma, multiple
species of Australopithecus are represented in the fossil record across eastern
and southern Africa. By 2.5 Ma, Australopithecus mostly died out, and in its
place evolved two separate lineages with very different adaptations to the
environment. One lineage is our own, Homo, characterized by a pattern of
increased brain size and dependence on material culture that has persisted over
the last several million years. The other lineage, Paranthropus, lasted over 1
million years, and was represented by three species with unique dental and
facial adaptations for potentially eating tough or hard foods. Despite the
obvious importance of this interval, it is poorly represented in the fossil
record and few fossil specimens have been found that can shed light on the
causes and patterns of the origins of these lineages. The Ledi-Geraru Research
Project works in a fossiliferous region that includes this important time
interval and aims to illuminate the issues relevant to the extinction of
Australopithecus and the emergence of Homo and Paranthropus. The investigators
will use the results of this work in public science outreach about the hominin
lineage, including the critical relationship between environmental variance and
hominin adaptations. The project also will foster international collaborations
and student training. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In the last decade, the
investigators have identified fossiliferous sediments in the Afar region of
Ethiopia that range from 2.9 to 2.4 Ma before present. Finds from these
sediments include a 2.8 million year old mandible that is the earliest known
representative of the genus Homo, and additional fossils suggesting that there
were multiple hominin species existing at roughly the same time in the region.
In addition, several localities in the Ledi-Geraru Research Project area show
evidence that hominins were using stone tools to gain access to animal tissues
and resources. Continued paleoanthropological research will be conducted at
Ledi-Geraru Project sites to recover additional fossil and archaeological
materials and better understand relationships between hominin behaviors and
environmental contexts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.