* 1853853
* Collaborative Research: NSFGEO-NERC: Aeolian dust responses to regional ecosystem change
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/2019,01/31/2023
* Brandon Edwards, New Mexico State University
* Continuing Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 01/31/2023
* USD 335,174.00

Wind erosion and dust emissions from global drylands impact ecosystem health,
agricultural production and food security, human health and climate. Despite
extensive study of how wind erosion and dust emission occur, and how they affect
Earth's atmosphere and human populations, little is known about where, when, and
why the processes take place across different ecosystems, or how changes to
Earth's ecosystems influence their rates at different locations over time.
Understanding these interactions is important for land managers to identify
where wind erosion and blowing dust may be a problem and act to sustainably
manage agriculture and ecosystems over the long term. This research will examine
how different types of ecosystem change occurring across North America due to
human disturbances, drought, fire and invasive plant species impact rates of
wind erosion and dust emission. The research will promote international
collaboration among researchers in the United States and United Kingdom as part
of a NSF/GEO-UK NERC project. It will produce new information that supports
management of North American drylands and will generate educational materials
for K-12 students and provide scientific training to underrepresented
undergraduate and graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will
establish wind erosion dust emission responses to regional ecosystem changes
across North America due to three disturbance regimes: 1) numerous discrete,
small scale (&lt;10 ha), abrupt ecosystem changes associated with energy (oil
and gas) development; 2) discrete, large scale (&gt;1000 ha), abrupt ecosystem
change associated with fire and ecological feedbacks that promote invasive
grasses and altered fire-wind erosion regimes; and 3) diffuse, large scale
(&gt;1000 ha), pervasive ecosystem changes associated with sustained shrub
invasion of desert grasslands. New aeolian (wind-driven) sediment transport
models driven by remote-sensing and broad-scale standardized ecological datasets
will be used to resolve the impacts of the regional ecosystem changes on wind
erosion and dust emission. The models will be calibrated using data from US
National Wind Erosion Research Network sites, then applied to explore patterns
of dust emission across North America. National ecological datasets will be used
to analyze the drivers and interpret dust emission responses to regional
ecosystem changes across the disturbance regimes. The research will
significantly improve our understanding of the coupling between the dust cycle
and anthropogenic drivers of ecosystem change. This project is jointly funded by
the Geomorphology and Land-use Dynamics Program, the Ecosystem Science Program,
and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.