* 1853673
* Incorporating the Effects of Synaptic Ensheathment in Neuronal Networks: A Multi-scale Investigation
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Alla Borisyuk, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 06/30/2024
* USD 160,000.00

This project will develop a mathematical framework to study the role of synapse
wrapping by astrocytes, a type of brain cells, with the aim of efficient and
accurate astrocyte representation in neuronal networks. Astrocytes have multiple
arms, called processes, and are linked with important brain functions but their
involvement is not well-understood. Often astrocytes wrap processes around
synapses, the contacts between neurons. The number of wrapped synapses and
wrapping tightness changes in diseases such as epilepsy. The role of such
differences is not yet understood and will be investigated in this project. The
problem is challenging and multi-scale: astrocyte wrapping acts at the scale of
individual, but it affects neuronal networks involving thousands of neurons. The
effects of wrapping will first be studied at the individual synapse level by
developing mathematical theory and detailed biological models. Next, the
essential features of connections altered by wrapping will be extracted and
included in neuronal network models. The effective network-level representation
of astrocyte ensheathment will be as simple as possible to aid implementation in
a variety of networks and minimize computing costs, but will preserve the
essential biological features derived from detailed models. The resulting hybrid
networks will reveal the effects of ensheathment conditions corresponding to
different brain areas and disease states. The project will involve graduate and
undergraduate trainees and will be disseminated through research presentations,
training courses, K-12 and public presentations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Synaptic
ensheathment is ubiquitous in the brain but not ordinarily included in models as
a property of network structure. Thus, this study explores a novel aspect of a
more general problem of network structure-function relationship, central in
modern neuroscience. Expected findings will contribute to understanding the
complex interactions between the two major brain cell types. To this end,
computational and mathematical analysis will be used to study the role of
synaptic ensheathment at different spatial and temporal scales. First, the
influence of degree of synaptic ensheathment on synaptic function will be
investigated at the spatiotemporal scale of molecules and receptors to determine
how ensheathment affects the (random) number of molecules reaching the post-
synaptic and astrocytic receptors as a function of time, the resulting astrocyte
calcium response, and excitability of the postsynaptic cell. This will involve
extending mathematical theories of diffusion with switching boundaries to
spatially-extended initial conditions and developing a method to quantify roles
of individual parameters in controlling the system behavior. These detailed,
biologically-realistic studies will inform how synaptic and post-synaptic
properties are determined by the level of ensheathment. Next, in an excitatory-
inhibitory network, each synapse will be endowed with its own ensheathment
parameters and the resulting firing rate and synchronization properties will be
determined based on the distribution of ensheathment properties. This will be
done both in simulations and by extending network activity coherence measures to
include synaptic ensheathment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.