* 1853458
* University of Arkansas Spring Lecture Series in the Mathematical Sciences 2019 and 2020
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/2019,05/31/2022
* Giovanni Petris, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 05/31/2022
* USD 9,956.00

The University of Arkansas Spring Lecture Series 2019 and 2020 will be held in
Fayetteville, AR, on April 18-20, 2019 and April 16-18, 2020, on the topics of
"Bayesian Analysis for Multivariate Dynamic Systems" and "Discrete Random
Structures and Prediction in Bayesian Nonparametrics," respectively. The common
theme of the two Lecture Series is how to harness the power of data using
complex models within the flexible paradigm of Bayesian statistical inference.
In each Lecture Series, a prominent researcher in the field will give five
lectures on the topic of the conference, starting with an introductory one and
reaching the boundaries of current research. Additionally, ten leading figures
in the area covered by the conference will give one-hour research presentations,
and there will be sessions devoted to contributed talks and poster
presentations. Graduate students, recent PhDs, and new researchers are supported
by this award. To facilitate the transition of graduate students to the advanced
research topics that will be treated in the lectures, there will be an
introductory workshop, specifically aimed at them, in the afternoon of the day
before the conference begins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 2019 conference will
focus on Bayesian approaches to modeling and analysis of high-dimensional
multivariate time series with a broad purview over problems of statistical
analysis, structure assessment, monitoring and forecasting. Emphasis will be
given on discussion of recent advances in state-space models anchored on
instantiations of the decouple/recouple concept and its implied strategies that
provide a powerful platform for scaling coherent statistical analysis to
increasingly complex dynamic systems. State-of-the-art Bayesian modeling
approaches based on this concept, as well as their broad range of applications
in many different areas including financial and commercial forecasting, socio-
economic, engineering and natural sciences will be covered in the lectures. The
2020 conference will give an overview of recent developments in Bayesian
nonparametrics, specifically focusing on discrete random structures that are key
tools for many modern inferential goals, such as topic modeling, change-point
analyses or meta-analysis. Special attention will be given to the most promising
research directions such as partial exchangeability and dependent nonparametric
priors, spanning state-of-the-art tools in this area. The attendees will benefit
from ample opportunities to forge and foster collaborations and exchange of
ideas as well as exposure to open research problems in methodological and cross-
disciplinary domains. More details on these conferences are available at
https://fulbright.uark.edu/departments/math/research/spring-lecture-
series/index.php&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.