* 1853095
* SBIR Phase II:  Post-Quantum Cryptography in Resource-Constrained Devices
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2019,02/28/2023
* Brian Koziel, PQSecure Technologies, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 02/28/2023
* USD 948,040.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is to deliver state of the art cryptography and
cybersecurity solutions to Internet of Things (IoTs) and embedded device
designers, enterprise hardware and software vendors, and government contractors
against the attack of classical and quantum computers. It has been widely
accepted that quantum computers will have the ability to solve complex problems,
the same complex problems many security algorithms are based on, exponentially
faster than current computers. Even though no quantum computer with serious
computing power has yet been built, large scale quantum computers are expected
to become a reality within the next decade. We believe it is necessary to plan
for the future as it takes years to change cryptosystem deployments due to
network effects. This project plans to implement quantum-safe security solutions
that will require the integration of quantum-safe software and/or hardware
cryptographic solutions on resource-constrained devices used in embedded
systems. As the landscape of connected devices changes how the world interacts,
the dependence on these systems increases, increasing the possibility of
exploiting security vulnerabilities. This project will expand the knowledge of
efficient implementations of quantum-safe security solutions, of which little is
currently known. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research
(SBIR) Phase II project will design, develop, and implement cryptographic
algorithms that are suitable for small and resource-constrained devices
employing hard and complex mathematical assumptions known to be classical- and
quantum-safe. Long-term and lightweight security are two main parameters that
need to be considered while deploying quantum-safe cryptographic algorithms in
resource-constrained devices. Devices being manufactured today may still be
around when quantum computers become available and thus need to be secure
against them. We plan to employ a special class of quantum-safe algorithms based
on maps on elliptic curves along with agile implementations of cryptographic
coprocessors to achieve the required performance and security. Cryptosystems
based on these maps are known to provide the smallest possible key sizes and
their security level is determined by a single, simple parameter in comparison
with other quantum-safe candidates. The hardware designs are taken through VLSI
design flow to realize the integrated circuits that are evaluated for
energy/power, area/performance, and security including side-channel analysis.
The project will generate new insights and results about how to be safe and
secure in the quantum era. This project will conclude with hardware and software
implementations and test chip prototypes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.