* 1853541
* Untangling the Energetics and Dynamics of Reactions of Ground State Silylidyne Radicals with Mononuclear Main Group Hydrides
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Ralf Kaiser, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 06/30/2023
* USD 520,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure Dynamics and Mechanism (CSDM-A)
program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Ralf I. Kaiser of the University of
Hawaii at Manoa is exploring chemical reactions between a simple molecule
containing one silicon and one hydrogen atom (SiH, formal name "silylidyne")
with other molecules such as water (H2O), hydrogen sulfide (H2S) and ammonia
(NH3). Similar reactions between simple carbon molecules and H2O, H2S and NH3
are well-studied, but little is known about the corresponding silicon reactions.
The chemistry of carbon and silicon are similar in many ways, even to the point
that some scientists have asked the question, "why is life on Earth based on the
element carbon, and not silicon?" Professor Kaiser's research is exploring the
differences in chemical reactivity of molecules containing silicon and carbon,
and is providing insights into chemical reactions in general. This research is
also broad implications and directly contributes to an ongoing effort by
astrochemists and astrobiologists to connect the chemistry of space to the birth
of stars, the formation of planets, and the evolution of life. More broadly,
this project impacts society through the dissemination of its research results,
through outreach activities to researchers, college students, and high school
teachers via interdisciplinary symposia, by broadening the participation of
underrepresented minorities, and by relaying the project's latest breakthroughs
directly to educators enabling them to incorporate research activities into
classroom curricula.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By conducting state-of-the-art crossed
molecular beam experiments of ground state silylidyne radicals (SiH) with
prototype mononuclear main group (IV - VI) hydrides and combining these results
with ab initio and quasi-classical trajectory (QCT) calculations in
collaboration with Prof. Martin Head-Gordon (UC Berkeley), the proposed
investigations explore the hitherto elusive chemical dynamics of silicon-bearing
systems and untangle the formation of exotic dinuclear silicon-carrying
molecules, of which many have only been predicted to exist theoretically. The
project is advancing the fundamental understanding of the chemical bonding of
silicon-based molecules, transform the knowledge of the unimolecular
decomposition of chemically activated silicon-bearing reactive intermediates and
evaluate the processes which control them, establish predictive concepts of non-
adiabatic reaction dynamics in silicon-bearing molecular systems, and illuminate
the perception of isovalency on the molecular level by comparing the reaction
dynamics of the silylidyne radical (SiH) with those of the isovalent methylidyne
(CH) systems. Participating graduate and undergraduate students are being
trained in cutting-edge laboratory techniques (reactive scattering experiments,
ultra-high vacuum setups, laser techniques) along with data analysis and
dissemination of their research results in peer-reviewed journals. The PI's
group also plans an annual one-week National Summer Teacher Workshop, aimed at
teachers from local and mainland high schools, that emphasizes hands-on
laboratory activities in astrochemistry and how the results from fundamental
research in gas phase chemistry (reaction mechanisms, chemical dynamics) are
applied to better understand the chemistry occurring in the solar system
(comets, meteorites, planets and moons) and interstellar
medium.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.