* 1853637
* Examining Atmospheric and Soil Contamination in Urban Community Gardens
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2019,02/29/2024
* Salvatore Engel-Di Mauro, SUNY College at New Paltz
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 02/29/2024
* USD 99,554.00

This project examines the spatial variability of and degree to which atmospheric
deposition and/or trace elements in the soil such as arsenic, lead, and others,
contaminate soils and vegetables grown in urban community gardens (UCGs). This
is of concern because of the potential public health consequences. To date
issues of air pollution and soil contamination in UCGs have been understudied,
yet UCGs proliferate, and have been lauded as a means of addressing questions of
food access and urban sustainability. This investigation advances the
understanding of human-environmental interactions and urban political ecology
theory as the relationship between air pollution, soils, and gardening in cities
needs to be critically evaluated for it to have the positive outcomes generally
associated with it. If airborne or soil trace element sources are significant in
UCG contamination, then there are potential repercussions in scholarship,
policy, and the promotion of urban gardens. As well as generating new knowledge
with public health ramifications about the degree to which there is atmospheric
and soil contamination in UCGs, and the contamination pathways, the project
includes educational and training opportunities for gardeners, especially
participants from under-represented groups. The research also broadens scholarly
diversity in urban garden contamination research, and derives societal benefits
in raising awareness constructively, spreading effective preventive strategies,
and providing data typically beyond gardeners' reach. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project's aim is to evaluate the importance of bulk atmospheric deposition
compared to other proximate contaminant sources, trace elements in the soil
(arsenic, cadmium, mercury, nickel, and lead) and gardening inputs, in urban
community gardens. The project systematically assesses the role of atmospheric
deposition in relation to trace element contamination in urban community
gardens. The investigation takes place in a sample of UCGs in New York City,
where the PIs will conduct archival research about the site of each of the UCGs
to develop a land-use history. In tandem they will conduct soil surveys to
assess the spatial variability of trace element and determine representative
soil and crop sampling points. Gardening inputs, vegetables, and soils will be
sampled and analyzed for trace element concentrations. Soils will be sampled at
multiple depths and analyzed for variables affecting trace element mobility.
Part of the vegetables sampled will be grown under row cover to discern
variables other than atmospheric deposition. Frisbee-type funnel-bottle bulk
collectors will be set up and sampled monthly for a year to gather atmospheric
influx data which will be compared to city air quality information. Findings are
expected to be transferable to UCGs in other large cities with manufacturing
histories and with decades of reliance on fossil-fuel based transport. The
techniques developed through this project are also generally applicable to rural
areas and small cities. Therefore, although this research project will focus on
atmospheric deposition in urban community gardens, the research will provide new
insights and approaches for dealing with food production and contamination
problems in urban areas in the United States and many other
countries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.