* 1853056
* EAGER: Analysis of the Depositional Fabric and Deformation Characteristics of Sands Using 3-D Computed X-Ray Tomography and DEM Simulation
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/15/2018,10/31/2021
* Nicholas Sitar, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 10/31/2021
* USD 299,812.00

Understanding the behavior of sands under different loading conditions is an
important aspect of being able to design foundations for all types of
structures. One of the great challenges is obtaining an accurate understanding
of how the way the sands were deposited affects their properties. Thus, the
objective of this EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) project
is an international cooperative effort to evaluate the use of computed X-ray
tomography to produce 3-D images of sands and silts deposited in different
environments. Computed X-ray tomography involves the use of high energy beam to
obtain high resolution 3-D images of microscopic objects. The technique has been
demonstrated using samples of granular materials and uniform sands prepared in
the laboratory. However, to-date the same has not been attempted with
undisturbed samples collected from natural deposits. Thus, the practical aspect
of the project is the development of the necessary laboratory techniques for
imaging undisturbed samples using computed X-ray tomography in order to
determine the actual depositional geometry of the grain assemblage. These data
will then allow analysis of the influence of the mode of deposition on the
mechanical properties of these materials using advanced particle tracking
numerical models. The ultimate goal is the development of more nuanced approach
to geotechnical analysis and design tailored to a specific material and its mode
of deposition. Overall, this effort represents an early exploration of advanced
techniques, taking advantage of the latest developments in visualization and
simulation of granular media. This award addresses the NSF mission "to promote
the progress of science." &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal objective of this
research is to explore the use of computed X-Ray tomography to demonstrate that
different depositional environments and sources of sediments produce different
types of fabric that are characteristic of that environment. This will allow the
development of a data base of types of fabric characteristic of different source
materials and depositional environments. This data base will then provide
baseline attributes of expected material behavior that are specific to the local
and regional geologic setting. Assuming that the scanning methodology can be
sufficiently standardized, this goal should become quite achievable with the
extensive data bases of the in-situ properties of recent sediments being
developed in New Zealand, Japan, Chile, and California, in particular. Advanced
visualization and DEM simulation tools will then be explored to develop a
realistic mathematical description of the micro-mechanical behavior of naturally
deposited sands and silts. The challenge is in being able to accurately
represent the grain geometry and then numerically track the movement of grains
and their interaction at points of contact. At present this type of detailed
numerical simulation has been demonstrated only on an assemblage of sand grains
with relatively open fabric. Thus, the objective is to extend the state of the
art to a more compact grain packing and more complex geometry in order to
explore the influence of fabric on the deformation characteristics of natural
deposits. This should allow for future advances in the state of the art of
modeling the behavior of granular sediment using multi-scale constitutive
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.