* 1853879
* Ultrafast and Energy-efficient Anti-ferromagnetic Electric-field-controlled Memory Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/15/2019,04/30/2023
* Pedram Khalili Amiri, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 04/30/2023
* USD 330,000.00

There is a fast-growing demand for new on-chip memory and data storage solutions
in computing systems, fueled by the growth of data-intensive computing tasks for
artificial intelligence and autonomous systems. Increasingly, the performance of
computing systems is determined by the speed and energy efficiency of reading
data from or writing it into the memory components of the system, rather than
the speed with which logic operations can be performed. This trend is driving a
paradigm shift of the semiconductor industry from logic-centric to memory-
centric computing architectures, where storage and processing of data are
closely integrated to increase computational efficiency. This memory-centric
computing paradigm puts new requirements on the memory devices in terms of
speed, switching energy, endurance, and manufacturing processes. However,
present memory solutions do not scale adequately to address all of these demands
and suffer from standby power dissipation due to leakage and/or refresh
requirements. This project is focused on the development of a new type of two-
terminal magnetic memory device, referred to as antiferromagnetic voltage-
controlled memory, to address the requirements of memory-centric computing
applications. In addition to its technical and scientific impact, the project
will impact the education of students at undergraduate and graduate levels,
including women and underrepresented minorities at Northwestern. The students
will study, develop, and implement state-of-the-art nano-fabrication and high-
speed measurements for emerging memory devices, working at the intersection of
physics, material science, and electrical engineering. Due to the
interdisciplinary nature of the project, they will also take part in
collaborations with industry and other departments at Northwestern and other
universities. The project also leverages and contributes to on-going outreach
efforts at Northwestern, engaging the general public in the advancement of
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project incorporates two innovative
elements in the device structure of magnetic random-access memory: (i) It uses
metallic antiferromagnetic layers with uniaxial magnetic anisotropy for data
storage. This is different from the conventionally used ferromagnetic free
layers in existing magnetic memory, and provides a number of advantages: First,
due to the zero overall magnetic moment of the antiferromagnet, the resulting
device is robust against external magnetic fields, without any requirements for
magnetic shielding. Second, it eliminates bit-to-bit dipole interactions, which
may result in scaling challenges and increased error rates in ferromagnetic
memory arrays with tight pitch. Third, much faster switching can be achieved
using antiferromagnetic resonance, which can have frequencies up to the
Terahertz range due to the large built-in exchange field of the
antiferromagnetic material. (ii) Voltage-Controlled Magnetic Anisotropy will be
used for energy-efficient writing of data. Specifically, a very short voltage
pulse will be used to initiate the resonant dynamics and will be timed to result
in a voltage-induced complete switching of the N?el vector. The switching occurs
without the need for electric current, thus reducing write energy to reach the
atto-Joule per bit range. The voltage-controlled magnetic anisotropy effect has
previously only been demonstrated in the case of ferromagnetic devices. Hence,
its demonstration and utilization in the case of antiferromagnets is one of the
key intellectual merits of the present proposal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.