* 1853384
* Collaborative Research:  Physiological and Genetic Correlates of Reproductive Success in High- versus Low-Quality Weddell seals
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Jennifer Burns, University of Alaska Anchorage Campus
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 08/31/2024
* USD 608,232.00

Within any population, some individuals perform better than others. These
individuals may survive longer or produce more offspring. Weddell seals in
Erebus Bay, Antarctica, provide an unparalleled opportunity to investigate how
an animal's physiology, behavior, and genetic make-up contribute to lifetime
reproductive success because they have been the subject of a long-term
population monitoring study and are easily accessible during their reproductive
season. This project will distinguish key differences in energy allocation,
reproductive timing, and dive capacities between female Weddell seals with a
history of frequently producing pups ("high-quality" group), versus females that
have produced pups only infrequently ("low-quality" group). For each group of
females, physiology and behavior during the nursing period will be analyzed to
assess whether investments influence their probability of reproducing the
following year. Whole genomes will be compared between groups to identify
underlying genes that govern reproductive success and population stability in a
long-lived mammal. This collaborative project will provide research
opportunities and training to several undergraduate and graduate students at the
three participating institutions. Results will be broadly disseminated through
presentations and peer-reviewed publications, and to students via an extensive
public outreach collaboration with museum programming, curriculum-aligned
science lessons, and pedagogy training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Within any wild
animal population there is substantial heterogeneity in reproductive rates and
animal fitness. Not all individuals contribute to the population equally; some
are able to produce more offspring than others and thus are considered to be of
higher quality. This study aims to distinguish which physiological mechanisms
(energy dynamics, aerobic capacity, and fertility) and underlying genetic
factors make some Weddell seal females particularly successful at producing pups
year after year, while others produce far fewer pups than the population
average. In this project, an Organismal Energetics approach will identify key
differences between high- and low-quality females in how they balance current
and future reproductive success by tracking lactation costs, midsummer foraging
success and pregnancy rates, and overwinter foraging patterns and live births
the next year. Repeated sampling of individuals' physiological status (body
composition, endocrinology, ovulation and pregnancy timing), will be paired with
a whole-genome sequencing study. The second component of this study uses a
Genome to Phenome approach to better understand how genetic differences between
high- and low-quality females directly correspond to functional differences in
transcription, translation, and ultimately phenotype. This component will
contribute to the functional analysis and annotation of the Weddell seal genome.
In combination, this project will make strides towards distinguishing the roles
that plastic (physiological, behavioral) and fixed (genetic) factors play in
complex, multifaceted traits such as fitness in a long-lived wild mammal. The
project partners with established programs to implement extensive educational
and outreach activities that will ensure wide dissemination to educators,
students, and the public. It will contribute to a marine mammal exhibit at the
Pink Palace Museum, and a PolarTREC science educator will participate in field
work in Antarctica. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-funded by the GEO-
OPP-Antarctic Organisms and Ecosystems Program, BIO-IOS-Physiological Mechanisms
and Biomechanics Program, and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.