* 1853036
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Culturally Influenced Environmental Narratives
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2019,09/30/2020
* James McCarthy, Clark University
* Standard Grant
* Scott Freundschuh
* 09/30/2020
* USD 17,997.00

This doctoral dissertation research improvement project will examine the use of
narrative forms to better communicate about the environment among Native
American and rural communities in the US. These communities are likely to be
among the most vulnerable to the social and ecological impacts of climate
variability and environmental change. Understanding how environmental knowledge
is perceived and communicated by different groups can lead to the development of
stronger, more culturally appropriate, communication tools for at risk
populations. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this project
will provide support to enable a promising student to establish an independent
research career. The student will contribute to the advancement of geographical
science by developing novel methods for better communicating and translating
complex science problems to different cultural groups. The findings of this
project will have implications for public policy, public health, and
sustainability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The doctoral student will use a mixed
methods approach to examine how environmental knowledge is disseminated,
perceived, and communicated in distinct ways. Specifically, this research
examines (1) how culture shapes environmental perception; and (2) how and
whether narrative forms can be used as an effective science communication tool
in Native American and traditional rural communities. Through collaborations
with local Appalachian and Alaskan cultural and scientific organizations, the
doctoral student will collect data through a multi-faceted approach including
participant observation at local cultural events, key informant interviews,
archival research including historic environmental data and oral history
collections, as well as experimental participatory workshops. This research will
provide new insights regarding the communication of environmental science to
different cultural groups, with implications for improving human health and
well-being.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.