* 1853158
* Workshop: Making and Makerspaces in Electrical and Computer Engineering Education
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Shawn Jordan, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 08/31/2022
* USD 99,855.00

The need for a robust STEM workforce is heavily discussed in policy circles. In
particular there has been a multiyear decline (followed by a small rise) in the
number of electrical and computer engineering (ECE) degrees awarded in the
United States (National Science Board, 2016). Although the need for a growing
and capable ECE workforce is well documented, how to impact college enrollments
is still a matter of considerable debate. One way to potentially impact college
enrollments is to support ECE-focused Making and Makerspaces. Makerspaces
attract many with strong interest in ECE-related topics, including embedded
systems, robotics, artificial intelligence, human-computer interaction, and
electronics manufacturing, and many Makers self-identify as having interests
related to electrical and computer engineering (Dougherty, 2016). However, the
facilities of most makerspaces both on and off of university campuses focus
primarily on mechanical fabrication tools such as laser cutters and 3-D
printers. Making is more than the creation of plastic 3-D parts, but rather has
the potential to stimulate truly innovative functional solutions to problems
that people care about. While Mechanical Engineering has connected strongly with
the Maker Movement with advanced manufacturing, ECE programs have to date done
little to leverage the strong disciplinary connections with the Maker
Movement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop will explore how Making and
Makerspaces can be used to attract students to and retain students in ECE, and
the resultant changes in student learning that result from exposure to
makerspaces. This activity will help advance understanding of the role
Makerspaces and Making play in increasing the number and quality of ECE
undergraduates. The workshop has transformative potential since it will lay the
groundwork for future projects that elucidate the role Making plays in
recruiting students into ECE. The plan for the workshop builds on existing
meetings to reach the target audiences and enables NSF resources to be focused
on under-resourced programs. The team has significant experience with both the
Maker Movement and Making in engineering, and close relationships with ECEDHA
and ASEE. The broader impacts of this work are significant, as Makerspaces and
the Maker movement are a growing phenomenon in communities, libraries, and
schools and are contributors to the United States' innovation ecosystem
(Deloitte Center for the Edge and Maker Media, 2015). The plan for the workshop
engages both established ECE Makerspaces while integrating participants from
under-resourced schools to establish a diverse network. "Makerspace in a Box"
electronic-focused giveaways will be given to participants coming from HBCUs,
HSIs, and TCUs. Dissemination activities will be integrated with ongoing
branding efforts by ECEDHA which will multiply the impact of the initial
workshop. Follow-on workshops at ASEE, Engineering Dean's Council, Maker Faires,
and NAMEPA are aimed to disseminate to critical
audiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.