* 1853240
* SBIR Phase II:  New devices Bioaerosol Sampler for Accurate, Time-Resolved Characterization of Viable Microbes and their Genomes
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2022
* Mark Hernandez, Aerosol Devices Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 06/30/2022
* USD 948,347.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is to provide general commercial access to a new
generation of affordable, high-efficiency aerosol samplers that will primarily
be used in the Industrial Hygiene and Indoor Air Quality market. The collection
technology in these new instruments is unique in that it captures, concentrates
and preserves airborne microbes in the same physical state they exist as they
are suspended in the air we breathe- a tremendous breakthrough for forensic
aerosol analysis. This work optimizes a novel collection method that
chronologically resolves air samples into a portable compact platform, which
ensures purity, minimizes handling and is safe for mail. The sample output is
delivered in small, sterile medical grade disposable plastics that are
compatible with a broad range of users' analytical needs whether it be the
military, health care, atmospheric researchers or indoor air quality sector.
This instrumentation is portable, and requires no filters or chemical additions;
it rapidly condenses airborne microbes out of ambient air by manipulating
humidity, offering a reliable way to assess microbiological air pollution-
indoors or out. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase II project proposes to
optimize the design of condensation growth-based bioaerosol samplers for
commercial validation, rapid manufacture and high-quality reproduction. The
accurate assessment of airborne biological agents remains a tremendous
scientific and practical challenge. The intellectual merit of this work lies in
finally overcoming the technical barriers posed by conventional air sampling
equipment, which require extensive sampling time and significantly compromises
the very information military, medical and building science professionals need:
what is the identity, distribution and abundance of airborne microbes. This team
will use the latest forensic genetic sequencing technology to isolate the
detection limits of this new collection equipment for common airborne pathogens
and allergens. The objective is to validate these new filterless aerosol
recovery instruments in controlled laboratory experiments, with a broad range of
common pathogenic bioaerosols. The team will demonstrate how the sample
preservation benefits of this technology, can be realized for commercial benefit
in monitoring high-density indoor environments, including health care settings
and public schools. Operating this new equipment in occupied indoor spaces, we
anticipate collecting bioaerosol in excess of forensic detection limits in less
than 30 minutes, while maintaining exceptional sample
fidelity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.