* 1853522
* STTR Phase II:  Novel real-time particulate matter (PM) sensor for air quality measurements
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2019,04/30/2022
* Shantanu Sur, Potsdam Sensors LLC
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 04/30/2022
* USD 965,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this STTR project is in the reduction
of healthcare-associated infections (HAIs) by proactively responding to data
from novel sensors. In addition, the technology being developed in this project
can also help measure airborne particle concentrations in other environments.
The successful completion of this proposal will result in improved public health
from reduced hospital stay and commercially benefit both hospitals and patients
by reducing hospitalization costs. The development and deployment of sensors in
a hospital, enabled by this project, will help our startup build a critical
dataset to train analytical models for near real-time identification of hospital
spaces with a pathogen problem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This STTR Phase 2 project
proposes to develop a novel sensor for integrated measurement of air quality
(AQ) and pathogen loads in the air and combine these measurements to create a an
early warning system to identify contaminated areas in critical facilities like
hospitals. Healthcare-associated infections (HAIs) are $20 billion problem and
are responsible for over 100,000 deaths in the US. Our low-cost, robust,
networkable, and easy-to-operate sensors will provide a data driven solution to
the critical public health problem. Combining novel techniques for real-time
detection of airborne particles with state-of-the-art pathogen analysis, our
sensor system will provide data to develop analytical models that will predict
hospital spaces with pathogen problems before they cause expensive
infections.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.