* 1853778
* Combining Historic and Ecologic Archives to Understand Past Environmental Change
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2019,12/31/2023
* Scott Mensing, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 12/31/2023
* USD 442,806.00

This project will examine past environmental change and the relative influence
of human activities. The investigators will consider what specific socioeconomic
conditions produced local ecological change doing this by comparing multiple
centuries of written historical records documenting agriculture and land
management with physical records of vegetation change reconstructed using
sediments from nearby lakes. Combining ecologic data with historical texts
permits identification of times when societal activities resulted in long-term
environmental change. There is increasing recognition that modern ecosystems
reflect the results of centuries of human and ecological processes. This project
will offer insight into present-day decision makers charged with developing
better strategies for responding to the challenges of living in a changing
environment. The investigators will contribute to the advancement of science by
applying a novel geochemical method to create a new and more detailed
environmental history. The project includes a team of historians and physical
scientists and will support the education of a graduate student and two McNair
scholars. The McNair scholar program is a federal program for members of
traditionally underrepresented groups in higher education to gain research
skills and better prepare for a potential career in higher education.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project tests the hypothesis that abrupt ecologic
change is more closely associated with the history of human socioeconomic change
than environmental change, and that these changes extend across broad geographic
regions under the same governmental control. Ecologic change will be
reconstructed using pollen, non-pollen palynomorphs and charcoal analysis from
radiocarbon dated lake sediment cores with very high sedimentation rates that
allow for a decadal chronological resolution that can be compared with
historical data. Historical narratives will come from extensive legal charters
dating back to 650 AD. The investigators will also develop a new high-resolution
precipitation reconstruction using a multi-method approach by analyzing oxygen
and carbon isotopes from lake sediment carbonates and cellulose, analysis of
hydrogen isotopes in leaf wax residues and testing whether carbon isotopes from
pollen can be used as a precipitation proxy. This study will investigate this
question by considering a case study near Lucca, Italy because this city
preserved 1,300 years of charters and legal documents recording land use history
across a critical transitional period from the Roman centralized taxation
system, into a decentralized political and economic system, then to proto-
capitalist city states and finally up to the modern society. The research will
provide new insights and approaches to managers interested in increasing forest
resilience in the United States by identifying past examples in which land
management decisions were implemented under different socioeconomic structures,
which resulted in altering land use practices and creating new ecologic states
that in some cases led to permanent environmental
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.