* 1853169
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Technological Choice and Human-Animal Relationships: A Bird's Eye View from the Rat Islands, Alaska
* GEO,OPP
* 02/15/2019,01/31/2020
* Ariel Taivalkoski, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Erica Hill
* 01/31/2020
* USD 29,138.00

In the past few decades, questions regarding human impacts on the environment
have been at the forefront of scientific research. Archaeology is well-placed to
answer these questions due to its deep temporal view, allowing researchers to
trace long-term changes in both human society and the environment. This project
will explore the ways in which humans interact with their environments by
examining the varied usages of birds by prehistoric peoples in the Aleutian
Islands. Throughout history, humans have used birds in a variety of ways, from
food, to raw materials for tools, to clothing. In addition to their more
practical usages, birds often play a significant role in Indigenous cultural
systems, making them valuable indicators of the ways in which human society is
shaped by the environment in which they live. However, due to poor preservation
and excavation bias bird remains have only recently begun to be studied in
depth. The archaeological sites of the Aleutian Islands have very large avian
bone assemblages due to excellent taphonomic conditions. The large size and
excellent preservation of these assemblages allows rigorous study from which we
can study not only local relationships with birds but also develop models for
other times and places.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will compare the
patterns of skeletal bird remains found at archaeological sites in the Rat
Islands to oral histories and ethnographies to reveal the interplay of the
symbolic and 'material' aspects of the relationship between birds and the
residents of the Aleutian Islands. The relationship between the prehistoric
inhabitants of the Rat Islands, the Unangan, and birds was maintained by a suite
of continual and often daily practices, from hunting, to storytelling, to
subsistence. The resulting artifacts of these day-to-day activities, in this
case the avian bone assemblage, play a significant role in the reproduction of
social and cultural values. By studying the technological choices that the
Unangan made regarding birds we can begin to examine the more social and
symbolic aspects of the Unangan-bird relationship. Patterns will be examined
over a 4000-year time span allowing for an examination of the impact of climatic
events on bird exploitation by the Unangan. This project will examine how
material practices are shaped by the culture in which they developed and, in
turn, by the environment in which they were created. The project team will
generate new methodologies for examining how bird remains are deposited by
humans within archaeological sites which will allow for not only a better
understanding of the interplay between humans and environment in the Aleutians,
but which will be applicable to archaeological sites
globally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.