* 1853809
* Analyzing the Magnitude, Variability, and Governance of Infrastructure-Mediated Flows in Urban Watersheds
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2019,01/31/2024
* Jeremy Diem, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 01/31/2024
* USD 399,992.00

This project investigates how the water cycle within urban watersheds is altered
by exchanges of water between the landscape and human infrastructure. The
project demonstrates a new framework for analyzing urban water budgets that
synergistically integrates qualitative analysis of knowledge, perceptions, and
governance of water resources and infrastructures. This research will generate
important new knowledge about how infrastructure-mediated flows (IMFs),
including inter-basin transfers (IBTs) and the infiltration and inflow (I&amp;I)
of rainfall and groundwater into sanitary sewer pipes, fundamentally alter the
hydrology of watersheds. The research will reveal how these IMFs strain the
capacity of wastewater treatment systems and evaluate how this new knowledge can
enhance the effective governance of transboundary water resources. The broader
societal impacts of this research include enhancing STEM education and the
inclusion of underrepresented groups in STEM fields. The project also includes a
summer workshop with local K-12 teachers aimed at integrating concepts of urban
hydrology and water governance into curriculum. The project provides research
training for undergraduate and graduate students at Georgia State University, a
national leader in supporting the educational accomplishments of
underrepresented minority students, and elements of the project will be
integrated into the curriculum for undergraduate and graduate courses.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The U.S. population is becoming increasingly urbanized,
resulting in dramatic impacts on urban watersheds and contributing to
multiscalar and transboundary water governance challenges. Water withdrawals for
municipal consumption have increased greatly, often necessitating politically
contentious inter-basin transfers of water. Aging water infrastructure is
conducive to infiltration and inflow, whereby a high volume of water permeates
sanitary-sewers through pipe fractures and discontinuities. This unnecessarily
increases inflow to wastewater treatment plants, while reducing streamflow in
local watersheds. Inter-basin transfers and infiltration and inflow remain
difficult to quantify, resulting in disparate perceptions of their magnitude and
importance. This project answers three fundamental questions about the
magnitude, variability, and governance of infrastructure-mediated flows (IMFs)
in urban watersheds: (1) how do IMFs impact urban watershed hydrology; (2) how
are these impacts perceived and managed by governance authorities and
stakeholders; and (3) how will governance decisions be impacted by improved
hydrologic characterization of IMFs? The methodology includes a novel
formulation of the urban water budget with explicit quantification of the impact
of inter-basin transfers and infiltration and inflow. A possible solution is
using data representing meteorological variables, potable water flows, sanitary
sewer flows, and land-cover characteristics. These data are widely available and
promote maximum transferability of the approach. The solution of the urban water
budget will be informed by qualitative data gathered from utility managers and
water resource stakeholders, thereby leveraging local expertise. The perceptions
of IMFs, and responses to new knowledge about them, will be characterized
through an iterative set of interviews with managers and stakeholders.
Inferences will be made via qualitative-thematic analysis of interview
transcripts and quantitative analysis of Likert-scale survey responses. The
findings of this project will inform conceptualizations about urban water
management and urban sustainability. To demonstrate the utility of this new
method and approach, this study focuses on the South River Watershed within the
broader Atlanta, Georgia metropolitan area, while the methodological approach
and results are applicable across a broad array of urban watershed in the United
States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.