* 1853506
* Collaborative Research: Nonsmooth Maps, Coupled Oscillators and Seasonal Variation of Sleep and Circadian Rhythms
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2019,11/30/2022
* Victoria Booth, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 11/30/2022
* USD 279,565.00

This project will develop and analyze mathematical models for circadian clock
signaling and its control of sleep-wake regulation to determine how seasonality
is encoded in the neural activity of the clock. Circadian (~24 hour) rhythms in
behavior and physiology, including sleep-wake rhythms, are entrained by the
sun's daily light cycle and affect physical and mental health. These rhythms are
driven by the brain's master circadian clock, which receives light information
from the eyes and coordinates biological rhythms throughout the body. In modern
life, exposure to artificial light can erode the crucial tie between internal
physiological rhythms and environmental light timing. The proposed mathematical
modeling and data analysis projects focus on understanding how information and
uncertainty in light signals are processed and stored in the master circadian
clock and propagated downstream to sleep-wake networks through neural signaling.
In collaboration with a clinical researcher, the mathematical models will be
applied to data describing light exposure and sleep in elementary school-aged
children during the school year and summer to understand summer vacation-induced
disruptions to sleep and circadian rhythms. An additional collaborator at a
primarily undergraduate and Hispanic-serving institution will contribute to
modeling the clock and developing a mathematical modeling mini-course for
undergraduate students. Undergraduate, graduate and postdoctoral trainees will
be involved in the research. This project is funded jointly by the Division of
Mathematical Sciences Mathematical Biology Program and the Division of
Integrative Organismal Systems Neural Systems
Cluster.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Behavioral states of waking, sleep, and rapid eye
movement (REM) sleep are governed by networks of brainstem and hypothalamic
neuronal populations, and mathematical modeling of these networks provides
insights into the dynamics of their interactions. The master circadian clock in
the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) controls the timing of behavior across the 24
hour day and involves a hierarchy of physiological processes from the
intracellular molecular "circadian clock," to clock-driven variations in the
electrophysiological responses of SCN neurons, to the collective signaling of
the SCN neural network and its dynamic role modulating sleep-wake behavior.
Using an innovative combination of mathematical modeling and analysis, key
aspects of light-dependent circadian modulation of sleep-wake behavior will be
explored at multiple spatial and temporal scales. Return maps will be used to
reduce dimensionality and formally classify the relationship between circadian
signaling and bifurcations in sleep-wake patterning. Effects of coherence of SCN
activity on sleep-wake behavior will be established theoretically, and these
results will be applied to understand experimentally observed changes in phase
relationships between dorsal and ventral SCN regions in rodents under seasonal
light variation. SCN and sleep-wake network models will be combined to
investigate the role of dorsal-ventral interactions in gating light effects on
SCN activity; to quantify sensitivity of the human clock to erratic light
schedules; and to examine mechanisms underlying summer vacation-induced changes
in sleep-wake behavior in data collected in elementary school-aged children.
Project results will identify potential targets for interventions to alleviate
summer vacation-induced disruptions to sleep and circadian
rhythms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.