* 1853374
* SHF:Small: Holistic Analysis: integrating the semantics of the world and the code
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Sebastian Elbaum, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 07/31/2021
* USD 416,001.00

Systems interacting with the physical world (e.g., robots, embedded systems,
cyber-physical systems) depend on the interplay of code and the physical
environment. Yet, techniques and tools to support quality assurance efforts on
such systems typically decouple code from the physical world to simplify the
process. This research effort attempts to unlock the potential of reuniting
these separate worlds, integrating the rules of the physical world with the
logic of code to improve the quality of the systems we
build.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key intellectual challenges of this
investigation include: 1) integrating the rules of the physical world into
program analysis to help developers identify faults associated with the
manipulation of physical units; 2) incorporating physical attributes manifested
in code into simulation scenarios so that system designers can better explore
the interplay between physical software and potential environments; and 3)
inserting spatial reasoning into program analysis to help developers understand
and verify how a system may translate and rotate in space over time. These
efforts impact research communities by generating artifacts and tools currently
lacking at the intersection of the software engineering and robotic communities,
preparing several graduate students including those from underrepresented
groups, and developing case studies on the faults and failures present in such
systems to assist instructors, students, and practitioners to cultivate an
informed perspective about the unique challenges these systems bring. The
longer, broader aim is to improve the quality of these systems that increasingly
affect all aspects of society.