* 1853880
* BPE TRAVEL GRANT:  Learn from Disasters Field Mission on Reconstruction of the Tohoku Region of Japan for Underrepresented Students in Engineering
* ENG,EEC
* 08/10/2018,04/30/2019
* Terri Norton, Bucknell University
* Standard Grant
* Paige Smith
* 04/30/2019
* USD 5,914.00

According to the theoretical and scientific literature, there is a dearth of
underrepresented students in engineering, particularly in the field of disaster
recovery and natural hazard mitigation. This international travel grant will be
used to support eight U.S. students on a field mission to Japan to observe the
reconstruction and redevelopment of the Tohoku region, after the 2011 Great East
Japan Earthquake and Tsunami. This Learn from Disasters Field Mission (LDFM)
two-week summer experience will train and mentor traditionally underrepresented
minority and female students. Student participants will learn firsthand the
process necessary to recover from a natural disaster. They will also visit sites
within the Miyagi and Iwate Prefectures to observe the recovery efforts and
attend workshops hosted by local Japanese universities. Further, the workshops
and site visits will provide broad exposure to disaster recovery and community
resilience research in Japan while also allowing the U.S. student participants
to establish meaningful relationships with Japanese engineering students and
researchers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-term goal of the LDFM program is to
develop a cadre of well-trained future engineers who will develop a strong
foundation in engineering and disaster recovery while also gaining the capacity
to engage successfully in international research within academia or industry.
Further, this travel grant will provide a unique opportunity for engineering
underrepresented students to receive firsthand experience in the field of
disaster recovery and natural hazard mitigation. The LDFM program will further
stimulate students' interest in pursuing advanced degrees in engineering and
greatly enhance their future careers in engineering. Moreover, this travel grant
will foster new international collaborative opportunities in hazard mitigation
and disaster recovery for the principal investigator and will promote global
learning and cultural exchange among the student participants.