* 1853697
* Do spatial traits (geography) or species traits better explain vulnerability and resilience of plants to external threats?
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Helen Regan, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 02/29/2024
* USD 450,000.00

This project identifies the elements of plant biodiversity that are most
vulnerable and, conversely, most resilient to the interacting threats of habitat
loss, via land-use change and urbanization, as well as environmental variability
and related changes in wildfire regimes. Identifying generalities in the factors
that confer vulnerability or resilience to species based on their innate
characteristics (their species traits) and where they naturally occur (their
geography or spatial traits) in relation to threats, is the intellectual
contribution of this project and to geography and the spatial sciences. Results
from this study permit a prioritization of species and ecosystems and identify
locations for management and conservation of plant diversity. This project will
be conducted at the University of California Riverside (UCR), a Hispanic-serving
institution located in one of the most socio-economically and culturally diverse
regions in the United States. The PIs will leverage existing STEM education
initiatives at UCR to engage undergraduates in local K-12 classrooms through the
CalTeach program, where they will introduce spatial science and models as a
framework for understanding geographic concepts, ecological principles and
pressing conservation issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The vulnerability of a plant
species to threat depends on their distribution (biogeography) in relation to
these threats, as well as their species traits. Plants may be long or short
lived (redwood trees versus poppies), escape habitat fragmentation and loss
because their ecological niche places them in locations undesirable for
development, or they may have traits that allow them to recover their
populations following fire (fire-stimulated seed germination, or resprouting
from underground parts). In a changing environment, plants can only move
(migrate) away from threats intergenerationally, mainly via seed dispersal. This
project identifies the general aspects of spatial traits (biogeography) versus
species traits that confer more or less vulnerability to plants under global
change in the coming century as human populations grow and land-use changes. The
PIs use simulation modeling to project the population growth or decline for a
wide range of plant species that differ in their disturbance-response and other
species traits (life form: trees, shrubs, herbs; fire-response; and
morphological traits) and their biogeography (coastal, mountain and desert
distributions) to identify generalities regarding their vulnerability to
threats. They develop and use statistical models of spatially explicit fire risk
and species biogeography using modern regression and machine learning methods
and use those models to project spatially explicit changes under different land-
use and environmental scenarios. The PIs construct plant population models using
data from the COMPADRE Plant Matrix Database and will extract species traits
from the TRY Plant Trait Database. This project focuses on the biodiversity of
the California Floristic Province, but trends identified will be broadly
relevant throughout the entire western U.S. where water-limited ecosystems are
strongly impacted by increasing environmental variability and increasing
wildfire.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.