* 1853193
* EAGER: Establishment of a High-Fidelity Simulation Infrastructure for Fuel Injection and Combustion in Supersonic Flows
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2019,08/31/2021
* Yue Ling, Baylor University
* Standard Grant
* John Daily
* 08/31/2021
* USD 120,173.00

The characteristics of the fuel droplets have a direct impact on the efficiency
of a combustor. In supersonic propulsion systems, the details of the fuel
injection process are difficult to measure in experiments. A high-fidelity
computational framework for simulating liquid fuel dynamics in supersonic
propulsion systems will be developed. The proposed computer program can be used
to improve injector designs for high fuel efficiency and low pollutant emissions
in supersonic aircrafts and rockets. The proposed computational framework will
allow researchers to perform simulations on supercomputers that produce more
detailed data than experiments can provide. The simulation program developed in
this project will be open-source, based on which other researchers can develop
new simulation capabilities. The outcome of this project will benefit both
academia and industry of supersonic propulsion. Along with the research project,
an exhibition on fuel injection will be developed for Baylor's Mayborn Museum.
This exhibition will use the results obtained in this project to introduce fuel
injection technologies to audiences of all ages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
accurately capture the gas-liquid interface and the complex topology changes due
to breakup, a mass- and momentum-conserving volume-of- fluid method for
compressible flows will be developed. High-order shock-capturing methods will be
incorporated to resolve shock waves and shock-interface interactions. The
Height-Function method will be used to calculate the interface curvature, and
the balanced-force surface tension calculation will be extended to compressible
flows. The above numerical methods will also be generalized for the quad/octree
data structure to allow adaptive mesh refinement in user-defined regions. The
parallelization of the code will be done through a tree decomposition approach
instead of the conventional domain decomposition. As a result, the parallel
performance will remain excellent even if a large number of refinement levels
are used. Four different experiments of liquid jet breakups in subsonic and
supersonic regimes will be simulated and compared to experimental measurements
to validate the predictive capability of the proposed simulation
framework.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.