* 1853908
* Controlling the Rates, Distance, and Direction of Electron Transfer in Ultrafast Inorganic Ground States
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Clifford Kubiak, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 07/31/2023
* USD 530,000.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Clifford Kubiak of the Department
of Chemistry and Biochemistry at the University of California San Diego is
developing new assemblies of metal complexes that undergo fast electron electron
transfer (ET) reactions. These reactions are monitored by infrared spectroscopy
which has picosecond (1 trillionth of a second) time resolution to follow such
ultrafast reaction. The goal of these studies is to develop a fundamental
understanding of the chemical factors that determine the rate, distance, and
direction of ET reactions. This work may ultimately pave the way towards the
design of molecular electronic devices such as switches and memory that function
far faster than the current generation of computers and sensors. This project
lies at the intersection between synthetic chemistry and physical
characterization, providing a rich opportunity for the training of graduate and
undergraduate students in cutting-edge research. Controlling the rates,
distance, and direction of electron transfer broadly impacts the life sciences,
technology, and energy sectors. This project represents basic research but, if
successful, could ultimately benefit society in important areas including
treatments for genetic disorders caused by damage to DNA; a new generation of
faster, smaller, and less expensive integrated circuits; advances in artificial
and natural photosynthesis and improvements in agricultural food production.
Professor Kubiak involves undergraduate students in research and engages K-14
students. The group has established a new undergraduate exchange program with
Cal State University Monterey Bay (CSUMB) for students to pursue research
projects that can be performed partly at CSUMB and partly at UCSD during summers
and school breaks. The research team also develops visualizations of complex
scientific ideas and their videos are also being shared broadly with both
researchers, educators and the general public. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mixed-
valence dimers of triruthenium acetate clusters display rich spectroscopic
evidence of ultrafast ET over long distances. They have proven to be fruitful
systems in illustrating how different bridging moieties, electronic structures,
and chemical environments and dynamics can impact the kinetic barriers of ET.
Professor Clifford Kubiak and his group plan to develop a more complete physical
chemical description of how electron transfer occurs across hydrogen bonds. They
will expand the synthesis of new complexes to better understand the interplay
between electron delocalization and hydrogen bonding. Additionally, they will
conduct the first two-dimensional infrared spectroscopy (2D-IR) studies of
intramolecular ET on the picosecond timescale. They will use synthetic studies
to probe bridging ligand dynamics and its relation to ET. This research will
attempt to demonstrate vibrational control of the ET coordinate to change its
rate and direction. Finally, the team will design and synthesize new
supramolecular assemblies that exhibit mixed valency between pendant tri-
ruthenium redox centers through semiconducting metal oxide
nanoparticles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.