* 1853699
* An Analysis of the Integration of Place Attachment into Visualizations of Hurricane Storm Surge Threats
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2019,11/30/2022
* Olga Wilhelmi, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 11/30/2022
* USD 399,583.00

This project investigates ways of reducing the devastating effects that
hurricane related storm surges can have on the safety and well-being of
communities. Reducing and managing risks from storm surge are challenging
because of the complex nature of the hazard and the inherent uncertainty in
storm surge forecasting. Weather forecasters and emergency managers often use
maps and animations (visualizations) to communicate storm surge risks and
threats to the public. However, little is known about how these visualizations
influence people's understanding and response to risk. This project will
contribute to research on visualizations and how well these work for the
communication of hazardous weather risks. By focusing on attachment to place
within the context of coastal communities, the investigators will improve
understanding of how people interact with information about coastal hazards and
what role visualizations play in understanding and decision-making. The
investigators will engage with practitioners and stakeholders throughout the
project, from the planning stages to dissemination of the research results,
ensuring project relevancy and building strong societal benefit for the needs of
affected communities. This project will support educational activities through
interdisciplinary training of students and faculty at a variety of institutions
including from minority serving colleges and universities. The project will
contribute to broader efforts to increase public scientific literacy by focusing
on the role of visualizations in communicating complex scientific concepts in a
relatable and usable manner. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will contribute
to fundamental theoretical and methodological advances in geography, geospatial
science, cartography, as well as decision, risk and management science and their
intersection with communication of hazardous weather risks. The research will
bridge the gap between how spatially explicit storm surge information is being
conveyed by scientists and their interpretation and use by members of the public
in at-risk coastal communities. The investigators will consider the role of
concepts such as space and place in data representation and hypothesize that
connecting people to place through theoretically and empirically informed
visualizations will enhance at-risk populations' understandings of and responses
to storm surge hazard threats. The project's research questions are: How do
residents of coastal communities perceive a sense of place in their everyday
lives and when hazardous storm surge threatens? How can sense of place
constructs be integrated into visualization of storm surge threats? How do
different ways of representing space and place in storm surge visualizations
interact with people's understandings of and responses to the hazards? The
investigators will use a multi-method interdisciplinary approach that employs an
experimental participatory cognitive mapping process, research on and
development of innovative storm surge visualizations, iterative focus groups on
risk perception and the degree to which attachment to place factors in to
decision-making, and an online survey to test the impact of different types of
visualizations. Together this suite of methods will be able to inform how the
visualizations, attachment to place, and other factors influence people's
understandings of and responses to storm surge hazards. The research includes
stakeholder engagement in coastal areas and experts from several related
government agencies. Although the project focuses on coastal Georgia and South
Carolina, the methods, technology, and visualization concepts will be relevant
to other coastal communities in the U.S. vulnerable to hurricane storm surge.
Furthermore, the theories and empirical findings will be relevant to non-coastal
communities by understanding how attachment to place within visualizations can
be used to improve communication of risk hazards and decision-
making.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.