* 1853936
* REU Site: Translational Research in Psychological Sciences: Human Factors at Texas Tech University
* SBE,SMA
* 07/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Patricia DeLucia, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 08/31/2023
* USD 264,077.00

This project is funded from the Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
Sites program in the SBE Directorate. As such, it has both scientific and
societal benefits, and it integrates research and education. The REU Site at
Texas Tech University advances research that aims to understand the cognitive,
social, and physical capabilities and limitations of people and translates that
knowledge to practical benefits for society. This area of psychological
sciences, known as human factors, which is a subfield of applied experimental
psychology, is vital in addressing societal challenges including those in
aviation, health care, energy, transportation, and cyber-security, creating a
large and increasing workforce need for human factors professionals. The REU
Site will introduce undergraduates to an area with plentiful job opportunities
and develop their research skills, making them attractive to graduate programs
in various disciplines, and to industry employers seeking individuals who can
apply research training to practical issues such as evaluating products and user
interfaces. The REU Site supports diversity in social and behavioral sciences by
recruiting under-represented groups to participate. Results of the research will
advance the state of the art in the field and will have broad practical
implications including traffic crashes, patient safety, education, human-robot
interaction, substance use and misuse, health-based disparities, baggage
screening, and occupational injuries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main goals of
the REU Site are to engage undergraduates in behavioral research that has clear
value in solving real-world problems, to develop research, teamwork, and
communication skills applicable to any career in social and behavioral sciences,
and to increase the number of undergraduates-- particularly those in
underrepresented groups, who pursue graduate education and careers in human
factors psychology. During each of three years, 8 undergraduates will work
closely with faculty members at Texas Tech University on behavioral research
with important applications such as driving, human-robot interaction; surgery;
enhancement of student learning; applications of neuroscience to baggage
screening; substance use and misuse; health-based disparities; and occupational
injuries.