* 1853454
* Coordinated Supervisory Control System for Smart Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2024
* Nilanjan Chakraborty, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 08/31/2024
* USD 562,417.00

This project will support fundamental research in smart manufacturing processes
and systems, promoting the progress of science as well as national prosperity.
Recent advancements in sensors, information, communication, and robotics
technologies have driven better ways of doing manufacturing. Modern
manufacturing systems are equipped with multiple sensors, communication devices,
and material handling robots that operate alongside other autonomous machines
and human coworkers/supervisors. However, the full potential of these
technological advances in improving production efficiency and quality has not
been realized. This is because manufacturing systems are inherently stochastic
and nonlinear, and there is a lack of theoretical and technical understanding of
real-time model-based prediction of manufacturing performance and production
control. This research will establish novel data-enabled models for predicting
manufacturing system performance under uncertainty and adaptive, robust, and
scalable control and coordination algorithms for production control. The new
knowledge will provide manufacturers with a rigorous quantitative tool for real-
time monitoring and control of the complex manufacturing systems. The results of
this research will contribute to both the theory and the practice of smart
manufacturing and will be very useful to the entire U.S. manufacturing sector
for maximizing productivity and economic benefit. This research incorporates
goals with industrial needs, helps broaden the participation of underrepresented
groups in research, and enhances engineering education.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will fill the knowledge gap via the
integrated study of production dynamics and multiple robots material dispatching
decisions to address their interactions in real-time, which is significant for
manufacturing systems efficiency. The research approach will be a novel
combination of dynamic systems modeling of material flow through production
processes along with dynamic multirobot task assignment under uncertainty for
optimizing production performance metrics. The research team aims to: a)
establish a data-enabled mathematical framework to describe real-time
manufacturing systems with dynamic production and multirobot operations to
enhance the understanding of dynamic manufacturing processes and systems; and b)
establish the scientific and technological foundation in adaptive control and
decentralized decision making for multirobot system working with
machines/humans. The Coordinated Supervisory Control System is based on the
holistic view of physical system analysis, advanced data-driven modeling, and
adaptive control. The methodology is transformable to other dynamic systems with
distributed sensors and data, such as transportation, supply chain, and health
care management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.