* 1853533
* Pukoa Kani Aina
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Maenette Benham, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Regina Sievert
* 06/30/2024
* USD 2,499,799.00

The goal of the Tribal Colleges and Universities Program (TCUP) is to support
Native-serving institutions of higher education in building their science,
technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) instructional and research
capacities. The Pukoa Kani Aina project, housed at the University of
Hawai'i-West O'ahu, aligns with TCUP goals through the enlistment of a series of
activities designed to strengthen the STEM instructional capacity at UHWO and
improve student outcomes in STEM. Using a pipeline approach, the project enrolls
high school students in summer bridge programs that enhance their readiness for
college and continues working with them through the use of a student cohort
model as they move through college. UHWO faculty across disciplines collaborate
in developing innovative STEM courses designed to more fully engage students and
foster knowledge and skills required in today's STEM workforce. Additionally,
these cross-disciplinary groups are formulating a five-year plan for developing
new STEM programs to be offered at UHWO.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This institutional
capacity building project at the University of Hawai'i-West O'ahu is designed to
establish an institution-level change that positively impacts Native Hawaiian
students' success in STEM degrees and careers. Pukoa Kani Aina project goals are
to 1) build a transdisciplinary, sustainable STEM ecosystem within the
university; 2) streamline pipelines from K-12 schools and community colleges
into UHWO STEM programs, graduate studies, and STEM careers; and 3) map a five-
year plan for the development of STEM degrees, concentrations, and certificates
to be offered at UHWO. The project convenes partners from K-12, University of
Hawai'i colleges, and industry in the development of STEM pathways into UHWO and
beyond by establishing a summer bridge program with innovative math and science
courses and fostering a student cohort in the freshman through senior year that
supports students' retention and success in STEM. Additionally, faculty members
are working in transdisciplinary professional learning communities to revise
curriculum to incorporate innovations in pedagogy and content believed to better
engage and support students in STEM degrees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.