* 1853291
* Wave Glider Observations of Surface Fluxes and Mixed-layer Processes in the Southern Ocean
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* James Girton, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* David Porter
* 06/30/2024
* USD 826,469.00

Surface and upper-ocean processes in the Antarctic Circumpolar Current (ACC)
play an important role in ocean heat transport, air-sea gas fluxes (such as
pCO2) and in sea-ice formation. The net of these in turn modulate global
climate, sea level rise and global circulation. This project continues the field
development of a surface autonomous vehicle (https://www.liquid-
robotics.com/wave-glider/overview/ ) to better measure and study these processes
in the remote Southern Ocean, where continuous data is otherwise very difficult
to obtain. Mobile autonomous surface vehicles, powered by sunlight and wave
action provide a very cost effective manner of solving the problem of obtaining
unattended observational coverage in the remote Southern Ocean. The project will
support ongoing education and outreach efforts by the PIs including school
presentations, visits to science centers and the development of educational
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The WaveGlider has an established track record
of navigating successful spatial surveys and positioned time series measurements
in otherwise inhospitable waters and sea-states. The study includes the addition
of some new measurement capabilities such as an (upper mixed) layer profiling
CTD winch, a high frequency acoustic Doppler turbulence system, and a
biogeochemical chlorophyll fluorescence sensor. This augmented instrumentation
package will be used for a set of Austral summer season experiments observing
ocean-shelf exchange along with frontal air-sea interactions in the vicinity of
the West Antarctic Peninsula.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.