* 1853210
* Statistical Approaches for Complex Multi-Dimensional Data
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2024
* Raquel Prado, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 07/31/2024
* USD 280,000.00

This research project will develop models and statistical tools for the analysis
of complex multi-dimensional temporal data. Data with these characteristics
commonly arise in fields such as neuroscience, the environmental sciences, and
economics. Currently, there are limitations with the statistical tools available
to analyze these data, particularly in neuroimaging. Some of the commonly used
methods are either not able to adequately capture the complex structure
underlying these data or are computationally expensive and only practically
feasible in very low-dimensional settings. This project will result in improved
methods that are general and therefore applicable to the analysis of data from a
variety of fields. New educational and training opportunities will be provided
to graduate students pursuing research at the interface between statistics and
other areas such as neuroscience and the environmental sciences. Open-source
software that implements the new statistical tools will be developed and made
publicly available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research project will develop new
multivariate Bayesian dynamic models for joint analysis and forecasting of a
collection of non-stationary time series data. These models and related
computational tools will lead to joint and fast inference on the time-varying
spectral features that characterize each individual time series, as well as
inference on the time-frequency relationships across the time series components
in the set. Dynamic hierarchical models for analysis of multiple time series
also will be developed. The hierarchical approach will borrow strength across
multiple time series to make accurate inferences on their common underlying
time-frequency structure. Tools for sparsity and dimension reduction in these
multi-dimensional temporal model settings will be developed and implemented. The
investigator will apply the new methods to brain imaging data, multi-channel
electroencephalogram data, fMRI data, and multivariate environmental
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.