* 1853191
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Bringing the Power of Deep Learning to Large-Scale Ordinal Data Classification
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2021
* Ying Xie, Kennesaw State University Research and Service Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 05/31/2021
* USD 16,000.00

This doctoral dissertation research project will develop a more effective and
efficient classification method for ordinal data. Due to the explosion in the
use of digital data, there has been a dramatic increase in the number of ordinal
datasets that have hundreds of thousands or even millions of records. Examples
include ratings surveys found on sites like Amazon and Yelp, large corporation
customer satisfaction/net promoter surveys, and the aggregation of medical
history records. Current classification methods are inadequate for analyzing
large ordinal datasets. The investigators will develop a classification method
that facilitates the analysis of large ordinal datasets across a spectrum of
application domains. Open-source software will be developed and made publicly
available. Learning material and case studies will be made available for
educators to adopt in relevant courses and experiential learning opportunities.
As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, support is provided to
enable a promising student to establish a strong, independent research
career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This doctoral dissertation research will develop a
highly scalable ordinal classification method that can be applied to both
structured and unstructured (e.g., images and text) ordinal data. A core
component of the method is a loss function that called Ordinal Hyperplane Loss
(OHPL). OHPL is particularly designed for data with ordinal classes and enables
deep learning techniques to be applied to the ordinal classification problems.
By minimizing OHPL, a deep neural network learns to map data to an optimal space
where the distance between points and their class centroid hyper-plane are
minimized while a nontrivial ordinal relationship among classes are maintained.
Preliminary experimental results indicate that deep neural network with OHPL
optimizing significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art alternatives on
classification accuracies across multiple datasets. This research will examine
strategies that scale the OHPL based learning to big ordinal data. The
investigators will apply the OHPL-based learning to real-life critical
applications such as determining the severity/stages of a disease. They will
develop a ready-to-use open-source package on the OHPL deep learning strategy
and make it publicly available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.