* 1853059
* SBIR Phase II: Improving silicon nanowire biosensors: throughput, repeatability, and quantifying measurement advantages
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2019,03/31/2024
* Marcie Black, Advanced Silicon Group
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 03/31/2024
* USD 1,355,001.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is to further develop improved biosensing for
biomanufacturing. Improved biosensing will enable biomanufacturers to better
measure the purity of their products and thus develop processes that result in
more pure products. Specifically, this phase II project is to develop a silicon
nanowire biosensor from proof of concept to a working platform suitable for
initial testing and deployment for the detection of host cell proteins in
biopharmaceutical manufacturing. An improved biosensor developed in this project
promises to improve yields, reduce costs, and improve patient outcomes through
higher purity and safer biopharmaceuticals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
project will validate the sensor's use, function, and measurement accuracy in
comparison to current methods for detection and measurement. The innovation is a
low-cost, quantitative biosensor that can detect many different proteins on the
same chip and do so even when the proteins are present at a low concentration
level. The company will use vertically aligned silicon nanowire arrays, an
inexpensive process to make nanowires, and a device design that eliminates the
difficulties in electrically contacting nanowire arrays. The company will fully
characterize the sensor's response and compare this response to the metrics that
are currently used in the industry. In order to achieve this goal, they will
increase the process throughput required to make these sensors, set
manufacturing controls to achieve an acceptable consistency in the sensors,
measure the response of these sensors over a wide range of protein concentration
values, and build a validation package to assist customers in their
implementation for using these sensors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.