* 1853602
* The Roles of Heterogeneity, Mechanics, and the Environment in Biofilm Growth and Emergent Properties
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Howard Stone, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,199,999.00

Biofilms are ubiquitous surface-attached bacterial communities that can cause
major problems in industrial settings by fouling surfaces and by clogging pipes
and filtration devices. However, biofilms can also be beneficial, for instance,
in waste-water treatment and in microbiomes. The project will employ three-
dimensional imaging, genetic techniques, mechanical measurements of biofilm
properties, and biophysical theory and modeling to provide a unified, multi-
scale characterization of biofilms that spans from the level of the cell to that
of tightly organized collectives of thousands of cells. The results will define
how properties that emerge in the "collective" determine the biofilm's material
properties. The project will further provide opportunities for interdisciplinary
training within an integrated research framework in which students and postdocs
from biology, chemistry, engineering, and physics spend significant time in
laboratories other than their own. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this research, the
three integrated thrusts are: (1) to explore the origins and consequences of
behavioral heterogeneity in growing biofilms, (2) to characterize biofilm
mechanics from the micro-scale (a single cell or cluster of cells) to the macro-
scale (the biofilm), and (3) to determine how physico/chemical and mechanical
features of the environment influence microscopic and macroscopic biofilm
properties. The focus is on the model quorum-sensing marine bacterium, Vibrio
cholerae. The fundamental understanding gained through this research will enable
development of biological and engineering strategies to promote or discourage
formation of bacterial biofilms in relevant industrial and other applied
settings, and, by connecting micro-scale and environmental features to
macroscopic properties, may enable the discovery and design of new materials.
Finally, the interdisciplinary work will lead to understanding of spatial and
temporal gene expression programs in biofilms at the single-cell level and
reveal how those programs, in conjunction with environmental factors, dictate
the large-scale architectural and mechanical features of these multicellular
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.