* 1853041
* RAPID: Coastal consequences of engineered water control systems: the role of freshwater discharges in Florida's ongoing harmful algal bloom crises
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2018,02/29/2020
* Eric Milbrandt, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 02/29/2020
* USD 121,624.00

Several hundred tons of marine life have died along the Gulf shores of Florida
since October 2017 from exposure to algal blooms known as a "red tide". The
intensity of these blooms is believed to be related to nutrients in freshwater
releases from Lake Okeechobee, a large inland lake in south-central Florida that
is managed for flood prevention. However, strong scientific evidence to support
the connection between the red tide and Lake Okeechobee water releases is
lacking. The objective of this project is to collect, analyze, and model water
quality data prior to and throughout major freshwater releases. These data will
provide insight into cause-and-effect relationships between freshwater releases,
and algal blooms. Findings from this study will directly inform management of
one of the nation's most elaborate freshwater flood prevention systems, and
support efforts to address the ecological emergency caused by red tide.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central goals of the proposed work are to define the
effects of human-managed freshwater control regimes on the magnitude and
duration of coastal algal blooms, and transfer knowledge gained from this study
to the public and decision-makers through education and outreach activities. We
will investigate connections between Lake Okeechobee releases and coastal algal
blooms of the species Karenia brevis using an interdisciplinary, data-intensive,
multi-scale, and integrated fresh-marine systems approach. This effort
necessitates rapid mobilization to collect targeted data on nutrient and algal
loads along the Caloosahatchee River and Estuary that connects to Lake
Okeechobee via canals. The project has the following objectives: (1) quantify
spatial variability in water column conditions (water chemistry and
phytoplankton community) across 13 sites from a fresh-marine gradient in
southwest Florida prior to, during, and after Lake Okeechobee discharges, and
(2) explain spatiotemporal variability in water column conditions as a function
of physical, chemical, and biological factors. The combination of an ongoing red
tide and imminent freshwater discharges from Lake Okeechobee creates a unique
setting for investigating causal relationships between freshwater discharges and
coastal algal blooms. To our knowledge, this study will be the first to couple
multi-scale observations (i.e., in situ point observations, continuous
monitoring data, and satellite imagery products) to analyze connections between
freshwater discharges and marine red tides.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.