* 1853630
* Spatiotemporal Neural Dynamics of Visual Decisions
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2022
* Zachary Kilpatrick, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 06/30/2022
* USD 249,999.00

An important aspect of seeing is deciding what to focus on. Such decisions are
governed by activity across multiple brain areas. State of the art models of the
human visual system tend to treat it as a feedforward machine, but feedback
connections are also very important to the efficiency of biological vision. This
project will develop mathematical models of the visual system that demonstrate
how visual processing, decision making, and attention are intimately linked.
These models will tested on three tasks: visually tracing a curve, visual
searching a tree, and detecting motion. Results will show the degree to which
the human visual system does not simply filter images, but can perform complex
decision making tasks. Treatment of blindness with visual prostheses requires
continued research on camera-to-brain interfaces that require deep computational
knowledge of the brain's visual processing abilities. This project will develop
novel and important mathematical insights into the efficiency of the visual
system and the underlying neural principles. Results from this work will also be
leveraged to develop course material for newly developed major and professional
masters in Statistics and Data Science at CU Boulder, training the next
generation of data scientists. In addition, this work will augment typical
machine learning approaches to modeling human vision, and potentially inspire
new technologies for computer-aided vision and categorization.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mathematical theories of vision must be extended to
address cognitive tasks that reflect the complexity of the natural world. This
project advances this effort for three main reasons. First, it focuses on
understanding how the visual cortex participates in decision-making, a
ubiquitous cognitive process. Most studies of the visual system consider object
filtering and image classification. This project will develop spatially-extended
neuronal network models that both process spatiotemporal inputs and interpret
them to make complex decisions. These models will reflect the geometry of the
visual world that humans observe and interpret, and the resulting theories will
help to predict strategies people use to make everyday visual decisions. Second,
the project is grounded in mathematical models of the visual cortex we will
validate with the data sets of experimental collaborators. These models are
amenable to mathematical analysis, so the architecture of neuronal networks can
be linked to the cognitive computations they perform, providing testable
predictions. This skill set will be crucial for analyzing models of
spatiotemporal activity in visual cortex. Trainees will become conversant in
techniques for the analysis of nonlinear and stochastic systems as well as
probabilistic models of decision-making applicable to many problems in science
and industry. The PI will share educational graphics, software, and outreach
materials on a webpage to communicate findings widely.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.