* 1853120
* SBIR Phase II:  Hats &amp; Ladders: A Mobile Platform to Foster Career Self-Efficacy in Youth Ages 14 to 25
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2019,01/31/2023
* Juliette Adams, Hats & Ladders, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 01/31/2023
* USD 1,443,356.00

This SBIR Phase II project serves a national need for stronger career readiness
by building the confidence of youth at an age when researchers believe it
matters the most. A key objective is to close equity and opportunity gaps by
equipping youth and their advocates with a data-driven, motivational career
development solution - one that taps into existing initiatives and connects
users to meaningful career-building experiences online and in their communities.
The intended outcome is a web-based career platform that fosters career self-
efficacy and increases knowledge of occupations and career pathways. The
proposed platform consists of (1) an engaging app for youth ages 14 to 25 based
on popular game mechanics; (2) a Web-based advocate (educator) dashboard that
reports on individual and aggregate user career exploration and skill-building
activity, and supports public and private organizations? need for visibility
into youth interests and skills as a way to prioritize funding; and (3) an
implementation toolkit, featuring 30+ lesson plans as well as professional
development videos for integrating the platform in a wide range of formal and
informal academic and advisory settings. This project's broader impact is to
help youth foster career readiness and, thus, increase their likelihood of
staying in school, finding good employment, and gaining greater social mobility.
This increased career readiness ensures a pool of qualified applicants for
employers in industries across the U.S. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project combines empirically-tested career development methodologies, proven
game-based learning principles, and open big data about careers to provide
personalized, accurate career guidance. The app engages youth in building
personal profiles using visualized psychological assessments (based on validated
inventories). A proprietary system then recommends Hats (careers) to explore and
Ladders (activities) to complete that provide real-world learning supported by a
range of motivators (level design, self-reflections, achievement badges, social
sharing, and mentor communication). Data generated during Ladder activity and
self-reflections strengthens the user's profile and, thus, the accuracy of the
recommendation engine. The project employs design-based methods as the
overarching research approach. A final evaluation of the completed program will
be conducted in both high school and after-school settings. Career readiness,
persistence, and perceptions of ability and of the H&amp;L program will be
assessed using quantitative methodologies. The anticipated result is a highly
effective career development program that engages 21st-century learners with
foundational career-building experiences. Students will be able to identify
career aspirations, based on interests and occupational data, and gain greater
confidence in their ability to navigate and adapt to changing career
pathways.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.