* 1853062
* SBIR Phase II:  User Application and Backend Portal to Enhance and Measure Addiction Treatment and Recovery Efficacy
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2022
* Christopher Pesce, Sober Grid, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 06/30/2022
* USD 799,996.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is to further develop the technical
functionality of its cohort recruitment tool that will advance efforts to launch
a production quality substance abuse disorder (SUD) research platform designed
for use by addiction researchers at universities, academic medical centers, and
commercial sector where U.S. publicly-funded research on addictions exceeds $1.4
billion per year. The project will enable the company to contribute directly to
broader societal goals of reducing the negative effects and costs of substance
abuse, addiction, and treatment services to individuals from all sectors of
society (e.g., minorities, veterans, etc.) by enabling addiction researchers to
surface novel and more effective addiction recovery supports and interventions
essential to enhancing health outcomes and controlling health care costs. The
enhanced functionality will provide SUD researchers and stakeholders a unique
platform to study and leverage existing evidence to improve treatment protocols,
policies, and financing to improve addiction recovery outcomes. Developing the
product will enable the company to combine its large mobile recovery community
with state-of-the-art research tools that provide significant value to addiction
researchers and demonstrate effectiveness to public and private health insurers
? two important target customers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will aid researchers in surfacing
novel technical interventions and support scientific methods to improve
population health outcomes. Although technologies are emerging to help address
recovery support, these have not yet met their full potential for addressing the
needs of people striving 24/7 to stay sober, the needs of practitioners
including SUD researchers intent on supporting their recovery, and the desire
for health insurers to incentivize best practices and to improve health and
control costs. The research objectives include expanding on its proof-of-concept
for a cohort recruitment tool by building, testing, and implementing a
production-ready open-source research platform with enhanced features for
conducting scientific studies including participant assessment and intervention
scheduling, advanced cohort selection and prospective assignment features,
automated study management features, a white label comparison app, highly
scalable architecture enabling very large studies, flexible data hosting and
management capabilities, and secure software update infrastructure. The result
will be an extensible, scalable, and open-source software tool for conducting a
broad variety of scientifically rigorous behavioral research studies, including
clinical trials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.