* 1853934
* IRES Track 1:Behavioral ecology and conservation of African carnivores
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Kay Holekamp, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 06/30/2024
* USD 305,017.00

The intellectual focus of this project is the behavioral ecology, physiology,
and conservation of African carnivores. Mammalian carnivores are critical to the
stability and integrity of ecosystems around the world, largely because they
play key roles in regulating such important ecosystem processes as interspecific
competition and predator-prey dynamics, yet many carnivores are currently
threatened or endangered. The economic well-being of many developing nations in
Africa is intimately linked with conservation of mammalian carnivores, but our
ability to conserve these animals is often limited by how little we know about
their basic biology. This IRES training program is designed to fill these gaps
in our knowledge about African carnivores while also enhancing the professional
development of young biologists at a critical early stage of their careers. Top
undergraduates and junior graduate students are selected each year from large
pools of applicants interested in conducting field research in Kenya on spotted
hyenas and other African carnivores. Mammalian carnivores represent one of
Kenya?s most important natural resources, yet many of them remain poorly
understood. IRES students have a rich selection of carnivore species from which
to draw their research subjects. IRES students work on a wide array of topics
ranging from comparative study of carnivore cognition to modeling the ecological
and anthropogenic forces affecting carnivore population sizes. Some students
exploit naturally-occurring variation to test hypotheses, whereas others conduct
experiments using equipment borrowed from our research camps. Each team of
undergraduate and graduate students works closely with a specific Kenyan
trainer. This arrangement allows students to get deeply involved in their work
even before they arrive in Kenya, and they also benefit immensely from the
careful guidance of individual grad students. Graduate student participants, in
turn, acquire invaluable mentorship experience as well as close American and
Kenyan colleagues working on problems of mutual interest. This IRES program will
contribute significantly to the development of a new generation of global
scientists who are united in their desire to understand and protect the natural
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This IRES project will engage five advanced
undergraduates and five junior graduate students each year to spend several
months in Kenya with experienced trainers, conducting research on African
carnivores. Students will utilize comparative methods, and undertake projects
designed to acquire new and useful information about the carnivores inhabiting
the Mara-Serengeti ecosystem. IRES pursues continuation of a training
partnership with three Kenyan scientists and one young American PhD-level
biologist; this team of trainers will help IRES students address a broad array
of research questions about the behavior, conservation, and physiology of
African carnivores, ranging from the evolution of their cognitive abilities to
anthropogenic effects on their stress physiology. Teams of undergraduate and
graduate students will be linked by topical research focus, and they will work
closely with specific Kenyan trainers. All Kenyan trainers are closely
affiliated with the Kenya Wildlife Service (KWS). Students will spend several
weeks developing and executing their field research projects, working closely
with Kenyan trainers and Kenyan students. While in Kenya, IRES students will
also receive explicit training in science writing, and present their work orally
at the Carnivore Researchers Conference held each year at KWS. The research
opportunities offered to students are unparalleled, not only to investigate the
biology of several carnivore species that remain very poorly understood, but
also to make important contributions to behavioral ecology, stress physiology
and conservation biology. In addition to providing support for one graduate
student program assistant, the IRES project is intended to influence the
professional development of ten top American student participants each year, and
offer them extraordinary opportunities to learn a wide array of field research
skills in a spectacular natural setting. IRES students will receive training in,
and conduct research projects investigating, both the basic and applied biology
of African carnivores. The economic well-being of Kenya is intimately linked
with conservation of African carnivores, but our ability to conserve these
animals is often limited by how little we know about their basic biology. Guided
by Kenyan trainers whose professional lives are dedicated to the conservation of
African wildlife, IRES students will gather data to allow important improvements
in the management policies used in Kenya's national parks and reserves. IRES
participants will learn a great deal about African life and culture, and about
the complexities associated with carnivore conservation in a developing nation.
This IRES experience will thus contribute significantly to the development of a
new generation of global scientists who are united in their desire to understand
and protect the natural world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.