* 1853357
* Mathematical Modeling and Computational Analysis of Cell Movement
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Hans Othmer, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 07/31/2023
* USD 300,000.00

Cell locomotion plays an essential role during embryonic development,
angiogenesis, tissue regeneration, the immune response, and wound healing in
multicellular organisms, and has a deleterious effect in cancer metastasis.
Movement is a complex process that involves the spatial and temporal control and
integration of a number of sub-processes, including the transduction of chemical
or mechanical signals from the environment, intra-cellular biochemical
responses, and translation of the intra- and extracellular signals into a
mechanical response. While many single-celled organisms use flagella or cilia to
swim, there are two basic modes of movement used by eukaryotic cells that lack
such structures -- mesenchymal and amoeboid. The former, which can be
characterized as `crawling' or `gliding', involves the extension of finger-like
protrusions and/or broad, flat protrusions, whose protrusion is driven by actin
polymerization at the leading edge. The amoeboid mode is less reliant on strong
adhesion, and cells are more rounded and employ shape changes to move -- in
effect 'jostling through the crowd' or `swimming'. Cells of the immune system
use this mode for movement through tissues when adhesion molecules have been
knocked out. However, recent experiments have shown that numerous cell types
display enormous plasticity in locomotion, in that they sense the mechanical
properties of their environment and adjust their mode of movement accordingly.
Thus pure crawling and pure swimming are the extremes on a continuum of
locomotion strategies, but many cells can sense their environment to determine
the most efficient strategy in a given environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
long-term objective in this research is to understand how cells sense the
mechanical properties of their environment and transduce the information into
intracellular biochemical and mechanical changes that determine their pattern of
movement. Recent experimental work has discovered that numerous cell types use
strong intracellular material flows near the cell wall, which, when disrupted,
disrupts&lt;br/&gt;cell movement. However, there is as yet little understanding
of how this flow translates into cell movement, and our first objective is to
continue development and analysis of a mathematical model that facilitates in
silico experiments to understand how the processes involved interact to produce
motion. Another objective is to understand the cytoskeletal changes needed to
produce motion using blebs, which are 'blister-like' protrusions of the
membrane, and how the choice between blebs and other modes is arbitrated in
complex environments. In particular, the role of membrane tension and the nature
of cell confinement in determining how and where on the membrane blebs are
initiated, and whether blebs or protrusions are used, are not understood. A
third objective concerns movement of cells under various forms of confinement.
It is known that imposed mechanical stress can induce movement in otherwise
quiescent cells, but how mechanical stimuli induce motion is not understood. A
detailed model such as the PI shall develop will provide experimentally-testable
predictions that can be used to guide new experiments that advance our
understanding of cell movement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.