* 1853105
* SBIR Phase II:  Conformal Temperature Sensors for Remote Monitoring of Diabetic Ulceration
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2019,12/31/2021
* Linh Le, FlexTraPower
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2021
* USD 780,200.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is to provide a new class of soft, flexible,
nonabrasive sensing elements which provides precise temperature readings to
positively impact the health and mobility of diabetic patients. The principle
impetus of this research is to focus primarily on advanced diabetic patients who
suffer from nerve damage to their feet. These patients cannot feel their feet,
leading to two important and related results. First, they are at high risk for
an increased number of undetected ulcerating injuries from tissue damage
produced by walking (friction) or standing (pressure). Second, since these
injuries are undetected and unfelt, there is a decreased urgency by the patient
to seek medical care. Delays in medical intervention further exacerbate injuries
and complicate treatment, leading to an economic burden associated with foot
ulceration estimated at $15 billion annually. More importantly, the 5-year
mortality rate after first ulceration (40%) approaches mortality rates from
heart failure (50%). The key need for a simple and cost-effective ulcer-
prevention paradigm is a safe, easy-to-use foot monitoring system with
temperature-sensing capability with a remote readout.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed project utilizes an innovative approach to develop a non-invasive
sensing system that will provide the ability to constantly monitor skin
temperature that would be integrated into a diabetic-friendly insole. Skin
temperature has been shown to be a predictive indicator of foot-ulcer
development and can additionally be used as a measure of wound healing. A simple
system enabling early detection of imminent skin ulceration subsequently reduces
further tissue damage, decreasing limb amputations and saving financial, medical
and emotional resources. The proof of concept shoe insert is designed to reside
daily in a patient's shoes to continuously record the patient's foot health. In
addition, the software system, including a mobile app for users as well as a
doctor dashboard, is developed as a communication channel between the patient,
the healthcare provider and the caregiver.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.