* 1853896
* NSFGEO-NERC:Collaborative Research: A New Mechanistic Framework for Modeling Rift Processes in Antarctic Ice Shelves Validated through Improved Strain-rate and Seismic Observations
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2020,07/31/2021
* Bradley Lipovsky, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 07/31/2021
* USD 362,278.00

Calving of tabular icebergs accounts for a significant fraction of ice mass loss
from the Antarctic Ice Sheet. In addition to this direct mass loss, calving may
further accelerate the seaward flow of grounded ice by reducing resistive
stresses provided by ice shelves, the floating extensions of the ice sheet.
Tabular icebergs are much longer and wider than they are thick and form when
full-thickness fractures known as rifts intersect the edges of an ice shelf. The
processes and drivers of ice-shelf rifting are neither well understood nor
accurately represented in ice-flow models. As a result, it is not currently
possible to predict when tabular icebergs may form, how large they will be, and
how calving may evolve as the climate changes. This lack of predictive
capability has two important consequences. First, it is not possible to
confidently project rates of mass loss due to calving from floating shelves.
Second, it is not possible to confidently project how tabular iceberg calving
will influence the mass loss from the grounded ice sheet. This second
consequence is a major source of uncertainty in projections of sea-level rise
over human timescales.

In this project, the team aims to improve understanding of tabular iceberg
calving using a combination of detailed observations and a suite of increasingly
sophisticated models to study the processes and drivers of rifting in ice
shelves. The work will focus on a natural laboratory: the ice-shelf system
formed by the Brunt Ice Shelf and Stancomb-Wills Glacier Tongue, East
Antarctica, which has one of the longest and most detailed observational records
in Antarctica. As of early 2020, two active rift systems are propagating across
the Brunt Ice Shelf, one of which should soon form a large tabular iceberg.
Thus, there is a rare opportunity to observe multiple active rifts. The project
will take advantage of this situation by employing remote-sensing observations
collected from a variety of spaceborne instruments to make detailed time-
dependent measurements of velocity and strain-rate fields across the ice shelf
and, notably, in the vicinity of the active rift tips. At these tips, stresses
are expected to intensify due to the presence of the rift. The observations will
inform a suite of ice-flow-and-fracture models that will be developed and used
to better understand how rifts propagate and how best to represent rift
propagation in large scale ice-flow models. The modeling objective follows a
development path that aims to yield a community ice-flow model capable of
simulating rift propagation, and that has been tested against observations.
Seismic data already collected in the vicinity of an active rift will provide
detailed knowledge of rifting processes and will complement the remote sensing
observations and inform the modeling efforts. This combination of multi-faceted
observations and models aims to illuminate the fundamental processes of ice-
shelf rifting, thereby contributing to the knowledge necessary to make reliable
projections of ice-sheet evolution and sea-level rise.

This project is jointly funded by the National Science Foundationâ€™s Directorate
of Geosciences (NSF/GEO) and the National Environment Research Council
(UKRI/NERC) of the United Kingdom (UK) through the NSF/GEO-NERC Lead Agency
Agreement. This Agreement allows a single joint US/UK proposal to be submitted
and peer-reviewed by the Agency whose investigator has the largest proportion of
the budget. Upon successful joint determination of an award, each Agency funds
the proportion of the budget and the investigators associated with its own
ivestigators and component of the work.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.