* 1853675
* NSF I-Corps: Silver materials for antimicrobial coatings
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2019
* Terry Bigioni, University of Toledo
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 08/31/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to provide a
new means of creating broad-spectrum antimicrobial fabric treatments with a low
barrier to entry for manufacturers. This technology promises to deliver
antimicrobial coatings at lower overall economic and environmental costs, by
reducing solvent usage, waste, and coating loss. Antimicrobial treatments are
already used in medicine, as anti-infective treatments of bandages, catheters,
and other medical items, and in garments and textiles, as anti-odor treatments.
The lower barrier to entry for garment manufacturers is expected to enable more
widespread adoption of the technology, which in turn will reduce material and
energy waste from excessive laundering and save consumers money. The technology
can be adapted to a wide range of fiber types and can be applied without
specialized equipment, facilitating the integration into existing manufacturing
processes and giving manufacturers access to premium market segments with
minimal upfront investment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps
project will help improve the market penetration of antimicrobial treatments,
which in turn will provide consumers with superior garment performance at
reduced environmental and economic costs. The technology uses a new form of
soluble silver metal, developed by prior NSF funded research, and an innovative
method to coat a variety of different fiber types with bioactive silver, which
enables the antimicrobial coatings to be applied at any stage in the
manufacturing process. Proof of concept has been demonstrated with basic
prototyping, but development of the technology for specific markets and
applications demands a better understanding of customer needs. This I-Corps team
project is aimed at discovering those customer needs, through extensive customer
interviews, in order to inform the development and engineering of products that
meet each particular market specific need that is
identified.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.