* 1853297
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Cross-Linguistic Investigations of Syntactic Creativity Errors in Children's Wh-questions
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/2019,08/31/2021
* Geraldine Legendre, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Tyler Kendall
* 08/31/2021
* USD 14,452.00

Children show remarkable aptitude for learning language and have mastered much
of the grammar of their language by age four. This remarkable skill has led to
the hypothesis that children come to this task with an innate ability to learn
certain types of grammatical patterns, namely those manifested in the languages
of the world. Through exposure, they learn which patterns are relevant to their
language. For example, children learning English initially produce a type of
complex questions not grammatical in English, but resembling grammatical German
questions. Over time, they learn this pattern is not English and no longer use
it. An alternative explanation for these errors is that limited general
cognitive capacities, specifically memory, attention, and sentence planning
result in productions which only superficially resemble German questions. The
goal of the project is to tease apart these possible explanations through
controlled experimentation comparing elicited questions and answers by English
speaking children and by German speaking children. The two hypotheses predict
different error types. If the errors are the result of an innate predisposition,
German speaking children should produce some questions resembling English. If
the errors are the result of limited cognitive abilities, children learning each
language should produce questions which are not consistent with such a
predisposition. This research holds the potential to be used as a clinical
diagnostic for investigating children's linguistic and cognitive development.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research comprises novel experiments designed to test
production and comprehension of multiclausal questions. Children between the
ages of four and six will be given tests designed to assess their attention,
working memory, and sentence planning abilities. By comparing performance of
English and German speaking children, this project will further illuminate the
role of input in language learning and provide a baseline for comparison for
English-speaking children. Novel contributions include furthering the use and
integration of psycholinguistic methodologies into linguistic work as well as
investigating German children's as yet unstudied acquisition of this complex
syntactic phenomenon.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.