* 1853254
* SBIR Phase II:  Scalable Linear Ion Beam For Large Area Plasma Processing
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2019,11/30/2023
* Robert Weiss, Malachite Technologies
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 11/30/2023
* USD 1,236,988.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project touches upon everything from shower doors to
consumer electronics to window glass. Deposition of high-quality thin films on a
large scale with precise energy control can allow, for one example, diamond-like
carbon (DLC) on glass. DLC coatings on glass can prevent soapy film build-up on
shower doors, can improve the scratch resistance of mobile phone displays, and
can reduce the cost of energy-conserving windows. The control of energy during
fabrication processes won't just broaden what films can be made; it will allow
the use of a greater variety of substrates. In recent years, a number of
applications have utilized traditional inorganic coatings like silicon oxide on
top of new materials like organic solar cells and organic LEDs. These organic
materials show greater sensitivity to degradation during the coating processes.
This ion beam source can give industry, as it begins to bring these innovations
to market, a tool with the level of energy control that will allow lab results
to translate to high yield, low cost manufacturing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed project addresses the challenge of depositing advanced thin films on
insulating and/or delicate substrates. Control of the deposition's energy flux
has been shown in laboratory demonstrations to be required for many thin films
including diamond-like carbon, transparent conductive oxides on silicon and
organic solar cells, and ultra-thin silver. A scalable linear ion beam sputter
source will establish a high-volume manufacturing tool for thin films limited
today to much smaller scale. In Phase 1, the source's functionality was
demonstrated. Phase 2 has two major components: hardware development for scale
and usability; process development for specific commercial applications. The
company will deliver a fully integrated control system and a source, scaled by
2x and designed for manufacture. Process development will consider beam
energetics and geometry of beam/target/substrate relative to film and substrate
properties. For DLC, this will focus on tribological and optical properties. For
silver, they will test for continuity of ultra-thin films. Transparent
Conducting Oxide (TCO) efforts will focus on electrical properties and substrate
impacts, particularly carrier lifetime in silicon.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.