* 1853201
* SBIR Phase II:  Optical Delivery System for In Situ Heating and Excitation in the Transmission Electron Microscope
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2019,04/30/2023
* Thomas Moore, Waviks, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 04/30/2023
* USD 1,085,825.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is to develop instrumentation that will allow
researchers to elucidate fundamental interactions at the atomic scale that occur
at high-temperature and various timescales. From advanced automobile
manufacturing to computer chips, virtually all developing technologies require
processing materials at high temperatures to enhance their properties. The
proposed optical delivery system will enable researchers and manufacturers to
efficiently study materials at unprecedented temperature, time, and length
scales, and thus bring new products to market faster. Furthermore, the system
will provide engineers and scientists a new platform for rapidly advancing
emerging technologies that are limited by understanding high-temperature and
excited-state materials phenomena.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will design, assemble and test an
optical delivery system specifically suitable for nano- and atomic-scale
characterization in a transmission electron microscope (TEM). The proposed
program will deliver a system with unprecedented ability to efficiently
stimulate materials in the TEM via highly-localized photothermal and
photoexcited modalities. The photothermal modality will enable agile, non-
invasive, and ubiquitous access to TEM specimens, and enable studies of unique
temperature and temporal regimes not accessible using standard resistive heating
systems. The proposed integrated temperature measurement system will allow
closed-loop feedback and control of the precise temperature. The excitation
modality will enable researchers to image and characterize optically excited
states of materials at the nanoscale. The proposed instrumentation consists of
fiber-coupled optical heating and excitation channels positioned by a specially-
designed nanomanipulator for accurate x-y-z positioning. In addition to the
hardware development, appropriate software controls will be developed for the
optical sources and the nanomanipulator system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.