* 1853296
* Asthenospheric melting and melt-induced evolution of the lithosphere beneath the Colorado Plateau and the Basin and Range from a seismic characterization of mantle layering
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/2019,09/30/2020
* James Gaherty, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Raterron
* 09/30/2020
* USD 134,910.00

Partial melting in the Earth's upper mantle plays a key role in controlling
surface volcanism. It also impacts the evolution of tectonic plates and the
deformation of the hot mantle underneath, called the asthenosphere. In recent
years, the continental United States has been blanketed by EarthScope's
Transportable Array, a program that deployed thousands of seismic instruments.
The collected data provide unprecedented new constraints on the structure of the
uppermost mantle, informing its dynamics and history of formation and
alteration. Here, the researchers analyze the data from the Colorado Plateau, an
area with ancient Proterozoic crust. This area has remained relatively
undeformed through multiple compression episodes and subsequent extension of the
surrounding Basin and Range. The rise of the Plateau from near sea level to its
current elevation is not well understood. The volcanism of the Basin and Range
is now actively encroaching on the ancient Plateau. By combining seismology and
thermodynamic modeling, the team maps out the partial melt and alteration of the
uppermost mantle. This project brings new light on the past evolution and
present state of an important region of the southwestern United States. It also
supports an early-career female scientist, the principal investigator, and
provides training to an undergraduate student in the field of
seismology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team investigates the Colorado Plateau
region, where disparate tectonic settings are juxtaposed within a small
geographical area. The researchers use surface-wave dispersion data and
information derived from S-to-P receiver functions about sharp velocity
gradients in the upper mantle. They calculate accurate seismic-velocity models
which employ a geologically reasonable layered framework. The models build on
the Principal Investigator's previous work with receiver functions, which
provides the layered lithosphere-asthenosphere framework in which to invert the
dispersion data. The team combine seismic analysis with thermodynamic modeling
in a self-consistent way to estimate regional velocity structures. The modeling
accounts for the composition, pressure and temperature, as well as melt fraction
at depth. These estimates are constrained by compositional and temperature data
from the abundant volcanism and xenoliths in the area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.