* 1853050
* Collaborative Research: The Role of Coherent Structures in Scalar Transport over Heterogeneous Landscapes
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2023
* Heping Liu, Washington State University
* Continuing Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 05/31/2023
* USD 406,458.00

Scalar fluxes including sensible heat, latent heat, and trace gases such as CO2,
methane, ammonia fluxes, from or to land surfaces have direct impacts on weather
and climate, air quality, agricultural management, and ecosystem services. A
better understanding of turbulence in the lower atmosphere is the prerequisite
for better quantification and modeling of these scalar fluxes. Over the past few
decades, there has been active research on the topology and transporting
capacity of coherent structures in canonical turbulent boundary layers and
convective systems. However, problems of practical relevance in micrometeorology
have not profited from these studies. This project aims to fill the research gap
by investigating the role of coherent structures in scalar transport in
atmospheric boundary layer flows over heterogeneous landscapes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on the interactions between land
surface heterogeneity and coherent structures at the point- and landscape-
scales, and their implications for the breakdown of Monin-Obukhov Similarity
Theory (MOST) in describing scalar fluxes. At the point-scale, the breakdown of
MOST arises from advective terms communicating the signatures of land surface
heterogeneity and vertical transport terms bearing the signatures of coherent
structures. At the landscape-scale where a spatial averaging is conducted,
dispersive fluxes arise from the interactions between land surface heterogeneity
and coherent structures. This work combines field experiments and large-eddy
simulations (LES) under a unifying framework via flux budget equations and their
spatially-averaged version. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The field experiment will be
conducted over a relatively flat but heterogeneous terrain in Idaho Falls,
Idaho, with a 62-m tower and several short towers to be equipped with eddy
covariance systems, a sodar, a wind profiler with RASS, 35 mesonet stations, and
other instruments. The field work will provide a unique characterization of
coherent structures and scalar turbulence in three dimensions and at high
resolutions. It will allow quantification of horizontal and vertical terms in
the scalar flux budget simultaneously. A series of LES runs will be used to
extend the insights afforded by the field experiment from point to landscape
scales. A novel approach based on quadrant analysis in time and space will be
employed to model dispersive fluxes. The new datasets generated by the field
experiment will provide opportunities for exploring other topics related to
atmospheric boundary layer and land surface processes. Beyond the tutoring of
two graduate students and two undergraduate students, the project will involve
several educational and outreach components. It will generate mini-projects for
students in several graduate and undergraduate courses taught by the PIs on
boundary layer meteorology, applied meteorology, and fluid dynamics. Short films
and videos will be created to present the significance of the findings to
researchers and the general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.