* 1853680
* Combine sensors, geophysical survey and geochemical tools to investigate pedogenic carbonate precipitation and carbon dioxide emission in irrigated soils of aridlands
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Lixin Jin, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Alberto Perez-Huerta
* 07/31/2024
* USD 683,756.00

Marginal aridlands have been converted to farmlands to support increasing demand
of food production. In these areas, intensive irrigation, coupled with high
evapotranspiration and limited groundwater recharge, has led to accumulation of
pedogenic carbonate and production of abiotic CO2 in agricultural lands. This
project will be among the first to quantify such an abiotic CO2 efflux, and to
define key linkages between flood irrigation, salt loading and soil-atmosphere
CO2 exchange in desert agricultural soils. This project is transformative in
that it examines how pedogenic carbonate formation in irrigated agricultural
systems, an under-studied process but continuously magnified by human
activities, impacts C cycling in one of the largest biomes on Earth. More
importantly, this project has significant socioeconomic relevance at global
scales, because irrigation-induced salt accumulation and elevated CO2 efflux
need to be remediated through improved agricultural practice and management.
This project is also highly relevant for advancing STEM education to
representative population of the southwestern U.S. It will provide
interdisciplinary training opportunities in Critical Zone Science, environmental
geophysics and isotope geochemistry, and advanced sensor technology for both
graduate and undergraduate students from primarily under-represented groups at
the University of Texas at El Paso (UTEP) where 80% of student body is Hispanic.
This project will directly support two Ph.D. and four undergraduate students,
and provide field experience and learning opportunities to environmental science
and geology majors, including two-week summer field trips. For education and
outreach, hands-on activities will be presented at the annual "Earth Science
Day" at UTEP, which generally attracts ~2000 visitors from the general
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three agricultural sites and one natural site along
the Rio Grande valley, that are typical and representative of aridland settings
worldwide, will be examined in the study. Geochemical, geophysical and isotopic
tools will be combined with newly designed CO2 sensors to test the overarching
hypothesis that "pedogenic carbonate accumulation in irrigated desert soils
emits an important anthropogenically induced flux of CO2 to the atmosphere." The
project will identify "naturally formed" versus "irrigation-induced" pedogenic
carbonate in agricultural soils, separate "abiotic" and "oil respired" CO2 in
soil gases, and monitor the spatiotemporal variation of abiotic CO2 efflux from
land to atmosphere at field scales. By identifying the major controls (including
irrigation intensity and chemistry, soil texture, and type of crops), expected
datasets from this field-based study can be extrapolated to large regional
scales and provide the first essential assessment on the potential of irrigated
agriculture to modify the land-atmosphere carbon
exchange.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.