* 1853717
* Sampling Peculiarity of Sea Surface Temperature Data Sets from Drifting Buoys due to the Lagrangian Nature of Observing Platforms
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Alexey Kaplan, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Sean Kennan
* 08/31/2023
* USD 392,069.00

Drifting buoys are a common platform for observing surface ocean currents and
sea surface temperature (SST). Their sampling is Lagrangian, meaning that they
move with the ocean currents, as opposed to other observational platforms which
are fixed in space (Eulerian) or move in some other manner (like ships). This
project will investigate the effects that moving with the currents has on the
differences between SST measured from drifters with SST observed from satellite.
The hypothesis is that there is a bias completely due to the Lagrangian sampling
which can be quantified and corrected for. The project has important
implications for improving the SST data sets that are used for initialization or
assimilation in climate models. The project will involve undergraduate students
in the research. The results will be made publicly available and will be
presented at the LDEO Open House and at an Earth2Class workshop for K-12 Earth
Science teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on the sampling
interdependency of SST observations from drifting buoys that occurs due to their
Lagrangian nature, combined with the approximately conservative property of SST.
It is hypothesized that root mean square differences between SST measured from
drifting buoys and satellite can be quantified as a sampling bias attributable
to the Lagrangian nature of the drifters. The research involves quantifying this
bias and correcting for it. The project will use SST from drifters and satellite
and will use the Mercator ocean model as well. The results are anticipated to be
useful for properly initializing climate models with accurate SST
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.