* 1853094
* Effects of Interviewers, Respondents, and Questions on Survey Measurement
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2023
* Jennifer Dykema, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 08/31/2023
* USD 329,999.00

This research project will investigate how the quality of survey data is
influenced by features of the survey interview. Survey data remains one of the
most important ways that researchers learn about the behaviors and attitudes of
populations. Using data and transcripts from a health survey, the investigators
will examine the interplay between the characteristics of the survey questions,
the behaviors of interviewers and respondents when questions are administered,
and the socio-demographic attributes (for example, age, ethnicity, and gender)
of both interviewers and respondents. The project will improve understanding of
the issues involved in participation in medical research, questionnaire design,
interviewing methods, and interviewer training. The results of this project will
be of value to survey practitioners, federal data collection efforts, and
social, behavioral, and medical researchers. Improving the quality of survey
data benefits society by elevating the contribution that social science surveys
make to the nation's data infrastructure. Results from this project will be
disseminated in journals and at conferences. Materials produced by the project
will be made available to practitioners and other researchers. Students will be
trained as part of this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The context for this
research project is survey measurement, particularly as it applies in a diverse
and multi-cultural setting like a health-related survey. The research will
address the question: How do characteristics of interviewers, respondents, and
survey questions independently and in combination impact survey quality?
Building upon prior research, the investigators will examine how features of the
survey interview may introduce systematic measurement error, bias comparisons
across social groups of respondents, and lead to increased unreliability. The
research will concentrate on two areas simultaneously: 1) a qualitative analysis
identifying behaviors of interviewers and respondents and the interplay between
them that produces a survey answer; and 2) a quantitative enumeration of these
features of the interaction and their association with characteristics of
interviewers, respondents, and survey questions. To facilitate the latter
analyses, the investigators will develop and apply systematic coding to
transcripts of standardized survey interviews. This coding will inform an
examination of whether the behaviors of interviewers and respondents -
especially behaviors other research finds are associated with lower validity or
reliability - vary for respondents across groups (for example, racial/ethnic
groups) and vary across characteristics of the survey
questions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.