* 1853008
* SBIR Phase II:  Development of Broadly Efficacious Ribonucleic Acid Interference Triggers for Pesticides
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Juan Arhancet, NanoSUR LLC
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 07/31/2023
* USD 1,069,281.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project will be to provide farmers with a new class of
biotechnology-based pesticides for more affordable and environmentally benign
crop production by addressing an unmet need: an efficacious, selective and safe
pesticide. The project will focus on a pesticide for the diamondback moth (DBM),
a pest that damages Brassica crops such as canola, cabbage, cauliflower and
collards. It is the most costly invasive crop pest worldwide, for which there is
no effective solution with acceptable resistance management. DMB has developed
resistance to more than 90 active ingredients in conventional insecticides,
i.e., almost every insecticide class known. If successful, this biotechnology
platform will contribute to sustainable food production and enhanced
biodiversity with minimal use of non-selective traditional pesticides associated
with human health costs. The goal is to develop a product that is efficacious,
selective, and provides improved resistance management against field populations
of DMB.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this SBIR Phase II
project is the development of RNAi-based pesticide for the treatment of
diamondback moth (Plutella xylostella) infestations in cruciferous crops. In the
last five years, there have been significant advances in the methods for the
production of RNAi triggers that allow the manufacturing of these materials in
large quantities and at a low price, which is required for broad agricultural
applications. Topical RNAi-based pesticides have been demonstrated in the lab to
be very selective with respect to the intended target. They also may be readily
modified to combat developed pesticide resistance by target pests. However, due
to low efficacy at economically attractive application rates, very few pests and
no Lepidopteran insects are currently in the RNAi list of commercial targets.
This project specifically addresses the challenges related to RNAi efficacy, and
the development of the proposed technology could be applied to Lepidopteran
control and other biotechnology applications. The outcome of the proposed
research would provide the first example of a scalable RNAi-based insecticide
targeting Plutella xylostella or any Lepidopteran.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.