* 1853185
* Collaborative Research: Anthropological Perspectives on Renewable Energy, Infrastructure, and Gender
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Kristin Phillips, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 02/29/2024
* USD 110,145.00

Renewable forms of energy (those energies naturally replenished on a human
timescale) have been hailed as solutions to energy security, especially for the
poor. In particular, the use of solar, wind, and biomass technologies to provide
electricity both on and off national grids is escalating worldwide. Energy
access and use is not just a technological issue but also a social one, creating
opportunities and risks related to connection and production. While there has
been significant research on the social effects of carbon-based energy
production and use, we know less about the specific ways alternative forms of
energy transform peoples' lives, create new opportunities or risk, and affect
relationships between individuals and communities. Understanding how alternative
forms of energy are perceived and used at the household level, especially by
those who may not have access to traditional forms of electrification, is a
crucial part of assessing whether and how alternative energy sources can
contribute to a more comprehensive and secure portfolio of energy options.
Findings from this research will illuminate the ways alternative energy
technologies are incorporated into daily life and to what effect, and will
inform national and international energy policies that can be targeted toward
meeting the needs of the most marginalized members of society. The project also
provides training for students in methods of rigorous, scientific data
collection and analysis; broadens participation in the sciences through the
training of students and researchers from underrepresented groups; and it
improves scientific infrastructure through international scientific
collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Kristin Phillips of Emory University and
Dr. Erin Dean of the New College of Florida will explore the question of whether
the benefits and risks associated with the adoption of new energy technologies
are socioeconomically differentiated. This research will examine the impact of
solar, wind, and biomass energy technologies on the everyday lives of people in
the East African nation of Tanzania. Tanzania is a particularly appropriate
place for such a study because the state's pursuit of traditional carbon energy
development has been coupled with a notable rise in alternative, renewable
energy investment by public and private sources. It provides an appropriate
laboratory for investigating energy consumption at the household level, where
90% of energy consumption takes place). The researchers have each worked for
over a decade in Tanzania, and their in-country research background is
geographically diverse, providing the opportunity to consider different
approaches to energy use in rural, urban, peri-urban, and island contexts.
Because the existing literature tends to overlook the role of women in energy
production and consumption, gendered energy labor and use is an important focus
of this research. With gender and geographic range in mind, the core of the
research for this project will be conducted through critical case studies in
domestic settings in three diverse sites. The researchers will use purposive
sampling to identify socioeconomically diverse households who are using a range
of energy technologies. Using the methods of observation, interviews, and focus
groups, they will investigate the socioeconomic dimensions of renewable energy
development. The researchers will also conduct interviews with energy experts,
advocates, suppliers, policymakers, investors, and technicians in the public and
private sector. Findings from the project will make important contributions to
scientific discussions about the optimization of energy extraction, theories of
inequality, and debates about infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.