* 1853478
* Collaborative Research: Modeling Animal Dispersal: Linking the Ideal to the Real
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2022
* George Cosner, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 07/31/2022
* USD 210,000.00

Animal movement behaviors fundamentally influence the dynamics of populations
and the interactions of species. Consequently, understanding animal movement is
crucial to understanding ecological processes such as the growth and decline of
wildlife populations and the spread of disease. Recent advances in remote
sensing, GIS, and other technologies and in methods of analyzing data have
greatly increased scientists' biological understanding of animal movement
behavior. Similarly, recent advances in mathematical modeling and analysis have
greatly increased scientists' theoretical insight about what movement strategies
would optimize the fitness of ideal animals in variable landscapes. However,
those two directions of research have mostly developed independently. This
applied mathematics project will help build a bridge between mathematical and
biological aspects of animal movement in dynamic landscapes. This bridge will
strengthen understanding of how different types of animal movement behavior
influence the performance and persistence of species and the outcomes of species
interactions. The mathematical models will be informed by empirical data from
animal tracking studies (especially those involving movement by deer, caribou,
and similar animals). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will draw on a variety
of modeling frameworks (e.g., partial differential equations, partial integro-
differential equations, integro-difference equations) to build mathematical
representations of animal movements in dynamic landscapes. The research will use
models and mathematical analysis to explore why many species seem to use similar
movement strategies to search for resources and how those search strategies
depend on landscape types. These efforts will provide insight into how landscape
dynamics such as the spatial and temporal distributions of resources drive
individual movement behavior, and how movement then produces the population
level distribution patterns characteristic of different species. By focusing on
the question of how animals use perceptual information to inform movement
behaviors, these studies will provide insights into how population patterns such
as home range residency, migration, or nomadism might evolve. The project will
feature the development of new kinds of models and of the new mathematics
required for their analysis, such as movement models that incorporate cognition
(e.g., switching between dispersal modes based on information that might be
nonlocal in origin). The analysis of the new models will lead to advances in the
theory of partial differential equations and integro-difference
equations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.