* 1853903
* RUI: Differential Response of Conifers to Drought Across Geographic Gradients
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2019,11/30/2022
* Rosemary Sherriff, Humboldt State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Tom Evans
* 11/30/2022
* USD 399,987.00

This project will examine how competition, species, and habitat interact to
influence conifer tree responses to drought. This research will explore the
impacts of drought in order to improve management efforts to mitigate conifer
die-back and wildfire risk. Since 2010, over 52 million hectares of trees have
died in California's forests due to climate change, drought, and drought-induced
disturbances such as wildfire. Forest loss and wildfire trends have important
implications for the health, safety, and well-being of communities in both urban
and rural areas throughout the American West. The effects of how competition,
species, and habitat interact geographically to influence tree responses to
drought will be studied across six conifer species. This research will benefit
society by providing valuable input data for potential fire risk modeling. The
project will also mentor young scientists at an undergraduate institution. It
will provide knowledge to land managers and regional tribes through public and
educational outreach. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will use the recent
drought as a natural experiment to investigate conifer responses within diverse
species' biogeographic distributions. The project will examine 1) how
competition, species, and habitat interact to influence tree responses to
drought, and 2) how drought resistance varies among diverse conifer species
after years of severe drought. This study uses multiple measures of tree
response for common and uncommon conifer species. This research will advance the
geographic literature on forest drought responses, while also providing
opportunities for students to work with an interdisciplinary research team. This
study, focused in northern California and southern Oregon, will provide
essential information about the potential impacts of ongoing drought to forest
species in a biodiverse and culturally important region of the Pacific West. As
forest mortality and drought are not issues unique to this region, findings from
this work will benefit management efforts in many forest ecosystems, with
implications for fire risk, human health and well-
being.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.