* 1853905
* Factors Underlying the Rise of Complex Societies
* SBE,BCS
* 11/01/2018,10/31/2023
* David Chicoine, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 10/31/2023
* USD 163,372.00

Dr. David Chicoine, of Louisiana State University, in collaboration with Dr.
George Lau from the University of East Anglia, will undertake archaeological
field research to document and understand the rise of divine lordships in
ancient Peru. The project has significant intellectual merit and broad societal
impact as it will contribute to our knowledge about the diversity in forms of
rulership and authority through time and space. One of the leading topics in
archaeology today is social complexity, or the study of variability in the forms
of organization and authority in large-scale political systems. The project
enriches this crucial field of study by investigating the emergence of divine
rulership, in which certain humans come to be treated as god-like supernaturals,
and their authority and being are seen as divine. The beginnings of this
distinctive kind of political system, which has been common and continues today
in world contexts, are not well understood archaeologically, especially for the
Central Andes, one of the heartlands of Pre-Columbian civilization. The research
project will bring insights into this important topic by uncovering primary
archaeological evidence to monitor changes over time in leadership strategies
and ways that rulers justified their authority, including claiming special
connections with landscapes, ancestors, and supernatural
beings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three field seasons and detailed post-excavation
studies will investigate the ancient political centers of Cerro San Isidro (Moro
region, Nepena Valley) and Pashash (Pallasca region), and their surrounding
hinterlands in the northern Ancash Department, Peru. Survey of regional
settlement patterns, as well as excavation data from elite architecture,
material culture, and funerary activities will allow comparison of pivotal
cultural transformations leading to lordships. Excavations within walled house
compounds and plaza areas will help to distinguish high-status and commoner
activities. Analysis of skeletal remains from nearby tombs will help to
characterize the individuals associated with the compounds. Studies of artifacts
and coeval visual arts will offer insights into the role of ancestors in local
ritual practices and the exercise of authority. Researching these data
comparatively will illuminate how and when major forms of divine lordships took
root in ancient Peru. Such polities were especially prominent in the study
region where ancient lords, according to ethnohistorical chronicles, levied
labor obligations from each household to coordinate collective tasks
(irrigation, ritual, war), while having cosmological and moral duties to ensure
order and the people's well-being. A leader's claim to legitimacy was pinned to
his bloodline and link to an exalted founding ancestor. This kind of Andean
social organization has three corollaries with key project implications: (1) a
tendency, over time, for more groups to feature ancestors at the apex of their
social hierarchy, (2) esteemed leaders come to share in the status of
divinities, and (3) a critical innovation is the integration of the esteemed
dead into the political life of nobles as they become institutionalized as
regular actors in the socio-political system. The project will build fruitful
links with local institutions (schools, museums) and hence add value to the
management of Pre-Columbian cultural heritage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
is made possible under the SBE-UKRI lead agency
activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.