* 1854001
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Preventing Web Side-channel Attacks via Atomic Determinism
* CSE,CNS
* 08/31/2018,08/31/2023
* Yinzhi Cao, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2023
* USD 500,000.00

Web browsers are vulnerable to side-channel attacks, which usually play an
important, first-step role in jump-starting a chain of attacks. For example, a
web-level precise clock can help adversaries to break operating system level
memory protection mechanisms, such as address-space layout randomization (ASLR).
Browser fingerprinting, a variation of web side channels, can be used to obtain
users' private information for launching social engineering attacks. In
addition, web side-channel attacks alone can also reveal private information,
such as illnesses and medications of patients and the number of social network
users' friends. The project is to design, implement and evaluate a novel defense
architecture integrating atomic determinism, a brand-new concept of determinism
tailored-made for web browsers, to provably prevent web side-channel attacks,
thus protecting web users' security and privacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key
insight of atomic determinism is that a web browser can be considered as a
composition of several atomic units, called reference frames (RFs), an abstract
concept borrowed from physics. The atomic determinism of web browsers defines
that each RF contains only one clock and at most one observer, e.g., a Turing-
complete program controlled by the adversary. From the viewpoint of the
observer, the clock in the RF ticks deterministically, i.e., being the same in
every runtime; by contrast, from the viewpoint of an oracle, e.g., a user of the
browser, the clock in the RF ticks normally without performance slowdown. The
project adopts two tactics to incorporate atomic determinism into web browsers,
i.e., designing a browser add-on and modifying a modern web browser. The former,
which translates existing programs and overwrites existing function definitions,
facilitates the general web users in short-term; the latter, which fundamentally
changes the browser architecture, facilitates users with special needs and can
be integrated into a mainstream browser in a longer term. The greatest impact of
this project is novel, effective approaches, systems, and technologies to
improving the security and privacy of browsers, benefiting web users from both
the academia and the general public. The principal investigator (PI) also
involves undergraduates, women, K-12 students and minorities in the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.