* 1854564
* Impact of vegetation geometry and distribution on bedload transport
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Heidi Nepf, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 02/29/2024
* USD 407,830.00

Coastal marshes attenuate storm surge and waves, protecting life and property.
This green infrastructure also improves water quality and provides habitat for
economically important fisheries. Similarly, floodplain vegetation reduces flood
peaks, enhances bank stability, and reduces nutrient loading to river channels.
Because of these benefits, resource managers advocate the replanting and
ecological management of vegetated landscapes along river corridors and in
coastal zones. The US spends billions of dollars each year to restore these
landscapes. The restoration efforts, which include the re-establishment of
vegetation and the diversion of sediment into eroded areas, require a
fundamental understanding of sediment transport and retention in vegetated
regions that this project will help provide. In addition to these desired
societal benefits that could stem from this research, the project will also
train one doctoral student, support one undergraduate student each summer, and
include outreach in Boston-area middle and high
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will develop physical
predictions of sediment transport as a function of flow and vegetation
characteristics. The new models will be developed through a series of laboratory
experiments using model vegetation of increasing complexity that will build an
understanding of how vegetation geometry and distribution within a channel
impact velocity, turbulence, and sediment transport. Experiments will record
velocity and channel-scale sediment flux, and will use laser-scans to track
bathymetric evolution. The transfer of new models to practical application in
the full-scale restoration projects will be facilitated through collaboration
with the US Bureau of Reclamation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.