* 1854850
* Collaborative Research: The Effect of State Disinvestment in Higher Education on Research Quality and Returns to Scale in Science Funding
* SBE,SMA
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Joshua Rosenbloom, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Feeney
* 05/31/2024
* USD 313,624.00

Science policy requires a firm understanding of the impact of funding on the
quantity and quality of research outputs produced by university scientists. This
project will examine the impact of recent declines in state support for public
universities on scientific research output. Since the Great Recession, several
states cut appropriations to higher education, and nineteen states have not
restored funding to 2008 levels. Yet few studies have examined the relationship
between federal and non-federal research funding, and none have investigated the
relationship between state funding for higher education and research output. In
addition, researchers have debated whether there are diminishing returns to
science funding. Diminishing returns occur when each additional dollar of
funding results in fewer publications and citations. The results of this
research will allow policymakers to make informed decisions about the allocation
of scarce funding resources to higher education at the state and federal
levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will examine the effect of
changes in support for higher education funding to examine the returns to
science funding in terms of publications and citations across science and social
science disciplines. First, the project will use new data that links
publications, citations and grants to individual faculty members at research
universities to model the returns to scale of science funding across several
disciplines. Variation across these fields will shed light on the returns to
scale in science funding. Second, the project will examine whether state funding
of higher education is a substitute or complement for federal research funding
in the production of research output measured by publications and citations. If
state funding is a complement for federal research funding, one would expect
that federal research dollars would fall in states that experienced budget cuts.
Third, the project will use individual level data on scientists and state budget
shocks to higher education funding to examine the impact of faculty mobility on
the research productivity of sending and receiving
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.