* 1854030
* IRES Track I: Mechanics of Porous Media across Scales - Research Experience at Paris Tech (MPMS Paris)
* O/D,OISE
* 03/15/2019,02/29/2024
* Chloe Arson, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 02/29/2024
* USD 300,000.00

Porous materials are ubiquitous: soils and rocks support habitat and store
energy, cementitious materials are the building blocks of infrastructure, and
our body is made of porous tissues. Strikingly, in all of these media, the
absence of solid matter, called the porous space, triggers processes that lead
to instabilities of the solid structure and/or of the fluid flow. This
International Research Experiences for Students (IRES) site award, titled
"Mechanics of Porous Media across Scales - Research Experience in Paris" (MPMS
Paris), supports U.S. students for immersion in cutting-edge poromechanics
research laboratories in Paris, France. The award aims to expose Georgia Tech
students to poromechanics research applied to civil, environmental and
biomechanical engineering, to immerse them in the academic culture of leading
European institutions based in Paris, and to inspire them in the pursuit of a
scientific career to create resistant, sustainable and safe porous materials in
response to infrastructure, energy and health demands. IRES participants will do
a 10-week research internship in one of several host laboratories at leading
partners institutions in Paris under the supervision of dual mentors from
Georgia Tech and the MPMS Paris partner. The project includes experienced teams
who collaborated on a prior IRES award and teams new to the collaboration. Pre-
and post- internship activities will be organized in partnership with Georgia
Tech international education programs and the Science and Technology Department
at the Consulate General of France in Atlanta. IRES participants will take
ownership of a research project in elite engineering laboratories, acquire
language skills and have longer exposure to history, technology and society than
in a regular curriculum. The integration of activities for faculty and
undergraduate and graduate students is expected to sustain long-term
collaborations between groups focusing on experimental, theoretical and
numerical research in poromechanics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description.
A multi-scale approach is needed to gain a fundamental understanding of the
complex phenomena that occur in porous media subjected to mechanical and
environmental solicitations, such as hysteretic flow and adsorption, fracture
initiation and propagation, in-pore crystallization and damage development,
resin infiltration and tissue restoration. The IRES site will gather a community
of scientists including world experts in theoretical poro-mechanics and
thermodynamics, from Navier and IFSTTAR at Ecole des Ponts Paris Tech (a top
European program in applied mathematics and mechanics), MSSMat at Centrale-
Supelec (a top European program in mechanical and electrical engineering) and
LMS at Ecole Polytechnique (the most selective engineering school in France).
Host laboratories are equipped with unique experimental, imaging and material
processing facilities and are located on the campuses of French "Grandes
Ecoles", which are elite engineering programs. Fundamental research in the
physics and mechanics of porous materials will combine cutting-edge simulation
tools with advanced experimental and imaging techniques to establish multi-scale
models that can capture coupled bio-thermo-hydro-chemo-mechanical processes and
predict the sustainability and durability of engineered systems. Teams of dual
mentors will foster long-term collaborations by working with several cohorts of
IRES students on a core research topic. The IRES program will also support
travel expenses for mentors to further enhance the student experience and
collaborative research activities. The project will support the successful
collaborations established through a prior IRES award led by the PI, expand the
program to a larger and more diverse group of scholars and ensure a bilateral
flow of scholars between Georgia Tech and Paris.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.