* 1854985
* RET Site: Multidisciplinary Computational Solutions to Smart Sensors and Sensing Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 02/15/2019,01/31/2024
* Andrew Kim, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Allyson Kennedy
* 01/31/2024
* USD 599,997.00

This award renews an exemplary Research Experiences for Teachers (RET) Site on
smart sensors and sensing systems at Michigan State University (MSU). The RET
Site will continue to develop a strong partnership between MSU and schools in
the greater Lansing/mid-Michigan area to advance pre-college science and
engineering education by training a cadre of leaders of middle and high school
teachers in the areas of Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
(STEM). The RET site will expose teachers to leading engineering and computing
research spanning biological and chemical sensors, robotics sensors, human-
computer interaction, microelectronic sensing circuitry and networks, energy and
automotive engines, high performance computing for nuclear science, and sensing
materials and manufacturing techniques, and will connect them to the profound
changes that sensors and sensing technologies are having on the daily lives and
the quality of life of all citizens. The interdisciplinary nature of the
research theme will provide a fertile ground for developing creative and
appealing middle and high school lessons and teaching activities in biology,
physics, chemistry, and technology that align with state and national curricular
standards. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The RET Site will expose teachers to cutting-
edge research that has significant impact on the world today. Goals for this
program are to train high-quality teachers that can inspire and prepare students
for future college studies and careers in STEM fields, to improve teachers'
skills in curriculum development, leadership, communication, and instruction, to
implement and disseminate innovative curricula to connect university research
activities to K-12 classroom practices, and to strengthen, sustain, and expand a
long-term, healthy partnership between MSU, local school districts, and industry
on advancing pre-college science and engineering education. Participating
teachers will attend a 6-week summer institute to engage in cutting-edge
research projects with mentoring from engineering faculty who lead vibrant
sensor and sensing related research programs. Working with researchers, faculty
mentors, and a curriculum development specialist, teachers will develop
innovative, standards-compliant curriculum modules and participate in a number
of professional development activities. The teacher-created modules and lessons
will be disseminated nationally through TeachEngineering.org, a nationally
recognized repository for searchable, standards-based engineering curricula.
Extensive follow-up activities are planned throughout the academic year to
ensure the translation of lab experience into classroom practice, and to foster
and strengthen long-term partnership between engineering faculty and the local
school districts. A third-party professional program evaluator will track and
evaluate the program and provide feedback for
improvement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.