* 1854873
* EAR-PF: Clumped and Triple Oxygen Isotopes of Terrestrial Carbonates: New Tools to Estimate Aridity and Precipitation in California During Past Greenhouse Climates
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2019,10/31/2022
* Julia Kelson, Kelson, Julia Rae
* Continuing Grant
* Aisha Morris
* 10/31/2022
* USD 245,700.00

Dr. Julia Kelson has been granted an NSF EAR Postdoctoral fellowship to carry
out research and educational activities at the University of Michigan, Ann
Arbor. This project investigates the water cycle during climates that are
characterized by atmospheres with high concentrations of greenhouse (heat-
trapping) gases like carbon dioxide. As long as atmospheric concentrations of
greenhouse gases continue to increase, we may observe more evaporation and more
seasonally intense precipitation (rain/snow) in future climates. One way to
understand such changes in the intensity of the hydrologic cycle is to explore
the record of evaporation and precipitation during ancient high carbon dioxide
climates, such as those of the early Cenozoic time period (65-30 million years
ago). This project will develop a new tool to estimate the intensity of
evaporation using ancient soil carbonates and mollusk shells. The chemical
composition of these ancient carbonate materials contains information about the
temperature of formation and the extent to which the rain/ground water from
which they grew was affected by evaporation. Thus, this tool will allow for a
simultaneous estimate of earth surface temperature and of aridity. The
investigator will convey the importance of understanding ancient environmental
change through outreach programs affiliated with the University of Michigan. One
program is Earth Camp, which brings underrepresented high school students at no-
cost to the university and to the field. Another program is Females Excelling
More in Math and Engineering Sciences (FEMMES), which encourages girls to
explore their potential in science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
leveraging two novel stable carbonate isotope measurements to improve our
ability to reconstruct aridity and precipitation of ancient climates. This
research consists of two components: 1) a modern calibration study, where the
isotopic composition of modern soil carbonates and mollusk shells are measured,
along with the isotopes of modern meteoric waters, to add to the growing
understanding of how the isotopic composition of carbonates reflect their
environment, and 2) an application to an ancient greenhouse climate, where these
new proxies are applied to a Paleocene section in California that has both
paleosol carbonates and mollusks in order to reconstruct past aridity and
moisture sources. By targeting environments where marine and terrestrial
carbonates are collocated, the investigator can understand the potential
seasonal biases that the carbonate materials may impart as well as different
aspects of the hydrologic cycle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.