* 1854462
* Collaborative Research: Constraining the role of chemical transformations in  the cycling of mercury at the Arctic Ocean air-sea interface
* GEO,OPP
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* David Kadko, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Kelly Brunt
* 12/31/2023
* USD 400,514.00

This project will provide new understanding about mercury exchange between the
air and sea surface in the Arctic, in conjunction with studies of the forms of
mercury in seawater. Results will help predict how increasing ice melt and
warming waters will affect mercury levels in polar regions. The investigators
will use a novel approach of comparing the dynamics of radon, an unreactive gas,
and mercury, which is reactive in all its forms, to understand the importance of
chemical and biological reactions influencing mercury levels in seawater.
Results will be useful for the international Minamata Convention and resource
managers concerned with mercury bioaccumulation in humans and wildlife. The
project will train a post-doctoral investigator, who will be involved in all
aspects of the research, as well as provide research experience for
undergraduate students. The investigators also plan to create outreach
publications for non-specialists and highlight the work on their
websites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will combine shipboard measurements
and incubation experiments to improve our understanding of the cycling of
inorganic and methylated mercury across the water-air interface and the role of
ice cover in affecting this exchange. To separate gas exchange from redox
reactions and other transformations in surface waters, the investigators will
collect samples for the determination of radon and radium, as the mixed layer
deficit in radon can be used as an independent estimate of the gas exchange
flux. The investigators will test the hypotheses that: 1) gas evasion of mercury
is not the primary sink for water column mercury in the Arctic Ocean, in
contrast to other oceans; 2) in situ water column degradation of dimethylmercury
is a more important sink than loss to the atmosphere; and 3) the relatively low
net production of mercury in the Arctic reflects lower ultraviolet light levels
and ice cover, productivity, and bioavailable mercury for reduction. Results
will help predict how the bioaccumulation of methylmercury may be altered by a
changing climate and an evolving Arctic sea ice
regime.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.