* 1854750
* Reliable, Flexible Patch for Monitoring Head Injuries in High-contact Sports.
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2019,01/31/2024
* Nelson Sepulveda, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 01/31/2024
* USD 470,251.00

With the discovery of chronic traumatic encephalopathy (CTE) in 2002, the topic
of brain injuries in high-contact sports gained plenty of deserved attention.
CTE is a progressive degenerative brain disease. It is a consequence of a
repeated concussions and traumatic brain injuries, such as those experienced by
athletes in high-contact sports. A brain with CTE gradually deteriorates and
loses mass. The disease not only deteriorates skills necessary for daily life
(e.g. memory, self-control, time-management, focus); but it also causes much
bigger mental problems (e.g. strong suicidal thoughts, depression, cognitive and
thinking problems, anxiety, violent/abusive behavior, dementia) which become
worse over time. The main issue with CTE is that it can only be diagnosed after
death. Therefore, early detection is impossible, and prevention relies on
monitoring individual impacts. While there have been significant efforts in the
development of helmets with capabilities of measuring head injuries in athletes,
current technologies come with limitations and inaccuracies that are inherent to
the approaches and transduction mechanisms used. For example, current approaches
consists on using an array of accelerometers that are physically connected to
the helmet, and trigger data collection whenever any of the accelerometers
measures an acceleration beyond certain threshold. The main limitation of this
approach is that it relies on accelerator-based sensors attached to the helmet's
not the athlete's head. Thus, the sliding that can occur between the helmet and
the head makes it difficult to predict how the brain moves inside the skull. The
resonance of the micro-mechanical structures inside the MEMS-based
accelerometers are within the range of head motion frequencies; which has been
found to cause large errors when measuring the peak angular accelerations. The
proposed work is aimed at developing a reliable, robust, flexible patch that
overcomes the sliding problems and frequency issues present in the current
technologies by developing a reliable patch monitor that is in direct contact
with the athlete's head and does not rely on suspended micrometer structures to
measure acceleration. A 2-week summer activity for high-school students will be
developed as part of this project. Undergraduate students and high-school
teachers from the summer research opportunities program and research experience
for teachers site at MSU will participate. This program will also help to
motivate talented underrepresented student from The University of Puerto Rico to
continue graduate studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three Major Research Tasks have
been designed to start at the device level, continue with system integration,
and finalize with a validation process. In the first task, we will perform
fundamental studies on the integration of PPFE films with carbon nanotube-based
thin films as electrodes of a flexible patch; where a mechanical impact will
produce an electrical signal from which the force and acceleration of the
mechanical impact will be extracted. The use of CNT films (instead of metal
electrodes) is aimed at eliminating issues due to metal electrode cracking and
enabling a reliable patch. The second task we will look for integration of the
patch into a reliable, self-powered wireless transmitter, from which the
information of the mechanical impact can be extracted. The third task looks for
the validation of the developed patch, where the device will characterized and
compared to a benchmark to confirm its performance. The idea is that the final
patch can produce and transmit signals that provide a comprehensive
representation of the impact; and from which the severity of an impact on the
human body (particularly the head) can be assessed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.