* 1854055
* The President's Scientists: Understanding the Role and Impact of the President's Council of Advisors on Science and Technology (PCAST)
* SBE,SMA
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* David Caruso, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Feeney
* 06/30/2023
* USD 321,927.00

The President's Council of Advisors on Science and Technology (PCAST) is a
federal advisory committee consisting of roughly 20 scientists, engineers, and
industry leaders appointed by the president. This project examines PCAST and its
impact on U.S. federal science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM)
policy through the lens of its membership. The research team is building and
analyzing a repository of materials related to PCAST - personal communications
and archival collections - and conducting and publishing oral history interviews
with PCAST members. This data will be used to develop policy recommendations for
future White House STEM advisory bodies, determine best practices, identify
areas of improvements, and raise overall awareness of PCAST's role and, more
broadly, the role of STEM in developing public policy. The data and research
products will be assembled into a comprehensive, publicly accessible library of
PCAST materials to inform policymakers, science historians and sociologists, the
STEM research community, and the broader public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PCAST is
led by the director of the White House Office of Science and Technology Policy
(OSTP), commonly referred to as the president's "science advisor," and up to two
other non-federal members from the STEM community. Created in 1990 under
President George H.W. Bush, PCAST advises the president on a broad range of
issues related to STEM including national and domestic security, workforce and
the economy, energy and the environment, and public health and medicine. The
council, with its high-profile membership and proximity to the president, has
historically played a central role in shaping federal STEM policy and
maintaining the overall health of the nation's STEM enterprise. However,
determining the full impact of PCAST across the broad spectrum of policy issues
related to STEM is challenging from the public record alone. The President's
Scientists compiles and analyzes data beyond PCAST's public reports, including
all White House communications regarding PCAST; transcripts and minutes from
PCAST meetings; and any available other relevant materials concerning PCAST from
presidential archives and collections of science advisors. In addition, the team
is conducting a series of oral history interviews with select former PCAST
members, chosen based on their demographics, areas of expertise, and the
administration they served, to have an inclusive and diverse sample. The
interviews will highlight members' perspectives on PCAST, as well as their
personal histories in STEM before and after their tenure on the council. The
goal is to understand the full extent of PCAST's influence, how it has been
utilized under each president and shifting political conditions, and how it
interfaces with other policy bodies across the government and in the broader
STEM community to build consensus and promote its recommendations. This research
will result in a comprehensive, publicly-accessible documentation of PCAST, as
well as best practices and policy recommendations for PCAST and other future
White House STEM advisory councils.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.