* 1854234
* Conference in Formal Power Series and Algebraic Combinatorics
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Sarah Mason, Wake Forest University
* Continuing Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 05/31/2024
* USD 69,760.00

This award will provide support for US participants, especially women, graduate
students, postdocs, and junior faculty, to attend the thirty-first and thirty-
second international conferences in Formal Power Series and Algebraic
Combinatorics (FPSAC), held at the University of Ljubljana in Slovenia on July
1-5, 2019 and Bar-Ilan University in Ramat-Gan, Israel on July 13-17, 2020. The
most important annual conference series in algebraic combinatorics in the world,
FPSAC offers young American researchers a unique opportunity to interact closely
with top mathematicians from many countries. Each conference, which includes
nine one-hour plenary lectures, thirty half-hour contributed talks, and forty
posters, will attract over 200 participants from all over the
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A distinguishing characteristic of FPSAC conferences
is the concerted effort to recognize and encourage outstanding young scientists.
At least one plenary speaker is an "emerging star," and talented young
researchers are well represented among the speakers selected for contributed
talks. Another special feature of the FPSAC conferences is a continued tradition
of inclusiveness. The conference seeks to draw substantial participation from
underrepresented groups. Furthermore, English and French have been designated as
official languages for FPSAC 2019 and 2020 to promote a diverse pool of
participants. Attendance at this conference will be exceptionally valuable for
graduate students and junior researchers. Somewhat interdisciplinary, the
conferences link research in combinatorics to other topics in pure mathematics
such as algebraic geometry, commutative algebra, representation theory, K-theory
and symplectic geometry, and to topics in other sciences such as computer
science, physics, and biology. More information can be found at
http://fpsac2019.fmf.uni-lj.si/ and
http://fpsac.org/confs/fpsac-2020/.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.