* 1854637
* CDS&amp;E: Graph-Based Learning and Uncertainty Quantification for Large-Scale Complex Data
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2022
* Yang Ning, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 07/31/2022
* USD 296,179.00

Many modern empirical and experimental researches routinely produce massive
amounts of high-dimensional and complex data. Graphical model is one of the most
important tools to visualize and exploit hidden, latent, low-dimensional
structure in high-dimensional complex data. Motivated by neuroscience and
genomics applications, the research project aims to develop cutting-edge
graphical model based computational and statistical methods to uncover latent
network structures in large-scale complex data. To enhance the reproducibility
of scientific studies, the project provides rigorous tools on uncertainty
quantification. The software packages will be developed to implement the
proposed methods. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research project focuses on
theoretical and methodological development for graphical models in high-
dimensional complex data arising from neuroscience and genomics applications.
Specific projects include proposing clustering based latent variable models for
dimensional reduction with a large number of variables, optimal distributed
learning and inference for massive heterogenous data under communication
constraint, and exponential family random effect graphical models for high-
dimensional longitudinal data under complex dependence. The proposed models are
equipped with a powerful multiple testing procedure to control false discovery
rate in a rigorous manner. The computational algorithms will be developed in
each application.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.