* 1854312
* CIF21 DIBBs: PD: Cyberinfrastructure Tools for Precision Agriculture in the 21st Century
* CSE,OAC
* 06/01/2018,06/30/2021
* Michela Taufer, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Amy Walton
* 06/30/2021
* USD 513,105.00

This interdisciplinary project applies computer science approaches and
computational resources to large multidimensional environmental datasets, and
synthesizes this information into finer resolution, spatially explicit products
that can be systematically analyzed with other variables. The main emphasis is
ecoinformatics, a branch of informatics that analyzes ecological and
environmental science variables such as information on landscapes, soils,
climate, organisms, and ecosystems. The project focuses on
synthesis/computational approaches for producing high-resolution soil moisture
datasets, and the pilot application is precision agriculture. The effort
combines analytical geospatial approaches, machine learning methods, and high
performance computing (HPC) techniques to build cyberinfrastructure tools that
can transform how ecoinformatics data is analyzed.

The investigators build upon publicly available data collections (soil moisture
datasets, soil properties datasets, and topography datasets) to develop: (1)
tools based on machine-learning techniques to downscale coarse-grained data to
fine-grained datasets of soil moisture information; (2) tools based on HPC
techniques to estimate the degree of confidence and the probabilities associated
with the temporal intervals within which soil-moisture-base changes, trends, and
patterns occur; and (3) data- and user- interfaces integrating data
preprocessing to deal with data heterogeneity and inaccuracy, containerized
environments to assure portability, and modeling techniques to represent
temporal and spatial patterns of soil moisture dynamics. The tools will inform
precision agriculture through the generation and use of unique information on
soil moisture for the coterminous United States. Accessibility for field
practitioners (e.g., local soil moisture information) is made possible through
lightweight virtualization, mobile devices, and web applications. This award by
the Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure is jointly supported by the Division
of Earth Sciences within the NSF Directorate for Geosciences.