* 1854863
* PaySpray
* TIP,TI
* 11/01/2018,04/30/2019
* Ali Dehghan, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Pamela McCauley
* 04/30/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project (PaySpray) is to
provide a platform in which the members offer their products or services to the
network, increase their assets, and use them to reduce their debts. Each member
of the system is a network node who is connected to the other members through
financial links that represent debt or credit relationships. Once a transaction
occurs between two members of a network, either inside a system or outside of
it, the link including transaction information will be created between them.
PaySpray owns the knowledge over all the networks supplies, demands, and
transactions and finds the optimum way to suggest the services from members to
members to close a cycle. Members can be individuals or companies, and services
can be anything legal to be sold or done. A member of a cycle may be a member of
multiple cycles. Services may exceed the amount of the owed money or be less
than that, the remaining debt can be paid either by paying money or providing
another service or entering into a new cycle. The object is to create a network
that permits various type of payments, bartering and financial transactions to
manage an individuals or organizations finances. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
I-Corps project utilizes Artificial intelligence on a platform that
intelligently connects users for financial transactions. Members may invite
anyone to join their network that they have financial relationships with whether
they are the payee or recipient of the finances. This process continues until
until a cycle is created. The system permits multiple cycles, and members can
participate in multiple cycles. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In developing the
application, a heuristic complex network algorithm was utilized to identify the
possible loops, matching service and demand in the networks. This was also used
as a means to improve the efficiency and optimize performance of the model. The
research also applied machine learning algorithms (mainly Natural Language
Processing) to extract the information from users, inputs and use the output of
the ML model to match service and demands. As a future improvement, researchers
will apply deep learning RNN models in order to detect the fraud services and
demands in the app. Currently the application is developed in AngularJS with
MongoDB Databases and deployed on Amazon Web Service.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.