* 1854156
* IRES Track 1: Ecological responses to rainfall across the Namib Desert climate gradient
* O/D,OISE
* 04/15/2019,03/31/2024
* Osvaldo Sala, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 03/31/2024
* USD 299,994.00

Drylands (arid and semi-arid ecosystems) are of global ecological and
socioeconomic importance as they cover nearly half of the earth's terrestrial
surface and support a large and growing portion of the earth's human population
and livestock production. Despite their importance, ecological processes in
drylands are poorly understood relative to wetter systems. This lack of
knowledge limits available information for informed dryland management. The
project aims to address this knowledge gap by training US undergraduate and
graduate students to carry out international research in dryland ecosystems. The
Global Drylands Center-Gobabeb Research Opportunity will provide intensive
training for eighteen US students over a three year period. The student
activities will last for eight weeks each summer, during which students will
conduct research at the Gobabeb Research and Training Centre, located in the
heart of the oldest desert in the world, the Namib Desert of Namibia. US
students will work collaboratively with Namibian interns, Namibian mentors, and
US PIs to design and carry out novel research projects that will use a unique
precipitation gradient to explore how climate and soil composition affect
ecological processes in drylands. Students will prepare for the research
experience through an online seminar in the semester before travel and will
participate in follow-up synthesis activities in the semester following their
research experience. These research projects will train a cohort of US students
in research techniques, positioning them for careers that will advance our
understanding of dryland ecosystems. The use of research teams composed of US
students, Namibian interns, and Namibian faculty mentors will provide valuable
training in collaborative research and communication skills. This program will
help develop a new generation of internationally-engaged dryland scientists,
thus enhancing capacities and contributing to the ecological knowledge base,
paramount for sustainable use and management of drylands.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scientific understanding of ecological processes in
dryland systems is limited relative to wetter systems. This knowledge gap
reflects both historical research biases and the transmission of these biases to
successive generations of student scientists. Little scientific study of
drylands is amplified by the fact that vast areas of global drylands are located
in developing nations with limited scientific resources. A step toward enhancing
our basic and applied knowledge in drylands is providing training opportunities
for students in international dryland research and developing a next generation
of scientific leaders who can effectively collaborate in international arenas.
Increased leadership by US scientists in international dryland research will
enhance understanding of our own drylands and improve basic science and land
management in developing nations. The Namib Desert of Namibia offers a unique
natural experiment for quantifying mechanistic controls over biogeochemical,
ecological, and physiological processes in drylands because of a steep
precipitation gradient coincides with contrasting soil surfaces. The close
geographic proximity of sites with contrasting rainfall and soil types, access
to a well-equipped research station, and existing relationships with Namibian
scientists make this an excellent site for a research training program that will
help develop a new generation of internationally-engaged dryland scientists. The
Global Drylands Center-Gobabeb Research Opportunity (GDC-GRO) will facilitate
research projects which will be carried out by teams of US students
(undergraduate and graduate) and Namibian interns who will work closely with
Namibian mentors and US PIs. A total of eighteen US students will participate
(four undergraduates and two graduate students in each of the three years).
Intensive IRES activities will last eight weeks each year, with preparation
activities in the semester beforehand through an online seminar and follow-up
synthesis activities in the semester following the IRES experience. Key players
in this proposal are Namibian mentors (from University of Namibia, Namibia
University of Science and Technology and Gobabeb Research and Training Centre)
who are eager to work with student teams and US PIs to develop substantive
research projects across the Namib precipitation
gradient.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.