* 1854273
* IRES Track I: Sensors and Machine Learning for Solar Power Monitoring and Control
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Wendy Barnard, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 03/31/2024
* USD 299,985.00

This program promotes international multidisciplinary research opportunities for
U.S. students at the overlap of sustainability, power systems and signal
processing with the aim of improving efficiency in PV power generation.
Algorithms for shading prediction and fault optimization will advance the state
of the art in remote solar array management. Training students in machine
learning, vision and data processing for energy systems is unique and requires
an integrative approach. IRES participants will be immersed in producing and
understanding solar analytics and creating algorithms and software to control
solar arrays. The IRES program will engage faculty researchers from the Arizona
State University SenSIP center and from the University of Cyprus KIOS Center in
solar energy research. Programs and workshops will be established so that IRES
participants are trained in machine learning for energy systems and present
their research results in international settings. Weekly presentations at the
international site and guidance by international mentors will enrich the cohort
research experience. Embedding students in the KIOS center research labs funded
by large European Union (EU) grants will provide knowledge on EU and
international research practices, energy standards and policies. Students will
spend six summer weeks at the University of Cyprus KIOS center to improve their
research skills and elevate their cultural competencies. This international
research endeavor will energize students to innovate and disseminate results
globally. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Solar energy or photovoltaic (PV) arrays
encounter loss of efficiency under conditions of shading, panel faults and
temperature variations. In fact, shading, weather patterns, soiling, and
temperature reduce power output considerably. For example, a malfunction of one
panel will cause an entire PV string to fail. To minimize inefficiencies,
individual panel current-voltage (I-V) measurements, weather information, and
imaging data are essential. Controlling the power output is possible through
solar panel matrix switching and optimization (i.e., changing certain array
connections from series to parallel using actuators). Matrix switching using
programmable relays allows for different interconnection options. The research
goal is to optimize PV array systems by: a) exploiting the measured I-V patterns
to detect faults using machine learning, b) employing advanced imaging and
vision techniques to predict shading, c) using temperature, irradiance and
weather data to elevate PV efficiency, and d) include smart grid interfaces.
This collaborative IRES project between Arizona State University and University
of Cyprus will engage students in the following research problems: a) How do we
use imaging to detect cloud movement, predict shading and elevate efficiency? b)
How can the array connections be reconfigured based on imaging, weather, and I-V
data to elevate efficiency? c) How can we detect and classify panel faults in
real time using machine learning and other algorithms? d) How do we extend these
solar monitoring and control concepts from utility-scale solar farms to house
rooftop systems?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.