* 1854434
* Computational and Mathematical Studies of Complexity Reduction Methods for Deep Neural Networks and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2023
* Jack Xin, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 06/30/2023
* USD 299,997.00

Deep neural networks (DNN) have become the state-of-the-art computing technology
driving the recent advances in artificial intelligence, surpassing human
performance on image and speech recognition tasks, and in playing complex games
such as Go. However, deep networks typically consume billions of flops in
computation and gigabytes of storage for model and data, rendering their
deployment a challenge on mobile and energy limited platforms such as cellular
phones and battery powered cars. The project aims to develop theory and
algorithms for complexity reduction methods so as to maintain DNN's performance
on low computational budget, achieving speed up and saving memory space. The
project also studies light weight deep networks through automated architecture
search and selection to reduce complexity at a higher design level. A broad
range of applications include mobile computer vision, disease diagnosis and
detection, face verification, as well as monitor and rescue missions by the
drone. The project will actively involve graduate students and enrich their
career development through both education and research activities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The approaches to be studied include (1) training of deep
networks with low-precision weights and activation functions (so called
quantization), (2) hand-crafted and automated lightweight deep networks, their
training via variable splitting and their quantization. The training of
quantized networks concerns with minimizing high dimensional discontinuous non-
convex objectives under discrete constraints, for which novel coarse gradients
and an accelerated technique (so called blending) will be analyzed to guide the
descent and reach convergence. A differentiable treatment of discrete
constraints, and of non-smooth and combinatorial structures will be fully
developed. The methodologies and resulting algorithms from the project will
contribute to information technology, optimization of civil infrastructure,
smart and efficient mobile computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.