* 1854875
* EAR-PF: Light- and Iron-Mediated Oxidation Mechanisms of Organic Matter
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Claresta Joe-Wong, Joe-Wong, Claresta Michelle
* Continuing Grant
* Aisha Morris
* 07/31/2022
* USD 236,000.00

Dr. Claresta Joe-Wong has been awarded a postdoctoral fellowship to work at
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory on understanding carbon cycling between
the atmosphere and inland waters, which is of increasing importance due to
global climate change. Inland waters are a crucial component of the global
carbon cycle because they transport organic carbon from soils to oceans; bury it
in sediments; and release it as carbon dioxide, yet the natural processes that
oxidize organic carbon to carbon dioxide in inland waters are not well
understood. This project will characterize one of the most important yet poorly
constrained of these processes, the oxidation of dissolved organic carbon in
sunlight when iron is present. This research, which links these mechanisms at
the molecular level to broad climatic changes, will be used to inform
undergraduate lesson plans that link chemical principles to earth sciences
processes. Undergraduates will be engaged in summer research internships and
expose them to innovative techniques in the earth sciences. The postdoctoral
fellow will benefit from broadening her research perspective and methods as well
as the mentoring experience gained for her future career.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Complexation with iron can enhance the reactivity of organic carbon
with light, resulting in the release of carbon dioxide. However, the plethora of
oxidation pathways involving short-lived radical intermediates makes it
difficult to predict the effects of iron. The proposed work will experimentally
characterize the reaction mechanisms and reactive intermediates of iron-mediated
photo-oxidation using ultrafast spectroscopy with sub-picosecond resolution.
Spectroscopic characterization of the photoreactivity of model carboxylates will
be paired with laboratory experiments determining the kinetics and products of
iron-mediated photolysis of dissolved organic carbon collected from the East
River watershed in Colorado and Arctic Long-Term Ecological Research site in
Alaska. Ultimately, integrating a mechanistic understanding of the photo-
oxidation of dissolved organic carbon with large-scale models of carbon fluxes
may promote a more comprehensive conceptual framework of carbon
dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.