* 1854007
* Model Predictive Control with Discrete/Continuous Decisions: Theory, Computation, and Application
* ENG,CBET
* 08/10/2018,06/30/2019
* James Rawlings, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Triantafillos Mountziaris
* 06/30/2019
* USD 51,234.00

1603768 PI: Rawlings&lt;br/&gt;Title: Model Predictive Control with
Discrete/Continuous Decisions: Theory, Computation, and
Application&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Systems requiring online discrete operating
decisions, also known as actuators in the control context, are ubiquitous. In
the historical development of feedback control theory relevant to process
control, however, the discrete decisions were always removed from the online
control problem and considered at a different level in the automation system,
often using heuristic rules, such as cycling through some bank of furnaces or
chillers in a pre-specified order. As a result, optimization of these discrete
decisions has seen essentially no implementation in process control
applications, while optimization of the continuous decisions (valve positions,
applied voltages, torques, etc.) has reached a high level, as demonstrated by
the widespread use of model predictive control (MPC) in the process industries.
The goal of this research project is to enable optimization and feedback control
of processes that have discrete as well as continuous decision variables. The PI
proposes to develop both new theory and computational software to address this
class of problems. The research will be conducted in close collaboration with an
industrial partner, Johnson Controls, and the research results will be tested in
applications involving control of heating, ventilation, and air conditioning
(HVAC) systems in commercial buildings. Energy use in buildings is responsible
for a significant fraction of energy consumption and carbon emissions in the
US.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed new theory encompasses both nominal
closed-loop stability and inherent robustness to model errors and disturbances,
and requires extension of standard MPC with continuous decisions (valve
positions, applied voltages, torques, etc.) to MPC with both continuous and
discrete variables (on/off switches for chillers, heaters, pumps; which
equipment to use when during a periodic, cyclic operation, etc.). The proposed
project aims to develop: (i) new theory for MPC with discrete/continuous
actuators, (ii) new free-source software to solve the MPC control problem with
discrete actuators, and (iii) an approach for decomposing the large-scale,
complex building HVAC control problem into tractable sub-problems. The enabling
computational software will be made available to all researchers in the free-
source language CasADi, which has become the leading language for solving large,
complex, and structured optimal control problems. Adding discrete decision
variables to CasADi will provide practitioners with a tool to implement the
results of this research in a broad range of industrial applications. The PI
plans to train a graduate student and develop new educational materials on
control system design.