* 1854833
* LEAP-HI: Hybrid Intelligence for Design: Bridging Human and Machine Intelligences for Collaborative Design of Engineering Systems and Infrastructure
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Caitlin Mueller, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 07/31/2023
* USD 1,031,926.00

Large engineered systems and infrastructure, such as buildings and airplanes,
pose a challenge to the interdisciplinary teams who work together to design
them. Today's architects, engineers and designers use computational tools to
help generate ideas and simulate and analyze specific aspects of the behaviors
of large systems. However, the larger and more complex those systems become, the
more it becomes necessary to integrate all aspects of design into a unified
design tool. This Leading Engineering for America's Prosperity, Health, and
Infrastructure (LEAP-HI) award supports fundamental research on a hybrid
approach that enables computers and humans to collaborate in system-level design
through the use of emerging computational techniques from machine learning,
convex optimization, image processing and artificial intelligence. The work has
the potential to benefit US industrial innovation and competitiveness by
enhancing design creativity and exploration, thereby improving product
performance and safety. The project integrates expertise in the disciplines of
product design, architectural and structural systems, and mechanical engineering
and includes activities to broaden the participation of underrepresented groups
and improve engineering and architecture education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A new,
machine-learning-based model for creative design space exploration that enables
architects, designers, and engineers to collaborate creatively and effectively
will be researched. The method links design decisions to real-time performance
predictions without the need for rigidly pre-specifying decision parameters,
combining the freedom of analog design methods with the power of computation.
For large, complex, engineered systems, the research effort will focus on
leveraging artificial intelligence and machine learning approaches to assist
system architects in extracting a designer?s intent and formulating that intent
as a set of hierarchically structured functional requirements that can be
maintained as subsystems of systems. Deep learning tools and algorithms will be
used to represent and embed the design functions that underlie the methods.
Studies of the use of computational tools for convex engineering by engineering
teams will be conducted to understand how hybrid intelligent approaches to
design impact notions of design intent in complex system
design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.