* 1854155
* IRES Track I: Lithological controls on strain localization in metasedimentary rocks along the Southern Iberian Shear Zone
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2024
* Dyanna Czeck, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 07/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

While stresses imparted on rocks during plate interactions may be pervasive, the
characteristic structures formed by them that facilitate rock deformation are
generally localized. Deformation or strain localization is an important
phenomenon throughout the crust, resulting in major contrasts in rock strength
that impact crustal architecture and tectonics, fluid flow, and potential
seismicity. The researchers hypothesize that the factors that control strain
localization vary by scale. The PI proposes to unravel the factors causing
strain localization at a variety of scales within metasedimentary rocks at a
major tectonic structure, the Southern Iberian Shear Zone in southwestern Spain.
A diverse, international team of geoscience faculty, graduate students, and
undergraduate students will perform this research by collecting integrated
structural geology, geomatics, and geochemical datasets through an international
field-based program of research and mentorship. Each year, four undergraduates
and one graduate student will spend up to four weeks in Spain conducting
fieldwork and perform follow-up analyses at UWM for a minimum of 13
weeks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Strain localization processes in the
lithosphere are fundamental to our understanding of plate tectonics. While
deformation may be pervasive throughout tectonic zones, deformation intensity is
often strongly localized. Factors that may control strain localization include
rheology contrasts and mechanical boundaries, differences in mineralogy or
grainsize, fabric formation, and various grain-scale softening mechanisms, which
are often enhanced by fluids. The primary scientific goal is to unravel multi-
faceted causes of strain localization within metasedimentary rocks affected by
the Southern Iberian Shear Zone and determine if and how they vary with scale.
Faculty, graduate students, and undergraduate students will collect integrated
lithology, tectonic fabric, microstructure, geomatics, and geochemical datasets
through a field-based program of research and mentorship. The strength of this
project lies in the integrated datasets derived from a suite of relatively
modest graduate and undergraduate student projects. Brought together through
careful spatial mapping and the integrated 3D digital model, these disparate
datasets can create a holistic picture of strain localization. These results
will help further our understanding of strain localization and shear band
formation in other metapelitic units in a wide array of tectonic settings. The
program will also enhance the careers of students as they gain international
research experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.