* 1854100
* Exploring Racial Socialization Processes in Black Families
* SBE,SMA
* 08/16/2018,06/30/2021
* Howard Stevenson, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 06/30/2021
* USD 39,184.00

The Directorate of Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences offers postdoctoral
research fellowships to provide opportunities for recent doctoral graduates to
obtain additional training, to gain research experience under the sponsorship of
established scientists, and to broaden their scientific horizons beyond their
undergraduate and graduate training. Postdoctoral fellowships are further
designed to assist new scientists to direct their research efforts across
traditional disciplinary lines and to avail themselves of unique research
resources, sites, and facilities, including at foreign locations. This
postdoctoral fellowship provides an emerging scholar-scientist with an
opportunity to investigate the ways in which diverse Black families navigate the
racial socialization of their youth in the 21st century. The well-being of Black
children in the United States is a matter of grave public health significance.
The unfortunate realities of Ferguson, MI, Baltimore, MD, Sanford, FL,
Charleston, SC, McKinney, TX, Cleveland, OH, and Chicago, IL, have left many in
our society with questions about how to provide youth with the triumvirate
"affection, protection, and correction" required to optimize their psychosocial
wellbeing. Racial socialization (RS) is a process that has been associated with
a number of positive outcomes. However, this research has largely assessed Black
mothers (of mother-father households), has predominately used survey data, and
has focused on retrospective reporting of RS, limiting our conceptual
understanding of a crucial parenting practice. This project addresses these
limitations, expanding the study of RS in a number of important
ways.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project, entitled the "Black Family Racial
Socialization Project" focuses on the development of three studies using both
quantitative and qualitative methods, from the perspective of both parents and
youth. The primary aim of the first study is to use survey and interview methods
to elucidate the ways in which Black families representing a diverse structural
spectrum (e.g., extended kin, blended families, LGBT couples) prepare themselves
to undertake the RS of their children. The primary aim of the second study is to
capture the synergistic and bidirectional nature of RS "in the moment", by using
media (e.g., TV scenes, song lyrics, social media posts) to create and code
ecologically-valid, family-level racial socialization conversations. The primary
aim of the third study is to prospectively assess how Black parents and Black
parents-to-be anticipate teaching their children about race "in the future".
This study will utilize annual interviews and biannual surveys to monitor how
intentions to socialize Black youth (and actual socialization behaviors) change
over time, and to elucidate the principal factors that instigate such changes.
Together, this research will lead to the development of a more complete
conceptual framework that can be tested and instituted in future investigations.
In addition, the findings from this research are expected to contribute to the
development of effective interventions for Black families.