* 1854486
* Collaborative Research: Linking the Long-Term Congo Drought to Changes in Walker-Type Circulations Affecting Equatorial Africa
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Liming Zhou, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 07/31/2024
* USD 598,447.00

The Basin of the Congo river is home to the second largest rainforest in the
world, which sustains a growing population and an abundance of plant and animal
species. Despite its size, population, and importance as a biodiversity
hotspots, the rainforest is not well represented in the climate research
literature, particularly compared to the larger but less populous Amazon
rainforest. In particular, recent short-term Amazon droughts have drawn
worldwide attention to the vulnerability of tropical forests, but the Congo
Basin has been in drought for several decades. The Congo Basin receives less
rainfall than the Amazon, and paleoclimate data suggests that it has experienced
dramatic forest loss during previous dry periods. The importance and potential
vulnerability of the Congo rainforest thus motivate further study of the
mechanisms which regulate climate and rainfall in the
region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Work performed here seeks to determine the causes
of the rainfall deficits in the region, in particular the extent to which they
are driven by increases in the sea surface temperature (SST) of the adjacent
oceans. Near-equatorial SST changes can affect continental precipitation through
their effects on the large-scale atmospheric overturning circulations known as
Walker cells. The research team will test the hypothesis that the drought is
primarily due to SST increases in the Indian and Western Pacific oceans, which
result in an intensified and westward-shifted Walker cell, which in turn induces
subsidence over the Congo and reduces moisture transport into it.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is conducted using a combination of
observational data and model simulations. The team will take advantage of a rain
gauge-based precipitation dataset for the Congo and surrounding regions from
1921 to 2014, compiled by one of the PIs under previous NSF support. Model
simulations are performed using a fully-coupled atmosphere-ocean climate model,
an atmosphere-only model with prescribed SSTs, and a "pacemaker" configuration
in which SST is specified over a particular ocean region (say, the equatorial
Indian ocean), but the coupled model determines its own SST outside the
region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work has broader impacts due to the importance
and vulnerability of the Congo Basin rainforest, as noted above. A particular
concern is that the SST increases in the Indian and Western Pacific Oceans may
be due to anthropogenic greenhouse warming, in which case the rainfall
reductions are unlikely to reverse. Results are communicated to African climate
communities and non-profit organizations for use in climate impact assessments
and the formulation of adaptation strategies. In addition, the project provides
support and training to two graduate students and one
undergraduate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.