* 1854051
* Not all Technologies are Equal: Measuring and Disentangling the Labor Effects of Technology Change in Manufacturing
* SBE,SMA
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Laurence Ales, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Feeney
* 07/31/2022
* USD 649,959.00

Manufacturing in the US is affected by powerful economic forces, such as
globalization and technological change, that have dramatically changed labor
market outcomes for workers. Despite growth in the value of U.S. manufacturing,
the number of manufacturing workers in the U.S. has declined, with fewer middle-
income jobs and displaced workers experiencing large losses in earnings.
Leveraging new empirical data and methods, we anticipate the effects of current
and emerging technologies on labor outcomes with a precision that provides
meaningful insights for training programs and for workforce policies that can
mitigate related labor market failures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Significant
literature exists on technological change and its influence on employment,
wages, and productivity. This literature suggests that technology change causes
a shift away from routine tasks and towards disproportionate wage gains for
workers with higher skills. The research to-date, however, has largely been
unable to distinguish between different types of technology change, and the
possible relation to wages and employment. Further, the economic approach
linking policy and technical change has been mostly limited to historical and
aggregated (e.g., regional or national) data. These approaches are unable to
characterize the consequences of emerging technology changes at individual
manufacturing steps and the consequences for labor at very fine levels of
required skills, training, and competencies. This coarseness in modelling
provides a challenge to the design of effective training policies and limits the
ability to understand the impact of emerging technologies on the specific skills
required for workers. We propose new methods and present novel empirical data to
address these issues and anticipate the labor market effects of emerging
technologies. Specifically, we seek to anticipate (i) how emerging technologies
affect productivity, wages, and employment; (ii) the implications for state-of-
the-art economic production functions, and (iii) labor market failures that may
be particularly severe in the presence of disruptive technological
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.