* 1854869
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: The Processes of Coalescence and Colonialism
* SBE,BCS
* 12/01/2018,11/30/2020
* Evan Giomi, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 11/30/2020
* USD 19,128.00

The researchers, at the University of Arizona and collaborators at Desert
Archaeology, Inc., will collect data to understand the relationship between the
social processes of coalescence and colonialism. Previous research on both of
these processes has tried to understand how the communities created through
either coalescence or colonialism maintained social cohesion, both within
pluralistic communities and between communities in a diverse social landscape.
At large scales, one of the primary impacts of both coalescence and colonialism
was to draw communities together in a web of economic interdependence, whether
on equal footing or in unequal relationships. In many parts of the world, and
particularly in North America, coalescence was a key process shaping the social
landscape into which European colonists inserted themselves. The organization of
economic relationships in these coalescent societies may have served as a
pattern for the economic relationships created by the subsequent colonial
encounter. However, the relationship between these processes has been
understudied. How much did economic organization under European colonialism rely
on existing relationships among Native American communities created through
coalescence? To what degree did European colonialism reconfigure these existing
relationships? Understanding the functioning of these processes is broadly
relevant to understanding the history of modern Native American communities in
the United States, particularly in the U.S. Southwest, Great Lakes, and
Southeastern regions. The results of this research are also applicable more
generally to understanding how economic interdependence can foster cooperation
between communities and help manage some of the social challenges encountered in
highly diverse communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will explore
the relationship between pre-colonial coalescence and early colonialism in the
Americas, particularly the impact of both processes on economic organization.
This research will focus on the degree of continuity and change in the
organization of the regional economy of New Mexico from a period of coalescence
(A.D.1300-1598) into the period of early Spanish colonialism (A.D.1598-1700).
Data will be collected from archaeological sites dating to this period
throughout the Rio Grande valley of central New Mexico. This data collection is
necessary to fill geographic gaps in the existing archaeological literature and
therefore give a more complete picture of economic relationships between
communities throughout the Rio Grande in New Mexico. The researchers will
compile existing data from three lines of evidence to evaluate different scales
and types of economic interaction related to the production of ceramics. The
researchers will collect new data through petrographic analysis of ceramic
tempers and isotopic analysis of lead glaze paints to help fill geographic gaps
in the coverage of the existing data. Network analysis will be use used to
analyze the data and will both facilitate comparison between the lines of
evidence and provide a methodology for understanding complex sets of
relationships at larger scales. The researchers will generate new methodologies
for archaeological network analysis of regional interactions. The researchers
will also expand on existing network analyses of coalescence to also help
evaluate the social consequences of colonialism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.