* 1854274
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Afro-Indigeneity and Protected Area Management
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2019,02/28/2021
* James McCarthy, Clark University
* Standard Grant
* Scott Freundschuh
* 02/28/2021
* USD 15,631.00

This doctoral dissertation improvement project examines how Black and indigenous
political identities intersect with respect to the creation and management of
protected natural areas. While there have been many studies on political
identity and conservation, there remains a gap in the literature regarding the
intersection of complex identities and conservation. Some traditional groups in
the Americas, for instance, claim both Black and indigenous political identities
simultaneously. Such communities often predate the countries in which they now
exist, many occupying areas historically assumed to be uninhabitable. Such
groups also face land insecurity, while at the same time playing an important
role in conservation. Understanding the political identities, territorial
claims, and ecological knowledge of these distinct communities has important
implications for the creation and management of protected natural areas. The
research findings will be disseminated through conference presentations,
academic publications, and stakeholder meetings. Results will be communicated
through written policy statements and recommendations to government offices,
development agencies, non-governmental organizations, and local stakeholders. As
a Doctoral Dissertation Improvement award, this project will provide support to
enable a promising student to establish an independent research career.

The research uses a comparative case study approach, analyzing and comparing the
experiences of two Maroon settlements, African-descended peoples who also claim
indigenous status. Both communities are located in forested areas of Jamaica,
with different levels of environmental protection and state governance. This
research has three objectives: 1) identify how Maroons describe and interpret
their identity to negotiate claims on territory and protected area management;
2) identify how state officials describe and interpret Maroon identity, claims
on territory, and protected area management; and 3) identify ways tensions
between diverse stakeholders are resolved. The doctoral student will employ a
range of qualitative methods, including: semi-structured key informant
interviews; participant observation; and collection and analysis of archival
documents (survey reports, environmental management plans, policy papers, and
maps). These methods will be complemented by collaboration and affiliation with
local communities and environmental non-governmental organizations. Although
this research project will focus on Maroons in Jamaica, the findings will
provide insights into Afro-Indigeneity and protected area management elsewhere
in the Americas, including in the United States.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.