* 1854376
* A bio-inspired strategy to dramatically reduce drag of particle-laden liquids over planar surfaces: characterization, theory and experiment
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2018,01/31/2024
* Parisa Mirbod, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 01/31/2024
* USD 505,997.00

This proposal describes a unified study that will reveal the interactions of the
motion of particles in a suspension flowing over a wall where slip-type boundary
conditions exist. This research is transformative because it will be the first
to comprehensively address the slow motion of particle-laden liquids over soft
porous material and its related drag reduction. This project will substantially
advance understanding of the behavior of slurry flows over highly compressible
porous media in which the fiber can act as a lubricating layer, with the
potential to vastly increase lift and reduce drag. The experimental methods and
analysis techniques developed could also be applied to the motion of suspensions
and non-Newtonian fluids over a broad array of structured/patterned surfaces
such as hydrophobic surfaces. The insights gathered could significantly advance
microfluidic-based devices in a wide range of industrial applications including,
biomedical fields, chemical synthesis, (cell) biology, food, and pharmaceutics
to drastically reduce friction and wear, leading to improved efficiencies and
operating lifetimes for these devices. Teaching materials for this unified
subject will be created by introducing suspension flows as an example of non-
Newtonian fluid mechanics and their interaction with porous media to the
engineering students. Undergraduates will participate as researchers in this
project through the McNair summer research program, Clarkson's REU program in
Sustainability, Clarkson's Honors program, or through a research elective.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the proposed research is to provide the basis
for understanding the flow of particle-laden liquids over soft porous materials,
and use that understanding to explore a new bio-inspired concept for greatly
enhancing the lubricating pressure while dramatically reducing friction and drag
in a particle-laden slurry flowing over planar surfaces. This concept, inspired
by the almost frictionless movement of red blood cells through capillaries,
involves covering the planar surfaces with an array of soft porous material with
a specific permeability and porosity. The objectives of the proposed project are
to 1) develop an analytical model that accurately describes the slow motion of
slurries over random arrays of soft porous media with specific mechanical
properties by coupling the Brinkman equation with the diffusive flux model, and
establishing scaling laws for coupled flows, and 2) experimentally validate that
model by a specially designed experimental set-up using pressure drop as a means
to measure drag reduction and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and particle-
image velocimetry (PIV) to measurement fluid velocities.