* 1854005
* Travel Support for Student Participation at the 2018 ASME-IMECE Micro and Nano Technology Forum; Pittsburgh, PA, November 12-15, 2018
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2018,03/31/2019
* Ganesh Balasubramanian, Villanova University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 03/31/2019
* USD 15,050.00

The purpose of this award is to provide partial travel support for 43 graduate
and undergraduate students to attend the American Society of Mechanical
Engineers International Mechanical Engineering Congress and Exposition in
Pittsburgh, PA, from November 12-15, 2018. The students participate in a
Society-Wide Micro and Nano Technology Forum (Topic 16-13), which focuses on new
developments in the field of micro and nano engineering and science. The
students present through oral and poster sessions their latest results to the
broader Engineering community. Travel grants for the students are based on the
technical quality of the poster abstracts submitted as well as on a statement
from the students' research advisors. Priority is given to student participants
who are women or who come from underrepresented groups, and to undergraduate
students. This approach promotes diverse participation at the conference, in the
short term, and in STEM fields, in the long term. This award benefits the nation
through the education of a skilled and diverse engineering workforce better
prepared to provide transformative solutions the challenges of their chosen
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This participation support is expected to benefit
the students' professional, scientific and technical development. Attendance at
the conference gives the students a broader view of the engineering profession
and of state-of-the-art research in their fields via access to several technical
and professional development talks by leading domestic and international
speakers. Students enhance their communication skills through oral and poster
presentations, in-depth discussions of their work with peers in their fields
during the Society-wide Poster Symposium at the Micro and Nanotechnology Forum.
This interactive experience significantly broadens student education, increases
their enthusiasm for their research topic, acquaints them with expectations for
scientific careers, and exposes them to new avenues for innovative
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.