* 1854072
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of a stand-alone kit for high-throughput and low-cost single-cell RNA sequencing
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,07/31/2020
* Alexander Rosenberg, SPLIT BIOSCIENCES, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 07/31/2020
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to develop technology for single-cell RNA
sequencing (scRNA-seq). Single-cell RNA-sequencing has emerged as one of the
best tools to catalogue cell types and understand their function. The key
advantage of scRNA-seq is that it provides transcriptome-wide information about
individual cells in heterogeneous samples while alternative methods either
provide information about only a limited set of genes (e.g., flow cytometry,
qPCR) or cannot provide single-cell resolution (bulk RNA-seq, microarrays).
However, current scRNA-seq approaches remain expensive, enable only limited
sample multiplexing, and are not compatible with common sample storage
conditions. This project will focus on the key technical challenges that are
required to develop universally applicable scRNA-seq kits that meet customer
needs. If successful, the end product will be a scRNA-seq kit that is ready for
pilot testing with academic and pharmaceutical company customers. By reducing
the cost and increasing sample size and sample multiplexing of scRNA-seq, the
technology will improve the ability to understand multicellular systems and
enhance workflows used in the pharmaceutical industry, such as drug screening
and patient stratification.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this
SBIR Phase I project is to develop a single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq)
method by using a combinatorial barcoding scheme that labels transcripts within
fixed cells. The proposed technology makes it possible to measure the
transcriptional profiles of hundreds of thousands of individual cells in
parallel. Unlike previous scRNA-seq technologies, the technology also enables
high sample multiplexing (up to 96 samples/experiment), is compatible with
stored samples, and fixes cells before dissociation, reducing the risk of
perturbations to gene expression during cell handling. Most importantly, the
method requires no complex instruments, which contributes to making the
technology an order of magnitude less expensive than existing technologies. The
objectives of this project are to dramatically improve the number of molecules
detected per cell and to simplify the workflow for users. Modifications to assay
chemistry will be tested to increase molecular detection, and time-consuming
steps in the workflow will be altered to shorten the overall experimental time
and reduce the probability of user error.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.