* 1854898
* NRI: Decentralized Feedback Control Design for Cooperative Robotic Walking with Application to Powered Prosthetic Legs
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2018,08/31/2020
* Robert Gregg, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 08/31/2020
* USD 399,185.00

This project addresses the creation of innovative decentralized controllers for
legged locomotion. Decentralized controllers require only local information to
accomplish their function. In the case of legged locomotion, decentralization is
desirable for several reasons. For prosthetics, where the purpose is to replace
a lost natural limb, it is impractical to wire the user with a profusion of
sensors. Therefore the prosthetic device must primarily rely on its own built-in
measurements. Another advantage of decentralization is the management of
complexity. As robots become more sophisticated, the number of variables that
must be monitored for a complete description of the system status becomes so
large that top-down controllers are costly or infeasible to implement. The
challenge of decentralized control is made substantially more difficult because
walking and running are hybrid dynamic behaviors, that is, the dynamics follow a
completely different set of rules when, for example, a foot is planted on the
ground, compared to when it is swinging in the air. This project will address
the substantial analytical difficulties caused by these features. This project
will advance the state of the art in advanced lower limb prosthetics, as well as
in locomotion for the next generation of legged robots.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate the systematic design of
decentralized feedback controllers that coordinate low-dimensional subsystems to
achieve robust legged locomotion, overcoming the curse of dimensionality in
legged robots and enabling cooperative human-machine walking with powered
prosthetic legs. The project draws upon robotics, optimization, and feedback
control theory to advance two key innovations: (1) creating algorithms to
systematically design robust stabilizing decentralized controllers for
cooperative subsystems; and (2) transferring the decentralized control framework
into practice with an experimental quadruped and a powered prosthetic leg. The
problem of creating decentralized nonlinear controllers for robust dynamic
walking with interconnected subsystems, coordinated only by a common gait cycle
phasing variable, will be formulated in the context linear and bilinear matrix
inequalities. The theoretical significance of these algorithms include: (1) they
are powerful tools for the design of general nonlinear decentralized feedback
control schemes; (2) they explicitly account for underactuation to account for
walking motions that are not flat-footed; (3) they provide cooperation between
subsystems of complex walking models with high dimensionality and strong
interactions; and (4) they provably stabilize full-dimensional hybrid dynamical
models of walking robots rather than simplified models. This decentralized
control framework is technologically significant because it can be readily
transferred into practical high-DOF legged robots, as well as wearable robots
for physical rehabilitation.