* 1854254
* IRES Track 1 IRTG Engaged in Dissecting and Reengineering the Regulatory Genome
* O/D,OISE
* 05/15/2019,04/30/2023
* Gregory Wray, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 04/30/2023
* USD 299,626.00

Much of the highly impactful research in genome sciences over the past two
decades has come from of international, interdisciplinary projects. This project
establishes a program to help prepare the next generation of leaders in genome
sciences to be interdisciplinary researchers with experience in collaborative,
international research. The program builds on strong existing ties between Duke
University and four Berlin institutions led by Humboldt University, and on a
history of productive collaboration between several of the faculty who will
carry out the training. The centerpiece of the program involves 2-3 month-long
visits by graduate students from Duke University to host lab groups in Berlin.
The goal of these visits is to embed students in a lab group that provides
exposure to complementary conceptual and technical approaches and, equally, to
provide experience in working as part of a team-based, international research
project. Funding for a complementary program on the German side was recently
awarded by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG), providing a fully
reciprocal exchange program. Students will not only benefit from the advantage
of combined physical and human resources that this program provides, they will
gain valuable methodological skills, domain expertise, and experience in
critical thinking through a truly collaborative learning and research
environment. Our long-term goal is to help them become future leaders in the
ongoing transformation of biology into a quantitative discipline, with a long-
term impact on how genomics affects numerous aspects of human
life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program described in this proposal establishes an
international collaboration between Duke University and four Berlin institutions
(led by Humboldt University) that will offer U.S. graduate students an
unparalleled opportunity to obtain a quantitative understanding of genome
function and gene regulation within the context of biological systems through
research within three complementary areas: (1) high-throughput genomics and
editing, (2) bioinformatics and machine learning, and (3) developmental systems
biology. Funding of this proposal will enable up to 12 graduate students from
Duke University to engage in research at a partner institution over a three-year
period. Participating students will travel to Berlin for approximately three
months in order to engage in research under the mentorship of a host scientist.
Students will obtain valuable international experience, significant training in
methodology and critical thinking, and career-building experiences at the
partner institution, thereby benefitting from expertise at both sites. Students
will be co-advised by a dissertation committee including computational and
biological experts from both sites. A tailored program will support the students
in bridging the three emphasis areas identified above and acquiring important
skills to prepare them for future careers at the cutting edge of academia and
industry. Students will not only benefit from the advantage of combined physical
and human resources, they will gain valuable methodological skills, domain
expertise, and experience in critical thinking through a truly collaborative
learning and research environment in order to become future leaders in the
ongoing transformation of biology into a quantitative discipline, with a long-
term impact on how genomics affects numerous aspects of human
life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.