* 1854028
* Davidson in Duesseldorf: Glycopolymer Research in Duesseldorf, Germany
* O/D,OISE
* 03/15/2019,02/29/2024
* Nicole Snyder, Davidson College
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 02/29/2024
* USD 299,915.00

With this award, NSF's Office of International Science and Engineering provides
three years of support for twelve Davidson College undergraduate students to
engage in high-impact research opportunities in Dusseldorf, Germany in
collaboration with the research group of Prof. Dr. Laura Hartmann at the
Heinrich-Heine-Universitat (HHU). The specific research focuses on the
preparation of a series of specialized compounds that present carbohydrates in a
precise fashion to study fundamental carbohydrate-protein interactions. These
interactions are important because they play critical roles in a number of
biological processes from cell communication to microbial infectivity and
cancer. Despite their importance, many questions remain as to how the precise
presentation of carbohydrates impacts their ability to be recognized by
proteins, and how the resulting carbohydrate-protein interaction impacts
downstream biological events. The research outlined in this award aims to
address this knowledge gap while simultaneously providing valuable research
opportunities in a high-impact international research setting. Undergraduate
participants will receive training in carbohydrate chemistry, polymer chemistry,
molecular spectroscopy, and biochemical and biophysical techniques that will
enhance their education and prepare them for a competitive international
workforce. Furthermore, results from this award will promote the progress of
science by directly advancing the fields of carbohydrate and polymer science,
including initiatives highlighted under the National Academy of Sciences report,
"Transforming the Glycosciences: A Roadmap to the Future (2012)", which
specifically emphasizes a broader understanding of the roles of carbohydrate
polymers in chemical, biological and industrial processes. Long term, the
results from this research may ultimately lead to advancements in national
health, prosperity and welfare by providing a better understanding of the
fundamental roles carbohydrates play in human health and disease.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the major challenges in studying molecular
interactions between carbohydrates and other biomolecules is the low binding
affinity of individual carbohydrate subunits. Biological systems overcome this
issue by increasing localized concentrations of carbohydrate residues or by the
multivalent presentation of carbohydrate ligands on proteins, lipids or cell
surfaces. Molecular scaffolds, which can be selectively tuned to vary the number
and density of sugar ligands along a defined oligomeric backbone, can be used to
gain fundamental insights into multivalent carbohydrate interactions and the
processes they govern. The research in this proposal, which will be conducted
with Davidson College undergraduate participants and in collaboration with Prof.
Dr. Laura Hartmann and her team at Heinrich-Heine-Universitat, uses a systematic
approach to synthesize several precision glycoconjugates to study the
relationships between the ways in which carbohydrate ligands are presented (e.g.
on a rigid oligoproline scaffold versus a more flexible oligo(amidoamine)
scaffold), and how that presentation impacts carbohydrate binding in two classes
of carbohydrate binding proteins: galectins and the C-type lectins. The
overarching research question that will be addressed by the proposed research
is: How does the presentation of carbohydrates on well-defined rigid or flexible
scaffolds impact their ability to engage proteins involved in specific
recognition events? The outcomes of this research will provide greater insight
into factors that govern carbohydrate recognition and may help scientists better
understand how recognition events and the corresponding biological outcomes of
those events are tuned by carbohydrate display.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.