* 1854018
* EAGER: Integration of Science Outreach into the Research Enterprise: Data-Driven Perspectives
* SBE,SMA
* 11/01/2019,04/30/2021
* Jeanne Garbarino, Rockefeller University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 04/30/2021
* USD 99,488.00

Science outreach represents a strategy that helps to connect scientists with
non-specialized audiences in culturally relevant ways, with the overarching goal
of bridging science and society. The concept of science outreach dates back to
the beginning of modern science research, but in more recent times, science
outreach is increasingly seen as a necessary component of the scientific
enterprise, particularly in the context of promoting access, equity, and
inclusivity. Yet, challenges exist with regard to scaling and sustaining science
outreach efforts. As the field of science outreach moves towards
professionalization, it is important to understand how science outreach programs
and activities are currently viewed among members of the scientific community.
The goal of this project is uncover how science outreach is valued among
scientific researchers, learn what motivates scientists to participate in
science outreach related initiatives, and examine how gender and race influences
participation. The results of this project have the potential to raise awareness
about the importance of science outreach and ultimately support increased,
effective, and sustainable public engagement with science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aims of this project will be accomplished through the
creation, dissemination, and analysis of a nationwide survey instrument which
will be developed with collaborative input from representative members of the
growing national science outreach community. The survey instrument will be
tailored to query three distinct groups of respondents that exist within the
scientific community: 1) Respondents who do not conduct science outreach; 2)
Respondents who participate in science outreach with varying frequency; 3)
Respondents who practice science outreach as their profession. A large-scale
survey will be conducted and the responses will be analyzed and shared with the
broad scientific community through peer-reviewed publication, alongside
complementary write-ups and future recommendations, which will be shared on free
and publicly accessible web platforms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.