* 1854638
* Study of Low Rank Approximation of Tensorial Data Set via Non-convex Regularization
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* MingQing Xiao, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 07/31/2022
* USD 151,099.00

Low rank approximation of higher-order tensors is highly desirable in various
practical applications and is becoming a main theme in processing multi-
dimensional arrays efficiently and effectively. Quite often in many
applications, due to some local similarity or certain periodicity of a highly
multidimensional array such as in image processing, the rank of such tensor
usually appears to be significantly lower than its size. When a multi-
dimensional array is governed by a low-rank structure, the handling of such a
dataset becomes much more approachable, and more importantly, the low rank
property indicates that the dataset can be significantly compressed in a
meaningful way. This explains why the low rank characteristic is so attractive
and practically useful in various applications. The broader significance and
importance of this project are mainly reflected by two aspects: firstly, the
project aims to promote the creation and development of the next generation of
mathematical theory/tools for handling and processing high dimensional data sets
more effectively and more efficiently, leading to expand the existing
methodology; secondly, the project will enhance the multidisciplinary program
for graduate/undergraduate student training and promote the mathematical
learning interests for K-12 students in the local community, a rural area at
Southern Illinois with many low-income families.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;During
the last decade, the low rank approximation of tensors mainly focuses on convex
regularization, and the approach appears to be insufficient due to the
limitations of convex formulation. In this proposal, we will develop the low
rank approximation of tensors via non-convex regularization, which currently is
not well established yet for the study of multi-dimensional datasets. There
exists very few study for tensors under the non-convex formulation at this
point. In this proposal, we propose a framework in which equivalent problems can
be formulated in the Fourier domain, where tensor ranks can be characterized in
a more approachable way. In this framework, the non-convex formulation can
provide more effective approach for tensor related problems than the existing
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.