* 1854960
* An Adaptive Partition-based Approach for Solving Large-Scale Stochastic Programs
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2018,05/31/2021
* Yongjia Song, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 05/31/2021
* USD 131,852.00

Stochastic programs are popular models for problems requiring optimization under
uncertainty. Stochastic programs are challenging to solve, especially when
uncertainty characterization relies on a large number of scenarios.
Consequently, both scenario decomposition and scenario reduction (clustering and
aggregation) techniques are used to reduce computational burden. The latter are
performed either in a heuristic manner, or in a way that does not utilize
information from intermediate solutions. This project's objective is to advance
a computational framework based on partitioning the scenario set adaptively
during the solution process. If successful, the technique can be potentially
integrated into existing algorithms and software. By enabling faster
computation, and in some cases making it possible to solve larger problem
instances, the project has the potential to impact a whole host of applications
requiring optimization under uncertainty.

The adaptive partition-based framework will provide a mechanism to aggregate
information from scenario sub-problems, by replacing the entire scenario set
with an adaptively constructed partition of scenarios. If successful, this will
lead to an algorithmic way to coordinate the efforts between approximating the
distribution and optimization. The approach will integrate both the optimal
(static) scenario reduction technique and the regularized cutting-plane method
with inexact oracles in the context of stochastic programs. The developed
algorithms will address two-stage and multi-stage stochastic linear programs as
well as stochastic integer programs.