* 1854827
* LEAP-HI: Catalyzing Resilient Urban Infrastructure Systems: Integrating the Natural and Built Environments
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Peter Haas, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 07/31/2024
* USD 2,127,326.00

The aim of this Leading Engineering for America's Prosperity, Health, and
Infrastructure (LEAP-HI) project is to transform the design, implementation, and
performance of stormwater infrastructure to reduce acute and chronic flooding
and increase the ability of communities, and particularly those that are under-
resourced, to prepare for, recover from, and adapt to extreme weather events. By
integrating ecologically-based Green Infrastructure (GI) with existing Built
Infrastructure (BI), the project will research technical and financial
strategies to protect local communities from current and future flood damages
and boost economic, social, and ecological redevelopment in neighborhoods across
the US. The outcome of this multidisciplinary collaboration is the reinvention
of the urban water cycle based on GI networks that not only improve water
management and enhance the livability and quality of local environments, but
also are more adaptive, robust, and resilient than the established (BI) practice
of paving, piping and pumping. The research team will identify and then resolve
the hurdles that have limited GI to single installations with limited real time
performance data or to plans that remain unrealized. In doing so, this project
will develop and apply engineering tools to real communities with real outcomes
affecting real lives and, thereby, convert stormwater runoff into a community
asset.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this LEAP-HI project is to
research the engineering tools (sensor network, data acquisition, model
development, and network design) that will allow the integration of Green
Infrastructure (GI) networks with existing Built Infrastructure (BI) for the
management of stormwater with systems-level, predictive performance and
quantitative assessment of costs and expanded benefits, including water quality,
biodiversity and community well-being. The intellectual significance of the
research is that it makes possible the transition from application of isolated
GI installations as randomly deployed beautification efforts to engineered
systems of GI networks that function synergistically to replace or enhance
deteriorating networks of pumps and pipes. This project employs a systems
approach in which GI/BI networks are designed to operate with predictive and
expanded performance metrics that are achievable because the network designs are
tailored to local conditions. Detailed study of test beds in Chicago and
Pittsburgh, two cities with ongoing stormwater issues but fundamentally
different topographies and infrastructure design, establish the basis for
replication in a wide range of communities. By fundamentally improving our
ability to predict GI/BI network performance, this project addresses three
National Academy of Engineering Grand Challenges: restore and improve urban
infrastructure, provide access to clean water, and manage the nitrogen
cycle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.