* 1854550
* Testing the Refugia Hypothesis in Southeast Alaska Using Paleogenetics and Glacial Chronology
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2024
* Jason Briner, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Yurena Yanes
* 04/30/2024
* USD 542,156.00

Vast ice sheets covered northern North America during the last Ice Age. These
ice sheets blocked movements of plants and animals between Asia and the Americas
for many thousands of years. Many species died out and others were forced into
isolated, ice-free areas (refugia) north and south of the ice sheets. Today?s
plants and animals carry the genetic legacy of the Ice Age and this refugial
isolation, but it is not completely known how it impacted and shaped the past
trajectory of many species and their movements following the retreat of the ice
sheets. Yet, such knowledge is important for understanding how plants and
animals may respond in the future due to environmental changes. The exact extent
and timing of ice coverage is also poorly known, and islands along the
northwestern coast of North America are hypothesized to have escaped Ice Age
glaciation. This means they could have acted as a unique bottleneck for the
passage of plants and animals in the geologic past, and even perhaps that they
were an early gateway for the peopling of the Americas. This research is aimed
at improving knowledge of a critical region for plant, animal, and even human
migration: Southeast Alaska. We are testing the hypothesis that coastal areas in
Southeast Alaska escaped ice cover by collecting rock samples that will tell us
whether or not landscapes were covered by ice and when they became ice-free. We
are studying the DNA preserved in fossil bones from mammals that died thousands
of years ago. This research project is providing much needed insights into the
history of iconic mammals and their environmental conditions in Southeast
Alaska.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The westernmost extent and timing of ice cover
along the North Pacific Coast during the Last Glacial Maximum is poorly known,
leaving unanswered fundamental questions about the impact of climatic change on
biotic diversification and postglacial colonization of the Americas. Various
lines of evidence point to the existence of a viable, ice-free coastal corridor
that may have played an important role for biotic exchange between the Old and
New Worlds during the last Ice Age. This project is designed to be the
definitive test of the hypothesis in support of coastal refugia. We are taking
advantage of cutting-edge technologies in cosmogenic nuclide exposure dating and
paleogenetic analyses of an unparalleled fossil collection from caves in SE
Alaska to achieve two key objectives: (1) directly determine if SE Alaska
provided ice-free refugia for terrestrial mammals during the LGM, and (2)
constrain the extent and history of the western Cordilleran Ice Sheet during the
LGM. Whether the hypothesis is supported or not, this highly interdisciplinary
project will deliver results with high impact and have important implications
for many different disciplines spanning the geological, biological,
paleontological, and archeological sciences. The results will answer a broad
range of key questions about the dynamic glacial conditions of SE Alaska during
the Ice Age, biogeographic history of mammal island populations, and the
configuration and timing of an available migration corridor for the postglacial
peopling of the Americas. This research will (a) provide training opportunities
for graduate and undergraduate students, (b) broadly disseminate results and
links to associated relevant topics, such as environmental change and human
migration, through a website, and (c) organize a workshop in SE Alaska with
public and K-12 outreach components to synthesize past and current research and
focus on the intersection between research, natural resource management, and the
impact of future climate projections on biotic systems across the
archipelago.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.