* 1854255
* IRES Track One: Involving Undergraduates in Research on Design and Cross-Cultural  Perceptions of Cuteness in Robotic Gadgets
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Hiroko Chiba, DePauw University
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 07/31/2023
* USD 286,761.00

As robotic gadgets, and eventually robots, become increasingly common in daily
life, it is critical that roboticists design devices that are accepted by
diverse users. This collaboration between DePauw University in the United States
and Shibaura Institute of Technology in Japan will lead to a deeper
understanding of the role that cuteness plays in fostering positive human
response to, and acceptance of, robotic gadgets. Building on research related to
the Japanese concept of kawaii (Japanese cuteness), this project involves
designing prototypes of robotic gadgets with varying levels and types of
cuteness, and conducting multi-site, cross-cultural user studies that evaluate
user?s reactions to varied designs. A long-term goal of this research is to
deepen our understanding of how designers can use the concept of kawaii to build
robotic gadgets that are accepted by diverse users. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project provides educational and research experiences, at the individual and
cohort level, for a diverse group of twelve students comprised of four
undergraduates participating in each of three summers. Before departing for
Japan, students will complete cultural and technical preparatory activities led
collaboratively by two DePauw faculty members with remote contributions from
three Shibaura Institute of Technology faculty members. Each student will then
conduct research for seven weeks at Shibaura Institute of Technology under the
primary mentorship of the Shibaura faculty members with supplemental remote and
on-site mentorship from the DePauw faculty members. In addition to informing
inclusive design practices for robotic gadgets, the project will serve as a
catalyst for ongoing collaborations between DePauw University and Shibaura
Institute of Technology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The concept of kawaii (Japanese
cuteness) is considered an essential element of Japanese design and is commonly
seen in both low-tech and high-tech products including robots and robotic
gadgets. Increasingly, kawaii is incorporated into successful products that are
used globally. An object?s kawaii-ness is an important part of its affect, which
may influence a user?s likability and acceptance of the object. Previous
publications by the project team and others have investigated several aspects of
kawaii in simple static objects, including analysis across cultures and genders.
Other researches have evaluated various affective properties of robots. Building
on prior work, the DePauw-Shibaura collaboration will investigate cross-cultural
and gender differences related to perceptions of kawaii, specifically in robotic
gadgets, with the aim of understanding how to design devices that are accepted
by diverse users. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Each student will work on a project that
involves designing and prototyping several versions (with varying degrees and
types of kawaii-ness) of a domain-specific robotic gadget, and then conducting
one or more experiments from a user-study suite that measures a user?s emotional
reaction to the gadgets using measurements obtained through self-reports and/or
biosensors. We will gather data from subjects in both Japan and the United
States, which will allow us to compare user reactions across both culture and
gender. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One challenge in running a cross-cultural, multi-
site user study involving prototypes of robotic gadgets involves replicability.
It is difficult to build several identical prototypes for use at different sites
and even more difficult to build several versions of each prototype that
incorporate different kawaii properties. Therefore, we will explore the use of
traditional video, as well as stereoscopic 3D video, to record each prototype
and to present the prototype consistently to users at different
sites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.