* 1854502
* Collaborative Research PREEVENTS Track 2: Land-atmosphere feedbacks over urban terrain under heat waves
* GEO,ICER
* 06/15/2019,05/31/2023
* Yuyu Zhou, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 05/31/2023
* USD 268,552.00

Heat waves are one of the most important causes of weather-related mortality and
could lead to unprecedented peak electricity demand. While heat waves are
usually instigated by large-scale atmospheric circulation patterns, land-
atmosphere feedbacks can further amplify their local magnitudes. However,
investigations of land-atmosphere feedbacks over urban areas under heat waves
are lacking, despite urban areas being home for over 50% of the global
population and 80% of the US population. This project aims to advance the
understanding of land-atmosphere feedbacks over urban areas under heat waves and
the prediction of local heat wave impacts on natural systems and human
activities in urban areas. This project will provide the scientific basis and
tools for policy makers to design heat mitigation strategies over the Boston
region by engaging policy makers through scientific briefings, workshops and
outreach activities. Beyond the tutoring of one graduate student and two
postdoctoral researchers, the project will provide summer research opportunities
for undergraduate students to participate in interdisciplinary research tackling
real urban sustainability challenges. The simulations and analyses generated by
this project will be incorporated into various undergraduate and graduate
courses that the PIs teach.

In particular, this project focuses on the coupled dynamics and feedbacks
between the natural (e.g., vegetation) and built (e.g., buildings) components of
the urban environment and the local meteorological conditions under heat waves,
and their representations in numerical weather prediction models. New
understanding generated by analysis of existing sap flux measurements will be
incorporated into the Weather Research and Forecasting (WRF) model to better
predict urban evapotranspiration under heat wave conditions. The response of
building energy use to heat wave conditions and how the feedback of
anthropogenic heat flux further modulates the local meteorological conditions
will be also quantified in an iterative manner using WRF and a city scale
building energy use model.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.