* 1854402
* Reproducible Developmental Science: Why and How
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2019,11/30/2019
* Michael Frank, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Peter Vishton
* 11/30/2019
* USD 6,418.00

Openness and transparency are foundational to a credible, reliable science.
Openness and transparency allow for original research results to be reproduced
(reproducibility) and replicated using new samples (replicability), which
benefit science by making findings easier to verify. This award funds a day-long
preconference preceding the 2019 Biennial Meeting of the Cognitive Development
Society that will address this issue by helping cognitive development
researchers adopt norms and practices at all stages of the research process that
support reproducibility and replicability. This will enhance the robustness of
the field and allow for the extension and translation of a more reliable basic
research foundation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Norms that are consistent with
reproducibility and replicability, such as pre-registering hypotheses and
analyses, sharing data and analytic code, and powering studies sufficiently to
effectively test hypotheses will enhance confidence in the published scientific
literature. Training that will aid in embedding these norms and practices will
guide social and behavioral science towards greater reproducibility and
replicability. This preconference will accomplish this goal for cognitive
developmental science using presentations and tutorials on the 1) scientific
evidence for the methodological and statistical challenges facing cognitive
developmental science, 2) benefits of adopting tools such as the Open Science
Framework for laboratory management, and 3) issues regarding multi-lab
collaboration. The preconference will enhance the practical knowledge on ways in
which reproducibility and replicability can be
increased.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.