* 1854703
* Collaborative Research: CDS&amp;E-MSS: Exact Homological Algebra for Computational Topology
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Lori Ziegelmeier, Macalester College
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 06/30/2023
* USD 129,757.00

A central problem in data-driven scientific inquiry is how to interpret
structures in large data sets uncovered by modern tools. The field of
topological data analysis provides a potential solution via the language of
homology, which encodes features of interest as cycles. These, in principle, can
be located and understood as generators, which reveal explicit structure in the
original data. However, fundamental mathematical and computational challenges
have restricted most topological analyses to the study of persistence diagrams,
numerical summaries that omit generators and, thus, dramatically limit modeling
power and explainability. This project draws on diverse ideas from the
mathematical domains of algebraic topology, numerical linear algebra, category
and order-lattice theory, computation, and combinatorics, and from the
scientific and engineering domains of biological aggregations, brain, and
medical imaging. It provides ample opportunities for training mathematical
scientists for the mastery of these tools, and for developing new, exploratory
methods in STEM teaching and learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
ExHACT project will provide the tools needed to realize the full modeling and
explanatory capability of generating cycles by creating a unified theoretical
and computational tool set for persistent homological algebra. Recent results in
the fields of matroid theory and exact categories (from which the project draws
its name) developed by one of the PIs provide the foundation for efficiently
performing the necessary computations using well-understood matrix
manipulations. The PIs will capitalize on this new opportunity by developing
theoretical and computational tools for the study of persistent generators,
induced homomorphisms of persistence modules, exact and spectral sequences, and
relative persistent homology, among other methods. They will augment this
computational core with data visualization capabilities to facilitate graphical
exploration of homological data in an intuitive fashion for scientists without
extensive mathematical background, and provide new tools for existing research
groups that currently apply topological methods in materials science,
neuroscience, biochemistry, and biological aggregations. ExHACT will also enable
custom functionality and workflows to be built by more experienced users,
providing a stable community platform for the development of new methodologies
in topological data analysis. All software functionality will be extensively
documented, including both technical specifications and detailed use cases, in
order to make a full suite of computation and visualization capabilities
accessible to a broad audience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.