* 1854854
* Influence of Cysteinate Protonation on Biologically Relevant Nickel-Mediated Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Jason Shearer, Trinity University
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 08/31/2021
* USD 309,248.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms B
Program of the Chemistry Division of the NSF, Professor Jason Shearer of the
Department of Chemistry at University of Nevada, Reno is studying the influence
of protonated sulfur ligands at the active sites of metalloenzymes. This type of
structure has recently been recognized as important in several metalloprotein
active sites, yet its impact on structure and catalysis has not been well
studied. This project examines a number of well-defined synthetic nickel-sulfur
compounds and evaluates their reactivity, structure and properties. The research
has impacts on the design and production of a number of catalytic systems,
including those important in clean energy, commodity chemical, and
pharmaceuticals. In addition, the project provides an educational platform for
the training of highly skilled workers in a number of Science, Technology,
Education and Mathematics (STEM) fields.

Cysteinate-ligated metalloenzymes represent a diverse class of biomolecules that
are involved in reactions ranging from electron transfer to hydrocarbon
functionalization. Recently, it was discovered that the active site of nickel-
iron hydrogenase contains a protonated-coordinated nickel-sulfur bond. This adds
to a small, but growing number of enzymatic systems, such as nickel superoxide
dismutase that contain this structural element. This research group has recently
shown that this feature is not only important in modulating the structure and
properties of nickel-thiolate ligated systems, but can also be involved in
reactions such as proton coupled electron transfer reactions. This research
seeks to understand the properties and reactivities of designed nickel
containing small molecules and metallopeptide-based systems that contain the
protonated nickel-sulfur bond. A series of spectroscopic, computational,
reactivity, and mechanistic studies are undertaken to understand these systems.
Information learned through these studies is used to rationally design systems
with fine-tuned electronic and geometric structural properties that can perform
specific reactions towards targeted substrates.