* 1854247
* IRES Track I: Mapping and Quantifying the Natural Disaster Resilience of Displaced People with the University of Rwanda Center for Geographic Information Systems and Remote Sensing
* O/D,OISE
* 03/15/2019,02/29/2024
* Brian Tomaszewski, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 02/29/2024
* USD 299,518.00

This International Research Experience for Students (IRES) is focused on mapping
and quantifying the natural disaster resilience of displaced people in Rwanda.
Over a three year period, fourteen U.S. graduate students from the Rochester
Institute of Technology (RIT) and three undergraduate students from the Monroe
Community College Geospatial Information Science and Technology program (MCC)
will participate in a ten-week summer research experience at the University of
Rwanda Center for Geographic Information Systems and Remote Sensing (CGIS).
Significant activities include student access to and learning from CGIS on
displaced population natural disaster resilience issues unique to Rwanda, East
African context student research training activities, and access to disaster
management organizations focused on displaced people such as the Rwandan
Ministry of Disaster Management and Refugee Affairs (MIDIMAR) only available in
Rwanda. The project will create unique linkages to East African organizations
that will train, educate and professionally develop 17 STEM student research
scientists over three years focused on disaster resilience, displacement and
GIS. The project will broaden participation of underrepresented groups as we
will fully leverage RIT's existing underrepresented recruitments networks such
as RIT's large Deaf-and-Hard of Hearing population, women, and minorities. The
MCC student will create a unique opportunity for undergraduate international
research experience as well as community college international research capacity
development. Displaced people in Rwanda will also benefit through their
participation as field research assistants as well as the research providing
outreach and advocacy for their situations. Intellectual products created by
IRES students, such as community-scale resilience maps displacement resilience
indexes will provide important benefits to society that can bring global
attention to displacement and disaster resilience research and GIS. The project
is particularly strong in enhancing infrastructure for research and education as
IRES students will become part of Rwandan and East African research networks
only available by being on-site in Rwanda. CGIS and MIDIMAR for the first time
become linked to NSF research. Workshops on disasters and resilience GIS mapping
will be conducted by IRES students with Rwandan secondary schools and disaster
stakeholder groups for broader project outreach. If successful, findings will be
generalizable for additional internationally-focused research beyond displaced
population natural disaster resilience in Rwanda (for example, the Syrian and
Rohingya refugee crises) and particularly US-national interest disaster
resilience and displacement issues like seen in hurricanes Harvey and Maria,
creating the potential for broader US-national and international research on
displaced population natural disaster resilience that can provide future
students with the knowledge, motivation and inspiration to pursue
internationally-focused science careers to solve US-national and global
challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary student research project goal is
community-level scale field mapping with Geographic Information Systems (GIS)
and remote sensing of resilience indicators relevant to displaced population
natural disaster resilience. Data collected by IRES students will be used as an
input for spatially modeling, indexing and quantifying the natural disaster
resilience of displaced people. The research team will create transformative
knowledge on understanding the relationship between displacement and natural
disaster resilience. Spatial indexes of displaced population natural disaster
resilience currently do not exist at any scale - let alone at the community-
level scale that will only be possible to investigate through the foreign
research site. Student research efforts will make valuable intellectual
contributions to understanding (a) the spatial relationships between
displacement and disaster resilience, (b) how developing displacement disaster
resilience spatial metrics can inform displacement planning, and (c) how
resilience is developed and manifested in displacement and disaster contexts to
inform disaster management decision making and risk-reduction. Rwanda is a
unique location for research on mapping and quantifying displaced population
natural disaster resilience due to both refugee populations and internally
displaced Rwandan citizens who face natural disaster risks. Access to these
diverse and unique groups is only possible by being in
Rwanda.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.