* 1854475
* Turbulent multiphase flow with interfacial mass and heat transfer: linking microscopic physics to macroscopic mixing
* ENG,CBET
* 09/12/2018,06/30/2021
* Rui Ni, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 06/30/2021
* USD 133,775.00

CBET - 1705246&lt;br/&gt;PI: Ni, Rui&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many naturally
occurring and industrial processes involve turbulent flows that contain
particles such as bubbles or drops dispersed in a fluid. In these cases, the
dispersed phase can exchange mass and heat with the surrounding fluid in a way
that depends on details of the turbulent flow. This award will support
experiments to understand the role of mass and heat transfer on large-scale
statistics of turbulent flows. The challenge is to relate microscopic mass
transfer on the scale of individual bubbles or drops to macroscopic mixing and
mass transport. A vertical water tunnel will be used to study bubbles that can
be held stationary and imaged to determine the concentration field of tracers
that are exchanged between the bubbles and surrounding fluid. The rate of mass
exchange will be correlated with parameters that describe the turbulence
intensity and characteristics of the dispersed phase. An LED illumination system
will be used to quantify temperature profiles in turbulent flow, which provides
insight into large-scale mixing efficient of vapor bubbles. This system will
also be used to study the concentrations of particles of various shapes to
analyze mixing in turbulent flow. The results of these studies will be broadly
relevant to such applications as evaporating sprays, rain droplets in clouds,
air bubbles in fermentation reactors, and multiphase chemical reactors. The
research team will prepare demonstrations of multiphase flows for K-12 student
groups participating in programs at Penn State and for the Central Pennsylvania
Festival of the Arts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A vertical tunnel facility will be
used to study mass transfer in particle-laden turbulent flows. An opposing mean
flow balances the buoyancy drive rise or settling of particles, which allows the
particles to remain in a field of view for imaging. The facility allows the mean
flow and the turbulence Reynolds number to be adjusted independently. A
combination of imaging methods will be used to measure the three-dimensional
Lagrangian trajectories of dispersed particles, statistics of the surrounding
flow, and the concentration field of mass exchanged between the two phases by
interfacial transfer. Experiments will be conducted to identify the relevant
parameters for turbulent multiphase flow with interfacial transfer. Flows
containing bubbles and other particles with inertia will be examined to
determine if inertial particles enhance mass transfer and mixing. The
possibility of two-way couplings between interfacial momentum transfer and mass
transfer will be investigated. The role of interfacial mass transfer on breakup
and coalescence of bubbles will be determined.