* 1854976
* Belmont Forum Collaborative Research:  Scenarios of Biodiversity and Ecosystem Service
* GEO,RISE
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2022
* James Clark, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 03/31/2022
* USD 179,999.00

Innovative research on the complex interaction of socio-economic and global
environmental trends on biodiversity and ecosystem services is needed to help
develop more informative scenarios for addressing environmental and human
development challenges. To overcome these challenges coupled natural-human
systems approaches and analyses are needed. These provide improved scenarios of
biodiversity and ecosystem services that couple the outputs of direct and
indirect drivers such as land use, invasive species, overexploitation,
biodiversity, environmental change, and pollution. The resulting models provide
a methodological state-of-the art that results in more accurate quantitative
assessments, better land use, and more effective ecosystem services. Employing
this methodology, this research project focuses on addressing land-use changes
due to abrupt climate change and their impact on species extinctions, range
shifts, and phenological changes. Better knowledge in this area is critical
because species loss destabilizes food webs which can negatively impact human
well-being and have unexpected consequences for multiple ecosystem functions and
associated services. Predicting the response of biodiversity to global change
has thus become an important area of research. Present models intended to
anticipate future biodiversity and ecosystem services have been criticized for
ignoring inputs such as biotic interactions and links between trophic levels
(e.g., predator-prey relationships). This research will use a recently created,
sophisticated, biodiversity modeling code that integrates predictive
biogeography, geography, biostatistics, and trophic web ecology to derive
scenarios of the impact of global change on biodiversity, ecosystem functioning,
and the provision of ecosystem services. As a test case, the program will be
combined with information from stakeholders and statistics on vertebrates to
generate a suite of likely models of pan-European vertebrate biodiversity as
they might be influenced by climate change. Stakeholders information will be
used to inform the project so methodological choices, scenarios, and indicators
can be made/set in such a way that results are useful for conservation planning
and decision-making support. Broader impacts of the work include international
collaboration between US investigators and six European (Finnish, United
Kingdom, Dutch, German, Swiss, French, and Italian) scientists and the
generation of scenarios for improving policy, decision-making, and conservation
planning of ecosystem services involving vertebrate species across the European
continent. In this coalition of investigators, each country funds it own
scientists and their part of the project. Additional broader impacts of the work
include workshops and summer schools to inform stakeholder groups and
train/education students and postdocs, respectively; the generation of reports
for the European Commission; and public outreach through a project website
linked to social media and online discussion groups and forums. For the US
component of the work, there will be the training of a postdoctoral scholar in
transdisciplinary, international science and teamwork.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award supports US researchers participating in a project competitively selected
by a coalition of 26 funding agencies from 23 countries through the Belmont
Forum call for proposals on "Scenarios of Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services".
The call was a multilateral initiative designed to support research projects
that contribute to the development of scenarios, models, and decision-support
tools for understanding and solving critical issues facing our planet. The goal
of the competition was to improve and apply participatory scenario methods to
enhance research relevance and its acceptance and to address gaps in methods for
modelling impact drivers and policy interventions. It was also to develop and
communicate levels of uncertainty associated with the models, to improve data
accessibility and fill gaps in knowledge. Using this methodology, this research
builds on the newly developed Generalized Joint Attribute Model, a generative
model that solves two big challenges for predicting community change: (1) the
ability to model responses of interdependent species across distantly related
taxonomic groups and (2) the ability to link species on scales from plot-based
plant abundance to individual- and plot-level herbivore damage. These advances
allow modeling of the distribution of individual species and species groups
across entire communities, while considering shared responses to the environment
and co-variation between species. The modeling code used in the project employs
a flexible hierarchical framework to model species communities responding to
multiple environmental changes. In addition to the modeling, the project will
work to expand the capabilities of the present modeling platform so it can
address predator-prey and competition-for-prey interactions. It will also allow
incorporation of prior information on expected relationships between species
based on relationships within the "who eats whom" network via hierarchical
implementation. Species predictions will include an analysis of uncertainties
and responses to environmental parameters as well as shared species responses to
the environment and interactions with other species. Model results will be used
to identify areas of conservation priority by combining principles of systematic
conservation planning with ensemble projections of multi-trophic communities and
ecosystem services.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.