* 1854432
* Collaborative Research: Growth, preservation, and modification of Neoarchean to Paleoproterozoic crust, an example from the Wyoming province, Montana
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Julia Baldwin, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 06/30/2023
* USD 247,435.00

Earth's continental crust is thought to have formed over discrete intervals of
geologic time, where particular geologic processes resulted in enhanced crust
formation and growth. These time intervals in the Precambrian also reflect a
transition to modern plate tectonic processes, resulting in collision and
assembly of smaller crustal fragments into continents and supercontinents. Rocks
at the northwest margin of the Wyoming province in southwestern Montana provide
a record of these processes during formation of the North American continent.
This project will utilize an integrated approach by applying petrologic,
geochemical, and geochronologic tools to establish relative contributions of
crustal growth versus subsequent modification by tectonic processes. The major
outcomes of this work will be a better understanding of the balance between
crustal preservation and growth during continental assembly. This project will
promote teaching and training by supporting graduate and undergraduate research,
and results of this study will be incorporated into undergraduate class field
trips and laboratory curricula. Infrastructure for research and education will
be enhanced through the development and refinement of new geochronological
techniques, and by providing training for students in state-of-the-art
analytical equipment. New age data from this project will be integrated into
current Montana state geologic mapping efforts to better interpret the overall
ages of rock units and structural relationships. Outreach efforts will include
presenting informal science talks for students and faculty from schools
nationwide that conduct summer field courses in southwest
Montana.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two intervals in the Neoarchean and
Paleoproterozoic represent major periods in the growth and assembly of North
America as well as continents worldwide. These periods have been inferred to
correspond to times of enhanced production of continental crust. This project
will examine the processes that have operated during these time intervals to
produce new continental crust as well as the processes operating to rework and
assemble this crust. The northwest margin of the Wyoming province in
southwestern Montana is an ideal natural laboratory for this study because it is
comprised of a diverse suite of metasedimentary garnet-bearing lithologies that
are amenable to Pressure-temperature-time studies, as well as containing
interlayered meta-igneous rocks that are poorly dated. The proposed work will
apply an integrated approach of metamorphic phase equilibria and geochronology
of Neoarchean to Paleoproterozoic rocks in the Laramide basement-cored uplifts
of the Montana Metasedimentary Terrane to establish relative crustal growth
versus modification during these time intervals. Data collected will determine
the conditions, timing, duration, and spatial extent of magmatism and
metamorphism through metamorphic phase equilibria, Uranium-Lead (U-Pb) geo- and
thermochronology of zircon, monazite, and titanite, Hafnium (Hf) and Neodymium
(Nd) isotopic analysis of zircon and monazite, and Lutetium-Hafnium/Samarium-
Neodymium (Lu-Hf/Sm-Nd) dating of garnet. This integration of tools will provide
temporal resolution magmatic and metamorphic histories and directly constrain
the growth and modification history of the northwestern Wyoming
province.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.