* 1854008
* IRES Track I: US-Canada Collaborative Research on Biomaterials for stem cell culture and neural differentiation
* O/D,OISE
* 03/15/2019,02/29/2024
* Kyung-An Han, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 02/29/2024
* USD 280,066.00

This award supports international research experiences for U.S. undergraduate
students from the University of Texas at El Paso (UTEP) at the University of
Victoria (UVic) in Canada in interdisciplinary research representing the fields
of bioengineering and neuroscience. The project engages primarily Hispanic
engineering students at UTEP, a majority Hispanic 4-year, public institution.
Reciprocal visits to UTEP by UVic students will be supported with Canadian
funds. UTEP students will be afforded professional development and educational
opportunities in cutting-edge research. Specifically, the project engages the
synergism of stem cell biology with advanced 3-dimensional biomaterial
technology to manufacture tissue from stem cells. Generating patient-specific
"artificial" tissue allows the researchers to control the rate of growth and
differentiation of stem cells. This research is significant in paving the way
for modeling disease and for future drug development.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Working together, the interdisciplinary team aims to
identify unique approaches of targeting differentiation of human induced
pluripotent stem cells [iPSCs] into neural phenotypes by utilizing advanced
materials and processing. Specifically, the UTEP team has expertise in human
induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC) culture and 3D bioprinting, and UVic has
expertise in culturing neuronal differentiation of human iPSC on fibrin-based
scaffolds. The research focus is the application of microfluidic-based 3D
bioprinting for coprinting of human iPSCs together with biomaterial scaffolds to
generate bio-composites of the desired architecture with high fidelity.
Bioprinting iPSCs with advanced biomaterials and scaffolds bears the promise to
develop 3D tissues, ideally including encapsulated cells and facilitating their
proliferation, and targeted differentiation. The project enables addressing
critical questions in the field: 1) How can advanced materials and their unique
designs facilitate stem cell culture and promote their differentiation? 2) How
can 3D bioprinting be applied as an advanced manufacturing technique to mimic
the complex environment for regulating growth and differentiation of stem cells?
3) Does the differentiated progeny of cells cultured atop micro-textured
scaffolds exhibit enhanced functionality and phenotype, compared with controls?
Thus, the scientific goal is to better understand the role of growth factors and
micro-environmental niche and cues released from biomaterial scaffolds in the
regulation of adult human iPSC differentiation into neural phenotypes. It is
widely known that distractive biomaterial scaffolds that incorporate patterned
structures and specific compartments of growth factors can more intricately
guide stem cell development. Achieving this goal enables the ability to address
fundamental neurobiological questions about neuronal growth, differentiation,
which is essential for designing treatments for nervous system disorders or
traumatic brain injury.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.