* 1854528
* IRES: Track II: Advanced Study Institute: Using Nanotechnology for Fabricating New Biomaterials and Next-Generation Electrodes
* O/D,OISE
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2024
* Katerina Aifantis, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 06/30/2024
* USD 350,000.00

Energy storage and biomedical engineering are two areas in the forefront of
scientific research that require the use of nanofabrication. The three advanced
study institutes, ASIs, (one each year) that will take place during this project
are to introduce graduate students to new fabrication processes for
nanomaterials, and also to exemplify how important it is to collaborate
efficiently with researchers from other fields. Each year, ten advanced US
graduate students will spend sixteen days at the University of Cambridge (UC)
and the Alexander-Friedrich University of Erlangen-Nuremberg (FAU), attending
lectures/labs on electrode fabrication in the former and biomedical implants in
the latter. In addition to being exposed to academia, the students will also
visit battery companies and medical schools. Interacting with leading scientists
in two distinctly different areas, the students will identify how the fields of
materials science and bioengineering can be bridged, and how a strong background
in fabrication results into interdisciplinary research. This will be a unique
experience for graduate students, allowing them to expand their horizons.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The most promising next-generation electrodes for Li-ion
batteries are comprised of nanostructured composites, while the most promising
scaffolds for tissue engineering also have a nanostructure. However, the energy
storage and biomaterials communities are not in close contact despite the
ability to use the similar materials for both applications. The novelty of the
present Advanced Study Institute is that instead of exposing the students to a
particular engineering field, it will show them how they can obtain insight from
one field in order to advance another. Although numerous fabrication techniques
will be described focus will be given on fabricating new nanocomposite
materials. After fabricating such materials, the students will examine their
ability to induce bone-regeneration (at FAU), as well as their use as anodes in
Li-ion batteries (at UC). The students will therefore obtain new results in
energy storage and tissue engineering by collaborating with world-known
institutions. The impact of this project will be significant in the
miniaturization of Li-ion batteries, and increase in biocompatibility of medical
devices, but also in the graduate education system of the US. Numerous outreach
activities will be performed in elementary and high schools throughout
Florida&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.