* 1854696
* EAGER - Testing a new approach to shed light on the dolomite problem - an investigation using the isotopes of Magnesium, Calcium and Strontium.
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Adina Paytan, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Douglas Kowalewski
* 07/31/2022
* USD 60,080.00

Minerals which are formed through the involvement of organisms (biominerals) and
are preserved in the geological record can be used to shed light on the
evolution of life on Earth. Moreover, such minerals can be used to reconstruct
environmental conditions in the environments of formation. Dolomite is a
ubiquitous mineral in the geological record and an important petroleum reservoir
rock. Accordingly, dolomites can be incredible archives for reconstructing and
understanding environmental changes throughout Earth's history and specifically
shed light on the evolution of organisms on Earth and in other planets. However,
dolomites occur in many different sedimentary and/or diagenetic settings and it
is hard to precisely determine formation mechanisms using currently available
mineralogical or geochemical tools. This limits and complicates the utility of
this mineral for geobiology, petroleum research, and low temperature geochemical
studies. Being able to unequivocally identify dolomites that form in association
with living organisms (microbial-dolomites) in the geological record would
eliminate some of these complexities and allow for more straightforward
interpretation of deposition environments. In this study the investigator
hypothesizes that the involvement of microorganisms in the formation of
dolomites induces unique signatures that could be used as "bio-markers" and
enable identification of microbial-dolomites in the geological record. The
investigator will test this hypothesis using microbial-dolomite samples that
were precipitated under controlled laboratory experiments at different
temperatures and growth conditions and microbial-dolomite samples forming at
present in a marine-lagoon and a lake setting. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The major
goal of this proposed research is to investigate the utility of Ca, Mg and Sr
stable isotopes in dolomite to shed light on the mechanisms of dolomite
formation. To address this goal the research will first analyze a suite of
dolomite samples (and the solutions from which they precipitated experimentally)
to identify unique signatures. This will be complimented by the analysis of
dolomite that formed recently (or is currently forming) in modern lagoon and
lake environments along with other associated minerals, exopolymeric substances
and precipitation fluids. Ancient dolomites across the two major time intervals
when oxygen levels increased at the Earth surface will also be analyzed.
Together with petrographic and stratigraphic information the geochemical
fingerprinting will enable identification of microbial-dolomite. Dissolved
samples and chromatographically separated solutions will be analyzed for major-
and trace element compositions using inductively coupled plasma optical emission
spectroscopy (ICP-OES). Stable isotope compositions will be determined by multi
collector-inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometry (MC-ICP-MS) and thermal
ionization mass spectrometry (TIMS). Solid samples will be analyzed petrography
and visualization (microscopy, SEM, TEM), mineralogy (XRD) for C and O isotope
(IRMS) data will also be collected. The research team has the needed experience
and instrumentation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.