* 1854702
* LEAP-HI: Ultra-Low Power Computing: A Disruptive Approach Through a New Integrated Nanomechanics Framework
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Andrew Rappe, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 07/31/2024
* USD 2,015,997.00

Modern society relies on microelectronic computing devices. Performing billions
of calculations per second, microprocessors enable the internet, smart phones,
laptop computers, cloud computing and digital cameras. Although microprocessors
are extremely powerful when it comes to fast computation, they consume a lot of
energy. This is because the billions of transistors in microprocessors have
become so small that they leak electrical current even when they are off. New
generations of powerful computing hardware will require more energy efficient
microprocessors. Transistors are solid state switches with no moving parts. This
Leading Engineering for America's Prosperity, Health, and Infrastructure (LEAP-
HI) award supports fundamental research to replace solid state transistors with
nanomechanical switches that can open and close to make and break an electrical
contact. These contacts can operate at the speed of computers because of their
incredibly small size.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Nanomechanical switch contacts are
operated with nanonewton forces applied normal to the interface. Though small,
the actual points of contact - nanometer-scale asperities - are subject to both
high stress and high current density, creating multiple degradation pathways.
Metallic materials have been used to make the electrical contacts, but they
eventually weld together. The objective of this work is to investigate whether
hard conducting oxide coatings on the metals can be used to overcome this
adhesion problem. The intellectual merit of this project is in meeting a grand
challenge at the intersection of mechanics, tribology and materials development:
to develop interfacial systems that not only achieve but maintain extremely low
and stable adhesion and electrical contact resistance after billions to
trillions of contact cycles with minimal degradation. To accomplish this, the
research team will perform density functional theory calculations of oxide
conduction mechanisms, and finite element and molecular dynamics modeling of
contact stresses. Experimentally, different oxides will be tested using atomic
force microscopy. Promising materials systems will be integrated into prototype
nanomechanical switches, and their functionality will be tested up to trillions
of cycles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.