* 1854631
* EPSCoR Workshop on Water Security Planning and Management
* O/D,OIA
* 08/01/2019,04/30/2024
* Patricia Sobecky, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* J.D. Swanson
* 04/30/2024
* USD 98,946.00

Water security is the availability of acceptable quantity and quality of water
for sustaining human health, economic welfare and the well-being of
environmental and ecological systems while mitigating the associated risks and
threats down to acceptable levels. For nations all around the globe, water
security is of paramount concern since much of our economic well-being depends
on the availability of fresh water. Currently, in the United States, many EPSCoR
jurisdictions are confronting water security crises that are intensified by
large-scale natural weather cycles and climate change effects. The objective of
the Water Security Planning and Management workshop is to establish
collaborative teams of investigators with sufficient scale and depth of
expertise to catalyze water-security research capability across and among
multiple EPSCoR jurisdictions. The workshop will help develop diverse multi-
disciplinary research teams that will catalyze water research capability across
and among multiple EPSCoR jurisdictions. These coordinated team efforts will
provide professional development pathways to help train scientists in water-
related STEM areas, particularly through the inclusion of underrepresented
groups at minority institutions in several EPSCoR jurisdictions. Follow-up joint
proposal development activities will generate additional opportunities for STEM
training for underrepresented minorities across all EPSCoR
jurisdictions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed workshop will advance
scientific knowledge by providing a unique forum for a systematic expert
discussion of multi-jurisdictional and multi-disciplinary water security issues
experienced by the EPSCoR states. The workshop sessions will be grouped under
four focus areas: asset assessment, threat assessment, threat management, and
human interactions. These areas will provide an interrogative framework for
presentations, discussions, and brainstorming sessions conducive to develop
transformative solutions. Workshop activities of the participating EPSCoR teams
will focus on: a) development of scientific and engineering research programs to
address water security management problems that threaten the economic well-being
of the EPSCoR states; b) development of joint cyberinfrastructure research
programs with an aim to construct intelligent water security networks that can
facilitate water quantity and quality information flow within and between EPSCoR
states; and c) development of partnership and outreach programs to collaborate
with industries, academic institutions, and governmental organizations. The
workshop outcomes will be summarized in a comprehensive project report. The
report will also identify key water management problems that are relevant to
EPSCoR states (especially in the Southeastern region), provide potential
solutions, and develop a roadmap for addressing water security governance in
economic, environmental, political and social
dimensions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.