* 1854271
* Energy Transfer in Complex Molecules
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2024
* David Leitner, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 06/30/2024
* USD 433,251.00

Professor David Leitner of the University of Nevada, Reno, is supported by the
Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods Program to explore
understanding how structure and changes (dynamics) in proteins are related to
their function in cells. This project is a theoretical and computational study,
involving a collaboration with experimentalists, that explores connections
between dynamics of proteins and how they transport energy. Proteins are large,
complex molecules that undergo structural changes when energy and heat move
through them. This research span a range of disciplines in physical and
biological sciences and engineering, and will contribute to the design of
nanoscale devices useful in technology, where thermal management remains a
critical problem. The research team brings together scientists working in the
areas of study through the organization of symposia and meetings, as well as
outreach activities with high school students in the Reno area and mentoring
undergraduate students in research. Computer programs developed to achieve the
aims of research are available on the group's website.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research addresses how molecular composition, structure and dynamics mediate
energy transfer between different chemical groups of a molecule using newly
developed theoretical and computational methods. The project explores the
relation between energy transfer in macromolecules, primarily proteins, and
their equilibrium dynamics and thermodynamics. In addition to providing insight
into protein function, an important goal is the interpretation of energy
transfer measurements in biological molecules on ultrafast time scales, and how
those measurements inform us about the molecular dynamics and thermodynamic
properties. The aims of this proposal include the exploration of relations
between energy transfer between chemical groups and their equilibrium dynamics
and thermodynamics, the identification of chemical groups that facilitate
thermal rectification, and the design of labels for use in time
resolved&lt;br/&gt;vibrational spectroscopy of biological
molecules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.