* 1854209
* RUI/Collaborative Research: The Rise of C4 Grasses in South America: Linking Grassland Transitions to the South American Summer Monsoon
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Ethan Hyland, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Yurena Yanes
* 03/31/2024
* USD 283,406.00

Grasses cover a large portion of the Earth and provide many staple foods for
humanity. However, there is considerable disagreement on how grasslands will
respond to environmental change, and the potentially dramatic changes to crop
productivity, species invasions, and biodiversity remain unknown. Without a firm
understanding of the climatic conditions that caused the spreading of warm-
season grasses in the deep past, it is difficult to predict how they will
respond in the future. The significant enlargement of grasses' geographic range
millions of years ago during the Miocene is the focus of this study. This
project is the first to collect data on precipitation and vegetation during the
Miocene in South America and to use it to make simulations of ancient climate
during this important ecological change. Results are leading to new
understanding about how the abundance of warm-season grasses may change in
natural and managed landscapes in response to future environmental
changes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Late Miocene expansion of C4 grasses is one of
the most dramatic ecological changes in the past 65 million years. In order to
predict how these economically important grasses will respond to future
enviornmental change, the factors controlling their past distributions must be
understood. In South America, C4 grass expansion was coincident with a
strengthening of the South American Summer Monsoon and regional tectonic
changes. This project is combining multi-proxy paleovegetation reconstructions
with proxy-based paleoclimatic reconstructions and paleoclimatic modeling
techniques to understand the linkages between tectonics, climate, and
environmental change in South America. Results are leading to new understanding
of the conditions under which C4 grasses expanded. A societal benefit of this
research includes the ability to make better predictions for how the abundance
of C4 grasses may vary in natural and managed landscapes in response to future
environmental changes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.