* 1854731
* Enhanced Statistical Learning for Physical Systems Exploiting Non-Standard Constraints
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2019,05/31/2023
* Debdeep Pati, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 05/31/2023
* USD 279,330.00

Real world systems are often naturally constrained by physical laws or human
behavioral patterns, and understanding of such systems can be significantly
enhanced by incorporating said constraints into the inferential mechanism.
However, the presence of multiple constraints can complicate the process of
statistical learning. This project aims to develop novel statistical methods to
help solve real world problems where a multitude of complex constraints pose
inferential challenges. Motivations are drawn directly from three concrete
applications: i) extracting the radius of proton from electric form-factor data,
a fundamental problem in atomic physics which is of high relevance due to
anomalies between results from different modes of experimentation, ii)
describing the relationship between wind velocity and power derived from wind-
turbines, which is one of the fastest growing renewable sources of energy and
iii) describing the traffic flow pattern with traffic speed, a key object of
research in traffic engineering. The project will bring together ideas from
machine learning and Bayesian nonparametrics to develop statistically sound and
computationally efficient methods of inference in constrained decision problems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to develop a
principled probabilistic approach towards inference in scientific and
engineering applications where various physical constraints provide a priori
knowledge regarding key objects of inference. Such objects may correspond to a
single curve or a collection of curves or density functions. The PI and co-PI
will develop novel statistical methods for simultaneous incorporation of
multiple shape constraints motivated by real scientific and engineering
applications, while being broadly generalizable beyond the considered
applications. Emphasis is laid on obtaining equivalent representations of
various constraints within a flexible nonparametric Bayesian model, and
developing novel prior distributions on these constrained spaces. The Bayesian
approach is attractive to obtain uncertainty estimates, and the PI and co-PI aim
to develop rigorous theoretical guarantees for the frequentist validity of
Bayesian uncertainty measures in the present setting. In addition, the PI and
co-PI propose to demonstrate that including the constraints diminishes the
uncertainty which will subsequently lead to better scientific conclusions. The
methodological developments will be accompanied by efficient computation
algorithms that meet the scalability demanded by the specific applications and
beyond. To maximize the impact of the methodology developed, the PI and co-PI
will closely collaborate with domain experts for the specific
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.