* 1854175
* Convergence HTF: Collaborative: Workshop on Convergence Research about Multimodal Human Learning Data during Human Machine Interactions
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2018,08/31/2019
* Roger Azevedo, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 08/31/2019
* USD 12,515.00

Intelligent, interactive, and highly networked machines -- with which people
increasingly share their autonomy and agency -- are a growing part of the
landscape, particularly in regard to work. As automation today moves from the
factory floor to knowledge and service occupations, insight and action are
needed to reap the benefits in increased productivity and increased job
opportunities, and to mitigate social costs. Such innovations also have
significant implications and potential value for lifelong learning, skills
assessments, and job training/retraining in an environment in which workforce
demands are changing rapidly. The workshop supported by this award will promote
the convergence of cognitive psychology, learning sciences, data science,
computer science, and engineering disciplines to define key challenges and
research imperatives of the nexus of humans, technology, and work with focus on
human affect, motivation, metacognition, and cognition during learning and
problem solving. Convergence is the deep integration of knowledge, theories,
methods, and data from multiple fields to form new and expanded frameworks for
addressing scientific and societal challenges and opportunities. This
convergence workshop addresses the future of work at the human-technology
frontier.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific focus of this multi-phased workshop
approach is to advance fundamental understanding of how to collect and analyze
multimodal, multichannel sensor on human affect, motivation, metacognition, and
cognition during learning and problem solving, and effectively integrate this
data into actionable educational interventions in advanced learning technology
environments (e.g., intelligent tutoring systems). The impacts of this research
extend to a diverse range of learning environments, and job training and
retraining opportunities. A multi-phased workshop approach will be used to
explore the implications in multiple job sectors, and the outcomes will be
broadly disseminated across geographic and disciplinary boundaries.