* 1854476
* Distributed Algorithms for Topic Models with Applications to Streaming Document Data and Cancer Genomics
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* Hani Doss, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 07/31/2023
* USD 350,000.00

There is a growing need for methods that analyze and organize large collections
of electronic information, for example a collection of papers on some scientific
field, or on some medical question, or a collection of news articles in the New
York Times. Traditional keyword-based searches are very fast but have important
deficiencies. Suppose we are interested in searching for articles that deal with
heart attacks. A search using the keywords "heart attack" will not return
articles that use "myocardial infarction", the medical term for "heart attack".
A newer and more powerful approach to the analysis and organization of large
collections of electronic documents and for document retrieval is through the
use of so-called topic models. These models work by identifying the hidden
topics in the collection (in the New York Times example, these might be Sports,
World Events, Politics, etc.) and by also identifying the topics that each
document deals with. By far the most commonly used topic model is the so-called
Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) model. Unfortunately, all accurate
implementations are slow: the algorithms list all the words in all the documents
in some order, and then carry out a calculation for each word. This is done
sequentially: the calculation for a given word cannot be carried out before the
calculations for all previous words have been completed. This project will
develop a class of algorithms that work in parallel, taking advantage of the
massive distributed computation that is now available on multi-core platforms.
Thus, for example, if 1000 processors are available, these algorithms work 1000
times faster than existing algorithms. These new algorithms will enable the use
of the LDA model on very large collections of documents. Topics can be used to
cluster documents into groups. However, at its core, LDA is a "multi membership
model": a New York Times article about NFL football players kneeling at the
national anthem belongs in the Sports section, and also in the Politics section.
Multi-membership models arise in areas other than document retrieval and
classification. For example, in cancer genomics, tumors can be potentially
classified as members of several cancer subtypes. This project will develop
other multi-membership models, designed to handle non-textual data, as in the
cancer genomics example above, and it will develop parallel algorithms to handle
these models. The output of this project will enable researchers to handle
massive collections of documents and medical data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;LDA and
other multi-membership models are inherently Bayesian models, in which topics
and topic memberships for each document are unknown parameters. Posterior
distributions are generally estimated by Markov chain Monte Carlo, which has
proven convergence guarantees. This project will develop grouped Gibbs samplers
which update variables in groups, where all the variables within a group can be
updated simultaneously. The project will also develop practical convergence
diagnostics and also theoretical results on the rates of convergence of the new
algorithms. The theoretical results will enable the user to determine how long
the Markov chains need to be run in order to provide a required level of
accuracy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.