* 1854244
* IRES Track I: Comparative Anatomy and Functional Morphology in Cuvier's Paris
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Adam Hartstone-Rose, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 03/31/2024
* USD 328,210.00

Functional Morphology and Comparative Anatomy are the studies of how bodies work
in humans and other animals, disciplines of research that began and continue, to
this day, in the collections in Paris. In this IRES project, new generations of
students will be taught to test hypotheses across species using cutting-edge
tools in functional morphology and comparative biology, subjects that are of
interest to the great number of students interested in careers in STEM fields,
thus attempting to inspire this focal 21st Century work-force growth in a place
that formed the foundation of the discipline over the last many centuries.
Approximately seven undergraduate students a year will be recruited from diverse
backgrounds (including recruitment from colleges and universities that serve
historically underrepresented groups) and trained in techniques that span live
animal behavior, muscle dissection, analyses of bones, teeth and skulls and
finally how to make inferences about the behavior and abilities of extinct
species from the shapes of their fossils. Not only will students learn these
technical skills, but through working with senior professors and their
international teams of postdoctoral fellows and graduate students, they will
learn the "soft skills" of collaborating across academic teams and cultures.
Students will gain these skills and earn authorship on professional
presentations and potentially publications, giving them the possibly life
changing experiences that may form the core of their continued pursuit of STEM
interests and careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this project
is to train diverse cohorts of students in burgeoning 21st century functional
morphology and comparative anatomy techniques. Students will be trained in key
techniques the US PI's lab (at North Carolina State University) prior to being
accompanied to Paris to work in the lab of one of his collaborators at the
Museum National d'Histoire Naturelle where they will have access to centuries-
old collections and the other biological research institutions in the region.
There, with the mentorship of the professors and their senior postdoctoral
fellows and graduate students, the IRES students will develop independent or
group projects that focus on modern approaches to functional morphology and
comparative anatomy research questions. These may include 1) behavioral research
and experimentation at several zoological facilities (including access to a
colony of mouse lemurs, or work with species like the greater bamboo lemur, that
are not held in captivity outside of France), 2) dissection work with fresh
specimens or specimens from the museum's expansive fluid collection, and
analyses of osteological or dental material from 3) modern species or 4) the
famous fossil collections also housed in this historically significant museum
collection. These studies may ultimately allow the IRES students to use this
knowledge about the behavior and anatomy of extant species to evaluate the
adaptations of extinct species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.