* 1854059
* From Practice to Research: Engaging Science Communicators with Educational Research They Can Use
* EHR,DRL
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2021
* Philip Bell, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Robert Russell
* 07/31/2021
* USD 149,089.00

This project will advance efforts of the Innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST) program to better understand and promote practices
that increase student motivations and capacities to pursue careers in fields of
science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM). The project will
develop and investigate the viability of a new kind of professional resource
designed to inform the practical work of scientists, science communicators, and
informal Science, Technology, Engine (STEM) educators undertaking efforts to
engage children, youth, families and adults in STEM academic, career, and
lifelong learning pathways. Scientists, science communicators and formal and
informal science educators who engage the public with STEM (hereinafter "STEM
communicators") seldom have formal training in education, and frequently are
unfamiliar with well-established evidence-based approaches that are key to
inclusive and effective pedagogies of engagement. The Research+Practice
Collaboratory of the University of Washington has developed a new professional
resource designed for K-12 leaders and educators called the practice brief,
which has been widely disseminated and taken up in NGSS implementation efforts
across the country. The project will develop and pilot a suite of approximately
20 practice briefs with and for STEM communicators.

The results of this project will be (a) the documentation of research interests
and needs of informal science eductors, developers, designers, science
communicators and others (b) the establishment of evidence for whether or not
the practice brief model is valuable to STEM educators and worthy of extension
to new topics and uses. The tools produced by this exploratory project can
support the practices of these informal STEM educators, thus impacting the
quality of programs they offer the public. Additionally, like their K-12
counterpart practice briefs, the proposed new set of briefs for STEM educators
and others can potentially be scaled, through partnerships with large national
associations such as the Association of Science-Technology Center, American
Association for the Advancement of Science, National Alliance for Broadening
Participation, and others, to inform the diverse science communication
workforce, and to strengthen the quality and outcomes of their broader impacts
work focused on youth engagement towards STEM workforce development.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.