* 1854308
* Collaborative Research:   Mechanistic understanding and control of soft interfacial nanorheology from molecular simulations and nanoresolved experiments
* ENG,CBET
* 08/07/2018,07/31/2021
* David Simmons, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 07/31/2021
* USD 147,694.00

CBET 1705738/1706012&lt;br/&gt;PIs: Simmons, David S./Priestly, Rodney
D.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;From longer-lasting and safer batteries to strong and
lightweight composites for use in airplanes and automobile bodies, many of the
materials that could open the door to tomorrow's technologies incorporate
structure on the nanometer scale. These materials are not composed of single
uniform substance. Instead, these "nanostructured" materials consist of vast
numbers of distinct alternating domains, each a thousand times smaller than the
thickness of a human hair. With the proper design, these composites have the
potential to combine the best properties of multiple materials into one.
However, researchers have found the performance of nanostructured materials
depends not only on the composition of the nanoscale domains, but also on the
interfaces between the domains. The behavior of these interfaces, which are too
small to characterize directly with current tools, remains unknown. This
collaborative award will support experiments and computer simulations of
molecular motion that will focus on these interfaces to understand the origins
of their unique properties. The project will determine how these interfaces
deform differently than the surrounding materials and how the interfacial
deformation can be designed to yield materials with improved performance. The
research team will engage high school and undergraduate students in an
integrated research experience spanning the University of Akron and Princeton
University, accelerating the understanding and discovery of new materials while
broadening the U.S. technology workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims
to 1) establish a mechanistic understanding of gradients in nanoscale
rheological properties at polymer/polymer interfaces and their connection to
molecular structure, and 2) pioneer a new strategy for the rational control of
rheology and mechanics near polymer/polymer interfaces via the introduction of
nanoparticle surfactants. A central challenge in accomplishing these goals has
been a longstanding inability to resolve directly nanoscale gradients in
rheological response near soft interfaces. This research will overcome this
challenge via a feedback loop between high-throughput molecular dynamics
simulations (Simmons) and experiments (Priestley). Experiments will combine
layer-resolved fluorescence spectroscopy with a novel non-contact shear rheology
method that enables nanoscale resolution of gradients in rheological properties
near polymer interfaces. Simulations will incorporate high-speed coarse-grained
simulations and chemically-realistic all-atom simulations. By systematically
probing a matrix of polymer and interfacial properties, simulations and
experiments will interconnect interfacial thermodynamics, segmental dynamics,
and rheological response near polymer/polymer interfaces. These results will be
combined with a matrix of simulations and experiments probing the effect of
nanoparticle surfactants on interfacial deformation to establish a new
mechanism-based strategy for control of interfacial rheological response via the
targeted introduction of nanoparticle surfactants. Ultimately, results from this
work will accelerate design of materials with targeted interfacial properties
and deformation, enabling new nanostructured polymers for applications ranging
from next-generation batteries to separations membranes to lightweight
structural materials. In addition to engagement of students over a range of
levels in a cross-institution training program, the PI's will extend the impact
of this research through joint organization of a symposium at a national meeting
focused on bridging polymer and interfacial phenomena research communities.