* 1854977
* PREEVENTS Track 2: Collaborative Research: Defining precursors of ground failure: a multiscale framework for early landslide prediction through geomechanics and remote sensing
* GEO,RISE
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Karen Daniels, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 05/31/2024
* USD 362,327.00

Population growth, urban expansion, and extreme weather are contributing more
than ever to hazard vulnerability. Among the hazards driven by weather patterns,
ground deformation due to landslides has immense global impacts. Large portions
of the Earth's surface are at risk to ground failures, affecting a considerable
fraction of the world's population. Landslides cause a global annual death toll
of several thousand and financial losses of more than $1B per year in the United
States alone. The most formidable challenge in predicting ground failures
derives from their ability to suddenly accelerate despite the lack of observed
precursors. In fact, natural slopes can deform in multiple ways, sometimes by
displaying slow movements, while at other times moving rapidly in a fluidized
state. Such modes of deformation coexist at the same site, affect portions of
terrain proximal to one another, and may be experienced by the same hillslopes
at different times. The current scarcity of predictive large-scale ground
deformation models is largely a consequence of the poor spatial coverage of
ground-based monitoring data. To overcome these obstacles, this project will
rely on technological advances in remote sensing that allow the detection of
rainfall patterns and ground movements at spatiotemporal resolutions that were
unthinkable just a decade ago. These observational advances have the potential
to unleash new formulation, calibration and validation possibilities for
hydrologic and ground deformation models by means of abundant, openly-available,
spatially-distributed information. Specifically, the project is motivated by the
idea that pre-failure deformations have much to say about when, how, and why
ground failure occurs, and aims to demonstrate that analyzing the deformation
signature of the ground is the key to explain why hillslopes fail in different
ways when subjected to variable weather patterns. If successful, this project
will lead to new ways to decode the physical origin of ground instability and
define measurable precursors of catastrophic landslide triggering, thus
potentially inspiring the design of innovative real-time early warning systems
able to better protect human life and infrastructure.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During the course of this project, the interaction between
the Earth's surface and the atmosphere will be studied from a new multi-
disciplinary perspective. Specifically, the project will formulate: (1)
rheological laws for geomaterials able to explain variations in landslide
velocity resulting from dynamically changing environmental conditions; (2) a
multiscale weather-hydrology simulation platform able to quantify spatially
heterogeneous rainfall inputs and soil moisture at the scale of mountain ranges;
(3) landscape-scale geomechanical models able to reproduce the evolution of
remotely sensed deformations via force-transfer laws between proximal portions
of terrain; (4) a network theory for surface processes based on the physics of
complex systems, by which patterns can be identified and precursors of runaway
instability defined. Such a combination of methods will provide a comprehensive
representation of landslide dynamics, thus improving our ability to forecast
landslides and mitigate hazards at the landscape scale. Most importantly, it
will provide innovative tools to address open questions in the domain of hazard
forecasting, such as: (i) Can we use landscape-scale observations to infer the
rheology of hillslopes? (ii) Which landscape-scale measurements are most useful
for predicting the fate of incipient landslides? (iii) Is the concurrent
collection of spatially-distributed data of rainfall patterns and displacement
rates sufficient to identify landslide precursors? These questions will be
answered by combining data from state-of-the-art remote sensing tools (e.g.,
satellite and airborne interferometric synthetic aperture radar, high-resolution
digital elevation models, and weather radar) with physics-based constitutive
laws for soil and rock deformation, atmospheric-hydrologic models, and complex
network theories. Rich datasets available for a variety of geological settings
and earthen materials within and outside the United States will be used to test
the predictive capabilities of the proposed approaches. This strategy will offer
unique opportunities to validate the concepts at the core of the project and
test their applicability to a wide range of geomorphic and climatic
contexts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.