* 1854896
* PREEVENTS Track 2: Collaborative Research: Geomorphic Versus Climatic Drivers of Changing Coastal Flood Risk
* GEO,RISE
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Thomas Wahl, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Continuing Grant
* Sean Kennan
* 05/31/2024
* USD 224,765.00

Coastal flooding is one of the most dangerous and damaging natural hazards that
societies face, and coastal development and climate change are causing a
dramatic rise in vulnerability. Since the 19th century, estuary channels have
typically been deepened and widened by a factor of two or three, harbor
entrances have been deepened and streamlined, and a large proportion of wetlands
have been filled over and replaced with neighborhoods. Such geomorphic changes
increase flood risk by reducing natural resistance to storm surge and tides.
Similarly, sea level rise and climate-modulated variations in storm
characteristics such as intensity, size and track path also alter flood risk.
The overarching goal of the proposed research project is to reveal and contrast
the mechanisms by which these geomorphic and climatic changes alter flood risk.
This goal will be met using a combination of computational modeling, historical
climate and storm surge data analysis, and theory-based synthesis. The study
will provide support for a postdoctoral research associate and several graduate
students and undergraduates, including underrepresented groups. It will improve
the well-being of communities within urbanized harbors and estuaries by
highlighting coastal development practices that can worsen coastal flooding. The
project plan increases scientific literacy and engagement, and connects the
research to applications through interactions with local stakeholders and
governments, as well as the US Geological Survey and the US Army Corps of
Engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will improve the understanding and
separation of climatic and geomorphic factors in coastal flooding through
several elements of novel research and technical innovation. The investigators
will use a unique tide-gauge data set that extends back to the 19th century
together with contemporary, retrospective, and idealized hydrodynamic models to
elucidate system sensitivities. Well-known, simplified insights into tidal
dynamics will be tested for storm surge, then used to help interpret how altered
local topography, bathymetry and wetland area have changed frictional damping
and long-wave mechanics. A combined analysis of climate, storm characteristics,
and morphologic change will identify the modes and pathways through which
climate variability and bathymetric change modulate storms surges. Advanced non-
stationary univariate and multivariate statistical models will be developed and
employed to incorporate these changes and assess how statistical properties
relevant for coastal design and risk assessments respond. A flood model inter-
comparison workshop will help quantify relevant modeling sensitivities, which
will help to improve estuary and floodplain predictions for the academic and
operational forecasting community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.