* 1854304
* Developing Catalytic Nanogels as General Purpose Glycosidases
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Susanne Striegler, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 05/31/2024
* USD 485,000.00

Developing new routes to transform readily available and renewable resources
into useful materials is one of the grand challenges of the 21st century
chemistry. The design of catalysts that mimic the enzymes used by nature is a
promising way to transform readily available starting materials such as plant
cellulose. In this project, Professor Susanne Striegler of the University of
Arkansas is developing fundamental understanding of enzyme-like catalysts and
exploiting the synergy between their structure and function. This basic research
is beneficial to our society as new avenues toward fine chemicals from bio-
renewable resources grow in importance. Dr. Striegler is actively engaged in
outreach activities to encourage middle and high school students in STEM
(science, technology, engineering, and mathematics) disciplines and in
combination with German language skill development. Encouraging students to
strengthen their German language skills and STEM education prepares them to
engage others at an international level and to study and work
abroad.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With funding from the Chemical Catalysis
and Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Programs of the Chemistry
Division, Dr. Striegler of the University of Arkansas is developing biomimetic
macromolecular, nanogel catalysts and elaborating the synergy between catalysis-
supporting matrix effects and the catalytic function of transition metal
complexes. The resulting catalysts may find applications ranging from new
antimicrobial agents to biofuel production from non-activated oligosaccharides.
Structure-activity relationship studies are being used to elaborate transition
state-stabilizing interactions between non-activated saccharides and binuclear
copper(II) complexes. The studies utilize kinetic analyses in combination with a
computational approach to reveal binding sites of the saccharides, and energies
and geometries of sugar-metal complex assemblies. The fundamental and basic
studies are projected to maximize the catalytic potency of nanogels and open new
research frontiers in biomimetic catalysis. Dr. Striegler is actively engaged in
outreach programs focusing on student recruitment into the STEM fields by
connecting German speaking local middle and high-school students and their
teachers to the training and career opportunities in the STEM
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.