* 1854400
* A Natural Language Based Data Retrieval Engine for Automated Digital Data Extraction for Civil Infrastructure Projects
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2018,02/29/2020
* H David Jeong, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Yueyue Fan
* 02/29/2020
* USD 166,684.00

This research project will create new knowledge and resources to significantly
enhance the reusability of digital data during the lifecycle of civil
infrastructure assets. The rapid development of digital technologies is
transforming how civil infrastructure asset data and information is produced,
exchanged, and managed throughout its life cycle. Despite growing digital data
availability, such data cannot be fully exploited without the ability to infer
meaning from the varying data terminologies entered by practitioners. The lack
of common understanding of the same data, or similar data given in different
terms, preclude data exchange or can lead to extraction of the wrong data and
misinterpretation. This research project will leverage the advancements in
linguistics and computer science to develop a novel approach that can recognize
users' intention from their natural language input and automatically extract the
desired data from heterogeneous datasets. The results of this research will
benefit the construction industry by accelerating the industry's transition to
digital data-based project delivery and asset management. The research will also
broaden engineering education by creating advanced course materials both at
undergraduate and graduate levels.

Diversity in data terminology creates an important hurdle for computer-to-
computer communication, creating a big burden to end users who must perform the
role of middleware in digital data exchange. This issue exists throughout the
life cycle of a civil infrastructure asset. This project will develop a
computational theory and a platform for its implementation to analyze users'
plain English data requirements, and automatically match their intention to the
data entities in heterogeneous source datasets based on semantic equivalence. To
accomplish this goal, the research team will: a) utilize Natural Language
Processing and machine learning techniques to recognize user's intention from
their natural language queries, b) translate text-based domain knowledge into an
extensive civil engineering machine-readable dictionary that defines meanings of
technical terms using a text-based automated ontology learning method, c) design
an algorithm that finds the most semantic-relevant data entities in digital data
sets for a given keyword input, and d) test the performance of the algorithm in
terms of its accuracy using civil infrastructure text documents such as
technical specifications, design manuals, and guidelines. The research outcomes
will provide fundamental tools and resources for other researchers and industry
professionals for various text-mining and intelligence-inference systems. It
will facilitate seamless data exchange between various proprietary software
applications used during the life cycle of civil infrastructure assets,
including applications involving design evaluation and selection, digital model
construction, and regulation compliance checking.