* 1854070
* How Do Volcanoes Work: Reconciling the Cold and Warm Storage Models
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Melanie Barboni, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 06/30/2024
* USD 233,131.00

Volcanic eruptions are some of the most destructive natural hazards on Earth,
costing the lives of hundreds of people and destroying many infrastructures all
over the world. The question of identifying the processes occurring beneath
volcanoes is of crucial significance, as such knowledge is necessary to better
predict destructive eruptions. An important aspect of petrology and geochemistry
is to develop new tools that allow researchers to assess how volcanic magma
chambers work and evolve. Unfortunately, applications of these tools give
contrasting answers that lead to contradictory models in the literature for the
storage and eruption capacity of volcanic reservoirs. This project seeks to
reconcile the community by providing a common ground where proponents of
different models and tools can meet and learn, Only an open-minded, reconciled
approach would allow the identification of trends among different volcanoes and
improve our understanding of volcanic systems that pose a threat to human life
and infrastructure. This project broadens the participation of underrepresented
groups, and supports a graduate student.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the past couple
of years, two models have emerged for the evolution of silicic magma systems:
Cold Storage, based on geospeedometry applications, and Warm Storage, mostly
based on thermal models and zircon geochronology/geochemistry studies. Both
models have critical implications on the mechanisms of volcanic eruptions, and
are highly debated within the petrology community. A lot of efforts are
currently allotted in the literature to discuss the merits of the various tools
used in both cold and warm storage models; however, none of those tools have
been applied together on the same volcanic systems. Therefore, it is unclear if
the different storage conditions documented so far in the literature are linked
to the analytical methods used, or reflect a more fundamental problem, that
physical mechanisms in volcanic systems are too variable for the establishment
of a unified model. In this project, we propose to apply analytical methods used
in the past to bolster the arguments for both cold and warm storage together on
the same volcanic systems and address the most fundamental question, do all
volcanoes of similar size and tectonic context work the similarly. We propose to
apply Sr diffusion in plagioclase (cold storage tool) together with zircon
geochronology/geochemistry (warm storage tool) on three different arc volcanoes
that were previously used to bolster either the cold or warm storage argument,
the St. Lucia Soufriere Volcanic Center, Mt. Hood (Cascade Mountain Range) and
the Okataina Caldera (Taupo Volcanic Arc, New Zealand). Our work will
concentrate on both lavas and cogenetic plutonic enclaves from the three case
studies. By combining results from all set of tools, samples and eruptive
events, we will draw a more comprehensive thermal history for these three
volcanoes, identify common features in volcanic reservoirs of similar size and
setting and test the cold and warm storage tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.