* 1854153
* IRES Track I: Shiraki International Multidisciplinary Undergraduate Research (SIMuR) Project
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Jennifer Aizenman, BRIDGEWATER STATE UNIVERSITY
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 03/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

The Shiraki International Multidisciplinary Undergraduate Research (SIMuR)
project is a collaboration between faculty and students at three public
universities (Bridgewater State University, University of California San Diego,
and Ilia State University in Georgia) and the National Academy of Sciences of
Georgia. The SIMuR project will engage U.S. undergraduate students in
interdisciplinary research of historical and ongoing human-environmental
interactions in the Shiraki Plateau in the southeastern part of the country of
Georgia. The project will strengthen scientific knowledge, technical and
leadership skills of a cohort of diverse, globally competent, and engaged young
STEM researchers. This international research experience will embed students in
a cross-country and cross-disciplinary research effort while getting them
acquainted with the national specifics of this culturally-rich strategic region.
SIMuR will increase STEM engagement and literacy in underserved communities in
rural Georgia and the US, bringing advanced data science, visualization and
spatial and temporal analysis concepts and technologies into this cross-country
collaboration, thus improving the capacity of students and universities to
address research problems of global
significance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, understanding the interplay of
natural and anthropogenic factors in the history of human settlement on the
Shiraki Plateau is a part of the interdisciplinary challenge of identifying and
modeling impacts of human and environmental changes influencing the rise and
decline of civilizations. With the goal of contributing to this developing body
of knowledge, SIMuR will engage 15 undergraduate students from Bridgewater State
University (5 students each year) in high-quality interdisciplinary research
collaborations with Georgian peers and mentorship from an international group of
experts in geological sciences, cyber-archaeology, computer engineering,
information management, and data science. Participants will also engage in STEM
outreach to underserved communities in southeastern Georgia and Massachusetts.
Both the research and educational components of the project will build on a
confluence of advanced technologies to clarify the several competing hypotheses
of the depopulation of the Shiraki Plateau, the site of a recently discovered
early civilization. The active reconsideration of the early human history of
this area by the research community, and rapidly growing additional data from
archaeological excavations and field observations in geology, hydrology, paleo-
ecology and related fields, will make this an unprecedented opportunity for
students to engage in the science debate, develop field research and analysis
skills, and deepen their understanding of this rapidly developing culturally
diverse area. By creating and disseminating findings in accessible online
locations, the project will increase equitable access to authentic scientific
data to scientists, educators, and underserved communities in US and throughout
the world. Recruitment will focus on undergraduate students from groups
traditionally underserved in STEM fields, low-income and first-generation
college students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.