* 1854443
* Collaborative Research: Topographic Influences on Extreme Warm-Season Precipitation
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Alison Nugent, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 07/31/2024
* USD 403,851.00

Extreme rainfall affects millions of people globally, yet our understanding and
forecast skill of this high-impact weather phenomenon is limited. The Prediction
of Rainfall Extremes Campaign in the Pacific (PRECIP, May-August 2020) field
campaign aims to improve understanding of the multi-scale processes important
for generating extreme rainfall in the moisture-rich environment of Taiwan and
the western North Pacific. The overarching PRECIP hypothesis is that extreme
rainfall results from an optimal combination of multi-scale ingredients in a
moisture-rich environment, but different key ingredients and processes lead to
strong vertical forcing and high rainfall intensity, strong horizontal forcing
and long duration, or a mixture of both intense and sustained
precipitation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;This project
focuses on orographic influences on extreme rainfall, using a unique combination
of radar and radiosonde observations on both sides of Taiwan's Central Mountain
Range (CMR) to determine the role of steep terrain in enhancing both intensity
and duration of rainfall through a combination of thermodynamic, dynamic,
kinematic, and microphysical processes. The overall hypothesis is that terrain
enhances both intensity and duration of extreme rainfall through increasing the
magnitude of ingredients needed to produce heavy rainfall. In addition to
promoting lifting and concentrating moisture, terrain modifies rainfall
intensity and duration through changes in microphysical processes. In the
subtropical environment of Taiwan, efficient warm-rain processes can produce
high intensity convective rainfall, while ice-based processes become
increasingly important for long-duration events dominated by stratiform
precipitation. Additionally, results from TiMREX 2008 suggest that upslope
tilting of relatively shallow convection along Taiwan's CMR can promote growth
of precipitation-sized ice. Subsequent cold-pool generation leads to continuous
growth of cells upstream and prolongs the duration of rainfall events along the
CMR. PRECIP offers the opportunity to further explore the role of terrain,
including the influence on microphysical processes, in producing extreme
rainfall for a wide variety of events, both on the western slopes and along the
data-sparse east coast of Taiwan. To test the above hypotheses, the study will
use a combination of PRECIP data from multi-frequency dual-polarization Doppler
radars (S-PolKa, SEA-POL), radiosondes, and models to explore terrain-influenced
processes for diurnally-forced convection, mesoscale convective systems embedded
within the Meiyu front, and tropical cyclones.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;An important broader goal of this investigation is to
determine which of the key ingredients and processes identified for Taiwan
extreme rainfall events are also relevant to orographic precipitation in other
environments or locations. The team of three early-career female scientists
brings a wealth of knowledge of observational field projects and terrain-
influenced precipitation studies spanning a variety of global regimes, including
warm-season rainfall in the Sierra Madre Occidentals, CMR, Andes, Rockies, and
Himalayas, typical trade-wind flow, a tropical cyclone passing over Dominica,
and cold-season rainfall over the Olympics. PRECIP will give an opportunity to
investigate a wide variety of rain-producing events, both the windward and
leeward sides of the mountain range. The findings from this project will have
the potential to provide an updated understanding of extreme rainfall globally
by building off an ingredients-based framework through unprecedented data
collected in a wide variety of heavy rain events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is jointly funded by the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research (EPSCoR) and PREEVENTS, Prediction of and Resilience against Extreme
Events program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.