* 1854607
* Collaborative Research: Dynamics, Thermodynamics, and Microphysics of Extreme Rainfall Observed during PRECIP (Prediction of Rainfall Extremes Campaign In the Pacific)
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Anthony Didlake, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 05/31/2024
* USD 381,327.00

Extreme rainfall is a high impact weather phenomenon that profoundly affects
people around the world, but our fundamental understanding and quantitative
forecast skill for these events remains limited. To address these important
scientific and forecast challenges, the Prediction of Rainfall Extremes Campaign
In the Pacific (PRECIP) in summer 2020 will be conducted to improve our
understanding of the multi-scale dynamic, thermodynamic, and microphysical
processes that produce extreme precipitation. Observations will be collected by
the NSF/National Center for Atmospheric Research's S-PolKa and Colorado State
University's SEA-POL radars, radiosondes, and disdrometers from 25 May to 10
August 2019 during the latter period of the Meiyu season over Taiwan and
transition to the early period of the tropical cyclone (TC) season.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The experimental design of PRECIP is motivated by four key
factors: 1) a moisture-rich environment, 2) the presence of both complex terrain
and an oceanic environment, 3) a dense operational observing network to augment
the specialized field observations, and 4) a high frequency of a variety of
heavy rainfall events. Taiwan and the western North Pacific region are a natural
laboratory that optimizes all four of these criteria. With high total column
water vapor in the region as a fundamental precondition, field observations will
be used to test hypotheses related to the presence and roles of key ingredients
and processes across scales in different heavy rainfall scenarios. PRECIP will
be conducted in collaboration with the Taiwan-area Atmospheric and Hydrological
Observation and Prediction Experiment (TAHOPE) and Japanese Tropical cyclones
Pacific Asian Research Campaign for Improvement of Intensity
estimations/forecasts (T-PARCII) to add additional synergistic research
observations to the campaign.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PRECIP seeks to improve our
fundamental understanding and prediction of the processes that produce extreme
precipitation through an ingredients-based physical framework. Research
observations will be collected in four event types that meet a global definition
of 'extreme' across a spectrum of rainfall intensity and duration: deep
convective cores, wide convective cores, broad stratiform regions, and TCs. The
field campaign is innovative in its approach to investigate the universal
aspects of extreme rainfall by testing hypotheses that are not directed at only
one weather phenomenon, and are therefore transferable to rainfall events that
affect the United States. The experiment is designed to maximize the chances of
observing a variety of heavy rainfall events in the moisture-rich natural
laboratory of Taiwan and western North Pacific in order to find the
commonalities. The primary objective is to simplify the complexity of multi-
scale interactions by identifying key ingredients and processes in the limiting
cases of high intensity and long duration events in a moisture-rich environment.
Field measurements will be made to address basic research questions about key
ingredients, physical processes, mesoscale structures, and prediction
improvement. The core observations will consist of multi-frequency radars,
radiosondes, disdrometers, and the Taiwan operational weather network that will
be integrated with modeling and data analysis and assimilation to better
understand the mechanisms that produce extreme
rainfall.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Improved forecasts and understanding of the
predictability of heavy rainfall will lead to better warnings and risk
communication that will have a strong positive impact on society. Improvements
to our understanding of orographic and non-orographic precipitation, physical
processes, and model capabilities will have broad application to improve other
related weather and climate predictions. The PRECIP dataset will also lead to
positive impacts in precipitation estimation, data assimilation, radar
meteorology, and hydrology. Concurrent projects with TAHOPE and T-PARCII will
strengthen international science collaboration in our common goal of improved
extreme weather prediction and will help facilitate the application of the
campaign findings toward operations in the future. The joint projects will occur
during the period leading up to and including the 2020 Tokyo Olympics. The
Olympics will naturally enhance the broader impacts of the PRECIP research, and
will provide a focal point for education and outreach promoting the positive
role of science to address global problems such as extreme weather. Additional
positive broader impacts are expected for graduate students, early career
scientists, and underrepresented groups through mentoring, international science
collaborations, and leadership opportunities in the
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.