* 1854158
* IRES Track 1: Physical State Estimation for Control Coordination and Behavior Monitoring
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2023
* Scott Beardsley, Marquette University
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 03/31/2023
* USD 298,915.00

Marquette University (MU) and the University of Genoa, Italy (UNIGE) will
participate in an international student exchange to foster understanding of
global healthcare issues and to cultivate the cultural competence required to
develop biomedical engineering solutions to improve the health status of
individuals around the world. The goals of this IRES project are to increase
understanding of the relationships between motor behavior and the health status
of individuals at risk of requiring costly healthcare services, and to develop
technological solutions that can enhance the quality of life while also reducing
medical costs. During their involvement, undergraduate and graduate students
will learn important research skills, discover applied solutions for global
healthcare problems, and develop international relationships. Student projects
are designed to be performed in conjunction with faculty mentors from both
universities. Upon completion of those projects, new technologies can be
developed for application in the healthcare industry. As such, this
International Research Experience for Students (IRES) project promotes the
progress of science, advances the national health, and contributes to the
development of a more globally competitive Science, Technology, Engineering and
Mathematics (STEM) workforce, with efforts to attract women, first-generation,
and other underrepresented minority populations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research projects will focus on motor control, motor coordination and overall
motor activity in individuals afflicted with Multiple Sclerosis, stroke, and/or
in the elderly population. Research projects will focus on developing technology
aimed towards reducing tremor in those with Multiple Sclerosis; improving manual
dexterity in those afflicted with stroke; and monitoring activities of daily
living in order to assess/classify at-risk older adults. Student groups will
prepare their research project under the guidance of MU faculty, they will then
travel to UNIGE to collect data and begin data analysis under the mentorship of
the collaborating UNIGE faculty. While at UNIGE they will also be immersed in
Italian culture and the biomedical and computer engineering field so as to
increase their cultural competence. Students will then return to MU to complete
analysis and disseminate their results to scientists and the general
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.