* 1854684
* LEAP-HI: On-Demand Multimodal Transit Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Patricia Mokhtarian, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,767,123.00

In the United States, car ownership is still the best predictor of upward social
mobility. Those without a car are disadvantaged in accessing jobs, health care,
education, and basic services, including buying groceries. Public transportation
has the potential to mitigate congestion and provide environmentally friendly
and cost-effective mobility. Existing systems, however, are often plagued by the
"first/last mile" problem, i.e., the inability to take travelers all the way
from their origin to their destination. As a result, travelers who can afford
them prefer private vehicles, creating congestion and harmful emissions. New
mobility services such as Uber and Lyft have improved transportation for some
population segments by exploiting ubiquitous connectivity to match riders and
potential drivers. Unfortunately, they increase congestion and emissions,
prompting some cities to limit their numbers. In addition, those services are of
limited use to low income citizens and may even lure affluent residents away
from transit systems, reducing revenue. In contrast, this Leading Engineering
for America's Prosperity, Health, and Infrastructure (LEAP-HI) Program award
explores the concept of On-Demand Multimodal Transit Systems (ODMTS). Being
multimodal, ODMTS combine on-demand mobility services that serve low-density
regions with high-occupancy vehicles (buses or trains) traveling along high-
density corridors. They differ from micro-transit solutions by planning,
operating, and optimizing transit systems holistically, using state-of-the-art
optimization technology and machine learning. As a result, they have the
potential to transform accessibility across population segments, decreasing
inequalities in transportation and providing a sustainable transportation model
for American cities and beyond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To realize this vision,
this award researches the data and decision science needed to engineer ODMTS for
large, congested cities. This requires a step change in our ability to plan,
operate, and optimize ODMTS, which are complex, socio-technical systems deployed
over a sophisticated infrastructure. To achieve this objective, the award
explores five research threads that address the following, high-level issues:
(1) the delivery of scalable optimization and machine learning algorithms for
designing the multimodal networks at the core of ODMTS, (2) accurate forecasting
of ridership demand in ODMTS and integration of the resulting forecasting models
into optimization models for network design, (3) generalization of network
design optimization to account for and mitigate congestion, (4) co-design of
ODMTS and infrastructure improvements to maximize the performance of transit
systems, using concepts such as complete streets and context-sensitive
solutions, and (5) the incremental integration of autonomous vehicles into ODMTS
as they become available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.