* 1854950
* 2019 Neuroethology Gordon Research Conference and Gordon Research Seminar, July 28-August 2, 2019; Mount Snow, West Dover, Vermont
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2020
* Mark Frye, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Sridhar Raghavachari
* 05/31/2020
* USD 11,755.00

The Gordon Research Conference on Neuroethology, and a preceding 2-day graduate
student/postdoc-led Gordon Research Seminar on the same topic will be held from
July 28-August 2, 2019 in West Dover, VT. Neuroethology composes areas of
neuroscience that aim to understand how nervous systems integrate sensory cues
and innate imperatives to produce complex behaviors in natural environments. The
shared goal of neuroethology is to reconcile the observed diversity of natural
behavior with underlying common principles of neural development, neural
organization and function. This symposium presents a unique opportunity to
promote dialogue and exchange of ideas among investigators who work on different
aspects of neuroethology. This year's theme is to study how sensory inputs
across multiple dimensions, e.g. visual, mechanical, olfactory are combined to
modulate brain circuit activity during complex, naturalistic behaviors. All
speakers are expert investigators in their fields. An expected outcome of the
symposium is the development of new collaborations that will lead to novel work
on fundamental questions about higher brain functions that underlie natural
complex behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Gordon Research Conference on
Neuroethology, and a preceding 2-day graduate student/postdoc-led Gordon
Research Seminar on the same topic will be held from July 28-August 2, 2019 in
West Dover, VT. This recurring conference brings together researchers working to
understand the common principles of neural development, organization and
computation that underlie the diversity of natural behavior. The theme of this
year's meeting is the study of multisensory or state-dependent modulation of
neural circuits during complex behaviors. The program assembles a broad
multidisciplinary group of experts and their trainees to discuss new approaches
and emergent findings. Sessions include the study of higher brain functions that
underlie complex behavior; optogenetic interrogation of neural circuits;
multisensory integration and neurogenetics. All speakers are expert
investigators in their fields. An expected outcome of the symposium is the
development of new collaborations that will lead to novel work on fundamental
questions about how neural circuit function and behavior respond and adapt to
natural environmental conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.