* 1854519
* Trans-Atlantic Research and Development Interchange on Sustainability Workshop (TARDIS, 2019)
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2019,04/30/2020
* Urmila Diwekar, Vishwamitra Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 04/30/2020
* USD 49,995.00

The focus of the Trans-Atlantic Research and Development Interchange on
Sustainability Workshop (TARDIS 2019) is the role of uncertainty in managing the
planet for global sustainability. The workshop will involve participants from
the United States and Europe. NSF funds will be used to help support the
participation of U.S.-based researchers. Funding is anticipated from the
Austrian Federal Ministry of Education, Science, and Culture to help support the
participation of European researchers. Workshop participants will include
experts from the engineering, mathematical sciences, physics, ecology,
economics, and political science fields. Planet-wide, humanity has the
imperative of managing the Earth within livable limits. This requires that
humans be able to: (1) accurately assess the current condition of the Earth, and
(2) forecast future trends as accurately as possible. Because any observation
always has uncertainty, the first requirement represents a formidable challenge.
Because any forecasting methodology also has uncertainty, the second requirement
presents a significant additional problem. The workshop will focus on how to
optimally manage the Earth for sustainability across diverse aspects including
physical (climate), biological (biodiversity), economic (value generation),
energy generation (renewable and/or low impact), production (meet human needs
with minimal resource use) and others, given uncertainty in measurements and
knowledge. The questions for the workshop are: 1. What is state of the art in
assessing uncertainty in observations of global sustainability issues? 2. What
improvements are needed to minimize uncertainty in these observations? 3. What
is state of the art in uncertainty when forecasting?

Participants will be chosen to represent a balanced mix of Government, the
private sector, and academic institutions. Care will be taken to achieve
adequate representation across disciplines, including economics, engineering,
ecology, policy, political science, and law. The organizers will strongly
encourage participation by underrepresented groups. Participants will be
expected to submit material for study by workshop attendees in advance of the
workshop. The workshop deliverable will be a report that synthesizes all these
perspectives, and it will be posted on the TARDIS public website for
dissemination.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.