* 1854829
* CDS&amp;E: DEterministic Evaluation of Kinetic Boltzmann equation with Spectral H/p/v  Accuracy (DEEKSHA)
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Alina Alexeenko, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 06/30/2023
* USD 331,229.00

The goal of this project is to develop an open-source massively parallel
computational software DEEKSHA (DEterministic Evaluation of Kinetic Boltzmann
equation with Spectral h/p/v adaptivity and Accuracy) for scientific simulation
of rarefied gas flows. Such gas flows occur in microdevices or at low gas
densities, as in high-altitude atmospheric phenomena and in manufacturing
processes that require vacuum conditions. Verification benchmarks and end-user
demos will be developed to facilitate adoption of the new scientific simulation
software by academia and industry and to provide the user and contributor base
for sustained development. Specifically, the demonstration cases will include
several classical rarefied flow problems such as Fourier and Couette flows,
normal shock wave, pressure-driven and thermally-driven channel flows and
thermal diffusion in gas mixtures. The computational solver will bridge the gap
between existing continuum and atomistic simulations and would enable scientists
and engineers to address so far intractable non-equilibrium transport problems
for low-speed gas mixture flows of fundamental and practical interest. The
specific applications that will be addressed in this project include trace gas
separation and gas analytical technologies as well as ultra-high-heat flux
evaporation cooling for high-performance integrated circuits. The computation
solver will be released to the research community, and the results will be
integrated into courses to educate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new
computational framework is based on the Discontinuous Galerkin Fast Spectral
(DGFS) method which allows accurate deterministic solution of the full Boltzmann
equation for arbitrary geometries and gas mixtures. The deterministic solution
of the integro-differential Boltzmann equation is high order accurate in both
physical and velocity space and time, free from statistical noise and sampling
errors, and is particularly suitable for unsteady and low speed flow
simulations. Due to the multi-dimensionality of physical and velocity phase
space of the Boltzmann equation, the deterministic solution of rarefied flows is
computationally demanding; hence, it requires solvers that are efficient on
massively parallel architectures. The high-order h/p methods for the Boltzmann
equation exhibit excellent parallel-scaling and serve as the basis of the
proposed DEEKSHA framework. To broaden the impact of project, the computational
solver will be released under a general, public license. The planned activities
for dissemination to end-user communities include: a) workshops for developers
and simulation bootcamps at conferences; b) integration of research results into
courses taught at Purdue School of Astronautics and Aeronautics and Department
of Mathematics as well as a webinar and interactive tool on Nanohub; and c)
research experiences for undergraduate students through Purdue Engineering
Summer Undergraduate Research Fellow program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.