* 1854629
* Laboratory Study of Substrate Control and Cryoseismicity of Glacier Basal Motion
* GEO,OPP
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2023
* Heather Savage, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 06/30/2023
* USD 379,452.00

One of the most devastating potential impacts of climate change is sea-level
rise. Current forecasts predict sea level to rise by as much as a meter by the
end of this century. Such a magnitude would inundate some of the world's most
populated areas, but uncertainties in the predictions need to be lowered. Well-
constrained sea-level projections that can provide guidance to infrastructure
protection and planning are dependent in part on accurately modeling the rate
that glacier ice is transported from snow accumulation zones to the oceans by
fast-moving bodies of ice called ice streams. Controls on ice-stream flow rates,
particularly those influencing processes at the hard-to-access base of ice
streams, are poorly constrained by observation. To shed light on these important
controls, the project team will conduct laboratory experiments that isolate and
constrain particular sliding behaviors. The experiments aim to identify which
factors (e.g., temperature, water pressure, velocity, amplitude of forcing)
control the sliding response so that outcomes can be scaled up from the
laboratory to the ice-stream scale and provide better predictive power to ice-
sheet simulation models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To isolate the ice-stream basal
sliding process, the project team will conduct friction experiments of materials
at cryogenic conditions. The team will apply the mathematical framework of rate-
and state-dependent friction that has been successfully used for decades in rock
mechanics to describe earthquake phenomena. Building on the team's past
measurements of ice-on-rock frictional dependence on normal stress, temperature,
sliding velocity, and driving stress oscillation, this project will extend the
parameter space to include till-layer thickness and pore-fluid saturation under
drained and undrained conditions. Coupling among frictional melt, lubrication,
and pore pressure will complicate the forcing and may greatly increase the range
of behaviors. The experiments will test the rate-state friction formulation's
ability to describe this full range of observed behaviors, from stick-slip
events to slow slip and tremor to steady aseismic creep. In addition to
measuring frictional shear stress, the team will implement acoustic
characterization techniques to record acoustic emissions and ultrasonic wave
propagation properties during deformation. Although direct comparability to
seismic data from the field is unlikely, observations of how experimental
conditions influence waveform properties such as the polarity, frequency, and
shape can help in the interpretation of cryoseismic datasets. The results will
also provide basal slip and bed deformation constitutive relations and
parameters for use in ice-sheet models that are vital for predicting changes in
ice-sheet systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.