* 1854554
* Continuous Manufacturing of Lead-free Halide Perovskite Nanocrystals Using a Microreactor System
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Fuqian Yang, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 06/30/2023
* USD 325,000.00

This grant supports research that advances knowledge to manufacture systems such
as high efficiency solar cells, affordable photovoltaics, flexible color
displays and biosensors more quickly, less expensively and free of the lead that
results from more traditional manufacturing approaches. Lead-free metal halide
perovskite nanocrystals emit light from the ultraviolet to the visible. Their
wide use is dependent on the development of techniques for their scalable, low
cost manufacturing. They are also candidates for replacement of lead-based
perovskites, which are toxic. Most methods to manufacture perovskite
nanocrystals are based on single batch approach, which has limited production
capacity and considerable product variability. Research here will support a
continuous manufacturing process. The ability to manufacture semiconductor
nanocrystals in microfluidic-microreactor systems enables their fabrication with
the desired size, shape and properties, thus, accelerating their applications in
a variety of industries. The successful development of a scalable method to
manufacture high-quality lead-free halide perovskite nanocrystals enables the
development of continuously manufactured lead-free metal halide perovskite
nanocrystals that leads to progress in the fundamental science of inorganic
semiconductors. The results from this research help maintain and enhance U.S.
competitiveness and leadership in these technologies, thus contributing to the
nation's prosperity. The multidisciplinary nature of this research prepares the
needed future workforce for U.S. industries with knowledge and skills in
advanced materials and manufacturing. Special efforts are focused on the
participation and training of women and under-represented
minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using microfluidic-microreactor systems can
overcome the difficulty in controlling the processing parameters, such as,
temperature, time and local concentration for the fabrication of perovskite
nanocrystals in the single batch methods and offer a possible approach to
manufacture them with very short reaction time and high throughput. The lack of
an understanding of the thermodynamics and kinetics controlling the formation
and growth of nanocrystals in a fluidic system has hindered the development of
microfluidic-microreactor systems to produce monodispersed nanocrystals of the
same geometrical shapes. This research is to develop a polytetrafluoroethylene-
based microreactor in a microfluidic system with in-line monitoring for
continuous fabrication of metal halide perovskite nanocrystals and to
investigate the fundamental mechanisms controlling their formation and growth.
The research team establishes correlations between the processing parameters,
such as, concentration, temperature, residence time and flow rate, and
perovskite nanocrystal characteristics, such as, morphology and size. The team
develops numerical models that can quantitatively analyze the growth of
semiconductor nanocrystals in the microreactor system. These correlations
provide fundamental understanding of the kinetics controlling the size
distribution and morphologies of nanocrystals and help optimize the microreactor
design for the scalable manufacturing of high-quality perovskite
nanocrystals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.