* 1854572
* LEAP-HI/GOALI: Meso-Scale Mechanisms for Friction in Structured Soft Materials: Elastic Hysteresis and Dislocation Arrays
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Chung-Yuen Hui, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,998,627.00

It is often crucial to control friction of soft material surfaces. For example,
high sliding friction between rubber tires and the road surface enables quick
braking. In the biological context, it is sometimes desirable to minimize
friction, as between a contact lens and the eye. On other occasions high
friction is needed, for example when designing hands of a soft robot for
grasping objects. This Leading Engineering for America's Prosperity, Health, and
Infrastructure (LEAP-HI) Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison (GOALI) project
will develop two novel mechanisms to improve friction of soft materials based on
bio-inspired design of near-surface structures. The research will be carried out
by a research team with members from Lehigh and Cornell Universities, and
Michelin USA, with application to tires. Tire production is a major component of
the US industrial profile. Dozens of plants produce over 150 million car, truck,
bus and other tires per year. This research will support innovation that is
needed to both increase vehicle safety and help the USA to maintain its position
as a leading tire manufacturer. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Friction as an interfacial
property is usually understood to be governed by interfacial intermolecular
interactions, coupled to bulk deformation and energy dissipation at macroscopic
length scales, for example by viscoelasticity. Recent work on bioinspired and
biomimetic materials has shown how appropriately designed near-surface
structures at a meso-scale (microns) intermediate between the molecular (nm) and
continuum scales (mm and larger) can be used to strongly modulate surface
properties like adhesion. This has opened up a new paradigm and mechanisms for
design of soft material interfaces, which however has been little exploited for
control of friction. Some of these mechanisms are meso-scale versions of
molecular level phenomena that underlie the fundamental question of how friction
arises between surfaces in the first place. The goal of this project is to study
and develop two meso-scale mechanisms underlying frictional energy loss, a)
Meso-Scale Dislocation Arrays: in which the interface comprises a periodic array
of features that accommodate misorientation by generating meso-scale interfacial
dislocations, which can be used to control friction, and b) Elastic Hysteresis:
in which periodic near-surface patterning of elastic modulus can be used to set
up a periodic resisting force that, in turn, sets up mechanical instabilities
and hysteresis to yield large friction enhancement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.