* 1854316
* FRG: Collaborative Research: Dimers in Combinatorics and Physics
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2019,05/31/2023
* Lauren Williams, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 05/31/2023
* USD 270,000.00

Statistical mechanics is the mathematical study of matter at small scales. Its
primary goals are to analyze phase transitions: for example liquid-to-solid
transitions where the physical properties of a substance change abruptly. The
dimer model was originally conceived as a simplified model of two-dimensional
matter in which phase transitions can be studied. Recent work, however, has
linked the model to many other areas of mathematics, from combinatorics to
string theory, where ''brane dimers'' are proposed as fundamental descriptions
of spacetime at small scales. The PIs propose to jointly investigate a number of
interrelated topics in mathematics and physics, each of which has the dimer
model as its underlying combinatorial structure. This project will lead to the
organization of workshops and regular meetings of the PIs and their graduate
students and postdoctoral fellows, continuing the PIs' efforts to get young
mathematicians and physicists involved in these topics. The PIs will contribute
to the mathematical community through their mentorship of young scholars,
research talks in conferences and workshops, papers published in peer-reviewed
journals, and books on a selection of these topics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
dimer model studies the set of all dimers, or perfect matchings, on a planar
bipartite graph G on a disk or Riemann surface. Despite the simple definition,
there are many open problems about the dimer model, as well as applications to
geometry, algebra, and physics. There is a fundamental connection between the
dimer model on the disk and the Grassmannian, via the fact that generating
functions of dimers satisfy Plucker relations. This fact leads to the cluster
algebra structure on the homogeneous coordinate ring of the Grassmannian, and
the beautiful combinatorics of the positive Grassmannian. This project will
explore a myriad of generalizations of the objects mentioned above, and will
significantly improve our understanding of: the dimer model on non-planar
graphs; limiting behaviors of the dimer model on a torus and other surfaces; the
connection between dimers on a torus and brane tilings in string theory; soliton
solutions to the KP equation and the bipartite graphs realizable as soliton
graphs; the relationship between convex polygon tilings and the corresponding
bipartite planar graphs with Kasteleyn weightings; the connection between the
dimer model and triangulations of the amplituhedron, an object whose volume
computes scattering amplitudes; and higher-dimensional dimer models, colored
quivers and a generalized notion of cluster mutation, exciting new objects
motivated by dualities in supersymmetric quantum field
theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.