* 1854136
* FRG: Collaborative Research: Computability-Theoretic Aspects of Combinatorics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Peter Cholak, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2023
* USD 271,989.00

Computability theory arose out of the development by Turing and others of a
mathematically precise definition of the notion of algorithm. One of the most
fruitful developments in this field has been the study of the algorithmic
content of mathematics. At the same time, concerns about the foundations of
mathematics have led to the analysis of different formal systems for
mathematical reasoning, and the study of the relative power of such systems. The
computability-theoretic approach has turned out to play a key role in this
project. Combinatorics is an area of mathematics whose methods and results
underlie a great deal of mathematical reasoning, so the study of its algorithmic
content and of the systems required to formalize its methods is particularly
important. Computable combinatorics has a long history, but has seen a recent
surge of interest highlighting the fact that computability-theoretically natural
notions tend to be combinatorially natural, and vice-versa. This project aims to
strengthen the connections between computability theory and combinatorics by
increasing our understanding of the algorithmic content of combinatorial
principles, through a concerted group effort to use what we have learned in
recent years to systematize the area further, work toward solving a number of
its outstanding questions, and explore its outward-facing
aspects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will address major open problems such
as determining whether Hindman's Theorem holds arithmetically, and whether it is
equivalent to its restriction to sums of length at most two; determining the
first-order part of Ramsey's Theorem for pairs, and clarifying the
computability-theoretic relationship between this principle and its stable
version; and determining the exact proof-theoretic strength of Laver's Theorem.
More importantly, it will focus on the development of lines of research
particularly relevant to the growing interest in connections between
computability theory and combinatorics, including the study of questions of
methodological interest to combinatorialists, for instance ones involving
Hindman's Theorem and the use of ultrafilters in combinatorics; the development
of new proofs of combinatorial theorems inspired by questions regarding the
computational content of these theorems, along the lines of Montalban's new
proof of Laver's Theorem; the analysis and comparison of different general
methods, such as the use of ultrafilters, topological dynamics, and
probabilistic methods; the development of notions of comparison between theorems
that, while still computability-theoretic in spirit, are closer to being direct
reflections of combinatorial differences; the understanding of splittings of
combinatorial principles into computationally and combinatorially simpler parts;
the study of the usefulness of combinatorially-defined objects as computational
oracles; and the study of the first-order consequences of the existence of
combinatorially-defined second-order objects. This project is thus aimed at
developing the study of the connections between computability theory and
combinatorics along a large number of related directions, making use of the
computability-theoretic, proof-theoretic, and combinatorial expertise of its
PIs, senior personnel, and key collaborators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.