* 1854299
* FRG: Collaborative Research: Non-Smooth Geometry, Spectral Theory, and Data: Learning and Representing Projections of Complex Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* John Harlim, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 06/30/2023
* USD 343,426.00

Complex, time-evolving systems are ubiquitous in nature and society, with
examples ranging from the Earth's weather and climate, to the function and
dynamics of biomolecules, and the behavior of markets and economies. Despite
their apparent complexity, many such systems exhibit a form of underlying
organized structure (``building blocks''), whose discovery would enhance our
ability to understand and predict a wide range of phenomena. The goal of this
project is to develop the next generation of mathematical and algorithmic tools
that can harness the information content of large datasets acquired from
experiments and observations to create coherent representations of complex
systems, and use these representations to perform prediction, and ultimately,
control. These objectives will be addressed through a novel combination of
mathematical techniques, bridging dynamical systems theory and differential
geometry with machine learning and data science. The newly developed techniques
will be tested and applied in real-world problems through collaboration with
domain experts in the areas of climate dynamics, space physics, and condensed
matter physics. The project will also contribute to STEM workforce and
curricular development through training of students and postdoctoral
researchers, and design of multi-disciplinary lecture courses. In particular,
this project will support one graduate student at each of the three universities
involved.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The modern scientific method is undergoing an
evolutionary change wherein large data sets and machine learning algorithms have
the potential to outperform classical first-principles approaches for certain
complex phenomena. For these tools to be accepted by the scientific community, a
rigorous mathematical framework is required to match the verifiability and
quantifiability of the classical modeling approach. Recently, a new tool called
the diffusion forecast has been developed based on provably consistent
estimators, which learn the unknown structure of a large class of stochastic
dynamical systems on manifolds. Moreover, the results of many published
numerical experiments indicate that this framework can be applied far beyond the
restricted context of the current theory. In particular, the evidence suggests
that the consistency proofs can be extended to non-autonomous projections of
complex systems, deterministic chaotic systems represented by non-compact
operators, non-smooth domains such as fractal attractors, and even generalized
tensors on metric-measure spaces. This project will undertake a rigorous
mathematical unification of these problems, leading to transformative advances
in our ability to model and describe complex systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.