* 1854815
* High-performance Computing and Data-driven Modeling of Aircraft Contrails
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Georgeta-Elisab Marai, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 06/30/2023
* USD 462,410.00

This project aims to model the early-phase formation of condensation trails
("contrails"), which are ice clouds generated by water exhaust from aircraft
engines. Although the contrails initially appear to be linear, they can spread
under favorable atmospheric conditions and form cirrus clouds that can persist
for hours and eventually become almost indistinguishable with natural cirrus.
Contrails and contrail-cirrus are indeed the most uncertain aviation
contributions to the Earth-radiation budget (that is, the balance of energy
entering, reflected, absorbed, and emitted by the Earth). Modeling this complex
multi-physics problem is challenging because the different physical processes
interact at different time and spatial scales. This project addresses this
challenge using high-resolution numerical simulations that rely extensively on
high-performance computing and advanced visualization techniques to help
identify, capture and model contrail features. The primary focus of the modeling
is on the early phase of contrail evolution where the presence of large-scale
motions generated by the aircraft wake vortices and the small-scale
perturbations induced by the jet and wake turbulence interact. The contrail
parameterization results will support the integration of emissions into global
atmospheric models. The sensitivity of contrail properties to the initial
particle emissions may suggest potential mitigation strategies. Underrepresented
minority students from the University of Illinois at Chicago, a Hispanic Serving
Institution and a Minority Serving Institution, will be engaged in the
computational research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific goals of the research
are: (1) to carry out the first fully three-dimensional spatial large-eddy
simulations (LES) of contrail formation that include the full aircraft geometry
and to develop an accurate data-set of contrail evolution in the jet and vortex
regime; (2) to identify the three-dimensional contrail features and fit
parameters by journaling the simulation workflow using advanced visualization
techniques; (3) to reduce the large dimensionality of the generated data-set and
provide a general and accurate model of contrail structure at the end of the jet
regime using Artificial Neural Networks based on high-fidelity data training;
and (4) to reconstruct contrail global properties over the full time evolution
using statistically inspired methods such as Polynomial-Chaos expansions for
parameterization into global models. The techniques developed through this work
will enable contrail parameterizations that are consistent with the physical
assumptions and the conservation equations used in global atmospheric models.
These techniques will further handle large uncertainties in the microphysical
and optical/radiative properties of ice particles. The techniques will also
handle large variability in atmospheric conditions that determine the background
and boundary conditions for LES of contrails. A visual analysis framework will
enable detection and analysis of flow features, as well as multi-scale and
multi-run analysis of multiple simulations and
parameters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.