* 1854276
* IRES Track I: Development of Global Scientists and Engineers by Collaborative Research on Reliability-Aware IC Design
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2023
* Sheldon Tan, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 03/31/2023
* USD 300,000.00

This IRES Track I project will support collaborative research to develop new
algorithms and techniques for reliability-aware physical design and optimization
of VLSI systems. U.S. students will be trained through collaborative research
between two teams -- UCR's VLSI System and Computation Research Lab (VSCLAB) and
Tsinghua University's Design Automation Lab. Each year five American students
will participate in the IRES program. IRES students will spend 10 weeks (one
academic quarter) at UCR and 10 weeks at Tsinghua University, China. Specific
IRES collaborative research, education and culture activities are planned to
expose U.S. undergraduate or graduate students to the global engineering
education and research environment through US-China academic collaboration. The
collaborative educational and research activities will provide unique training,
mentoring, networking and intellectual development opportunities for students at
UCR, which is a growing and Minority Serving Institution. This project thus
provides a unique opportunity to contribute to diversity in the U.S. technical
workforce. Such international engagement will benefit the students' entire
careers and make them more competitive and competent in their careers as
scientists and engineers. Furthermore, building long-term connections with top-
tier engineering schools like Tsinghua University will help U.S. scientists and
engineers maintain competitiveness in the long term. Finally, the joint research
will strengthen existing computer engineering research and education programs,
and broaden the collaborative research work at UCR.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The
IRES collaborative project will produce important research advances through
joint development of efficient algorithms and design methodologies to address
the grand challenges of reliability-aware physical design and optimization of
VLSI systems. The researchers will work on the most severe and challenging
aspects of verification and design problems of silicon CMOS based integrated
systems in current and coming 10nm/7nm nodes: modeling, analysis of long-term
interconnect reliability effects such as electromigration (EM), time-dependent
dielectric breakdown (TDDB), bias temperature instability (BTI) and reliability-
aware physical design and optimization. The mutual interests and complementary
knowledge, and established trust between the two research teams is critical for
the success of the student training, mentoring and the proposed joint research
project. The education and research activities of this joint project consist of
following activities: student training, mentoring and intellectual development
via pre-trip preparation and on-site visits; new courses and seminar development
for proposed research topics; joint research projects and student supervision
and publications; promoting and nurturing diverse cohorts of U.S. students;
evaluation for continuous improvement of the program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.