* 1854127
* Collaborative Research: IRES Sites: Freshwater biodiversity research opportunities for students in the imperiled lakes and streams of western Kenya.
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Ray Schmidt, Randolph-Macon College
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 08/31/2023
* USD 159,745.00

This IRES project will provide scientific and cultural research opportunities
for 18 undergraduate students, including those from traditionally
underrepresented groups, from several US institutions. These students will
collaborate with Kenyan researchers and undergraduate students to investigate
the freshwater ecosystems of western Kenya. Prior to the research trip students
will receive training in biodiversity research methods and the language and
culture of Kenya to prepare them for the experience abroad. In Kenya,
participants will collect fishes, aquatic macroinvertebrates, and conduct water
quality analyses; to better understand the dynamics that shape these biological
communities and how contemporary changes to the environment are affecting
critical freshwater aquatic habitats. Additionally, using cutting-edge molecular
techniques, students will have the opportunity to participate in the discovery
and formal description of a vast array of unknown species in the area.
Freshwater ecosystems are among the most threatened ecosystems in the world and
the skills and experiences students will gain during this project will prepare
them to contribute to freshwater ecosystem conservation efforts globally. Upon
returning from Kenya, students will engage in individual projects and
disseminate their results via social media, conferences, and peer-reviewed
publications. By providing these students this unique international research
experience, this project will train and prepare the next generation of U.S.
scientists to engage with and lead the global scientific community in addressing
the ongoing biodiversity crisis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Freshwater biodiversity
in arid East Africa is beset with many ongoing threats; providing an uncertain
future for freshwater ecosystems and people that rely on these resources for
survival. This collaborative project will provide 18 undergraduate students a
year-long opportunity to engage in research on the unique and imperiled
biodiversity in freshwater ecosystems of western Kenya, including six weeks of
field work in Kenya. In addition to initiating the training of a new generation
of U.S. biodiversity researchers, the project will build the capacity of Kenyans
to engage in biodiversity research. Fishes and aquatic macroinvertebrates
perform many crucial ecosystem roles in freshwater environments, and are thus
ideal targets of study for monitoring ecosystem health. Striking little baseline
data on the freshwater biodiversity of western Kenya is available. Using Next-
Generation Sequencing techniques (metabarcoding), traditional molecular and
morphological approaches, and ecological studies, students will research aquatic
biodiversity in the region; understand the biogeographical processes that
promoted this diversity; and determine how these environments are responding to
ongoing anthropogenic pressures. With exploitation of water resources in Kenya
on the rise due to extraction and hydropower projects, the results of this
project will be critical for identifying biodiversity hotspots and preventing
further loss of biodiversity in the region. The project will recruit
traditionally underrepresented students at home institutions and through ongoing
collaborations with minority-serving institutions in the community. Research
projects in the lab and field will provide a foundation for students to address
the looming biodiversity crisis in future endeavors. Student participants will
gain valuable insights on the culture and environments of western Kenya by
learning from Kenyan mentors and interacting with Kenyan undergraduate students.
Students will be provided with opportunities and encouraged to share their
experiences and research findings through public outreach and presentations at
national and international meetings. We will also build upon prior successes
developing the research capacity of host institutions, providing training
opportunities to local students and researchers, improving the natural history
collections for the region, and developing guides for the region's
biodiversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.