* 1854401
* I-Corps: Michelangelo
* TIP,TI
* 11/15/2018,09/30/2019
* Yoonjin Won, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Pamela McCauley
* 09/30/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project allows
physicians, nurses, and other healthcare personnel to give medication to their
patients in a more efficient and safe manner by significantly reducing the
number of medication errors made in health care settings. One study calculated
the economic costs of this problem in the United States to be over $2 billion in
1993, leading to longer hospitalizations, loss of income, and higher insurance
premiums. Of greater importance, these errors can be traced to over 7,000
deaths. Consumer segments include any medical institution that administers
medications including medical centers, academic, major metropolitan, and
regional hospitals, surgery centers, urgent care centers, dental and
veterinarian offices, and nursing homes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps
project is a proposal for a medical device designed to decrease medication
errors and be compatible with vials currently used in the hospital. It uses
cameras to read a printed code on a vial to positively identify the medication
for safety, contraindications, expiration, manufacturer recall, and previous
usage to dispense medication contained inside without the use of needles,
syringes, or labels. It will also decrease medication delivery times, adverse
drug reactions, contamination, counterfeiting, and waste. Our device also
consists of a backend database that keeps track of medications tagged with a
code to provide a record of medication given to patients. The database can be
updated to prevent the delivery of recalled, expired, and previously used
medications.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The basis of this device is a barcode
medication administration (BCMA) system to give medication to patients and
manage inventory of medications in pharmacies. Most medication errors occur from
the use of intravenous medications from a number of different sources and are
the leading cause of complications by anesthetists. This apparatus can improve
workflow efficiency and provide multiple safety nets by automatically alerting
the anesthetist to contraindicated medications and allergies, sending reminders
for redosing medications, and documenting medication
administration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.