* 1854433
* Belmont Forum Collaborative Research: Land to Sea
* GEO,RISE
* 03/15/2019,08/31/2022
* Edward Barbier, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 08/31/2022
* USD 179,998.00

Innovative research on the complex interaction of socio-economic and global
environmental trends of biodiversity and ecosystem services is needed to help
develop more informative scenarios for addressing environmental and human
development challenges. To overcome these challenges coupled natural-human
systems approaches and analyses are needed. These provide improved scenarios of
biodiversity and ecosystem services that couple the outputs of direct and
indirect drivers such as land use, invasive species, overexploitation,
biodiversity, environmental change, and pollution. The resulting models provide
a methodological state-of-the art that results in more accurate quantitative
assessments, better land use, and more effective ecosystem services. Using this
methodology and via an international coalition of investigators from the US and
four other countries in the Northern Hemisphere, this research involves
integrating the economic, social, and natural sciences in a comprehensive
framework to examine the consequences of human activities in coastal settings on
terrestrial and nearshore marine water quality and coastal marine biodiversity.
Such input is critical to ecosystem health and human well-being because many of
our coastal fisheries, recreational activities, and nearshore marine ecosystems
depend on the quality of freshwater that flows from the land to the sea. The US
component of this international research consortium develops the
economic/valuation component of the larger, coupled, modeling system that will
be used to examine how changes in freshwater flows and water quality in coastal
systems impact fisheries and fishing communities. The Estuary and Northern Gulf
of St. Lawrence in Canada serve as case studies. Collaborators from outside the
US and their parts of the project are funded through their associated national
funding agencies. Project objectives are aligned with work of the
Intergovernmental Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services. This entity
encourages the integration of economic, social, and natural sciences to
understand the complexities and linkages of human impacts on ecosystems. In
addition to the valuation module, the US research team will help develop the
decision support framework that can be used to inform policy and ecosystem
service choices for coastal regions. Broader impacts of the work include
international collaboration, between the US and Germany, Ireland, Sweden, and
Canada. The research also has potential health implications for coastal
populations and communities increasingly impacted by deterioration in freshwater
sources, water quality, and loss of coastal marine biodiversity as a result of
increases in coastal population pressure and habitation in a world subjected to
rising sea level, increasing temperatures, and evaporation resulting from global
warming. Study results will be useful to policy makers and resource managers of
marine-freshwater ecosystems, with the modeling component providing useful input
on possible coastal adaption strategies to climate change. Additional impacts
include use of multiple communications platforms to reach out to stakeholders,
the public, and policy makers to maximize utilization of and provide broad
accessibility to research results. The Project also provides valuable student
training in terms of becoming international scholars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award supports U.S. researchers participating in a project competitively
selected by a coalition of 26 funding agencies from 23 countries through the
Belmont Forum call for proposals on "Scenarios of Biodiversity and Ecosystem
Services". The call was a multilateral initiative designed to support research
projects that contributed to the development of scenarios, models, and decision-
support tools for understanding and solving critical issues facing our planet.
The goal of the competition was to improve and apply participatory scenario
methods to enhance research relevance and its acceptance and to address gaps in
methods for modelling impact drivers and policy interventions. It was also to
develop and communicate levels of uncertainty associated with the models to
improve data accessibility and fill gaps in knowledge. Using this methodology, a
five-party, international, collaborative research project, in which
investigators from the US are involved, focuses on developing an integrated
framework of coupled models for predicting the immediate and long-term
consequences of land-use and climate change on water quality, biodiversity, and
ecosystems processes related to freshwater (surface and groundwater) and
nearshore marine ecosystems. The process starts with engaging a broad spectrum
of stakeholders to co-design scenarios of human and global change-associated
pressures on terrestrial freshwater and marine ecosystems. From this input,
conceptual models and mechanistic frameworks that can explore the impacts of
multiple terrestrially-derived pressures on freshwater and marine biodiversity
and ecosystem processes can be constructed and coded. The work of the US team
focuses on providing modules to determine economic and other impacts, as a
function of one or more stressors, on habitat and with regard to regulatory
functions (e.g., changes in freshwater flows or/and quality/health of coastal
systems). The US contribution will also provide critical input into the decision
support component of the project. Overall project goals are to create effective
and realistic decision support tools from which recommendations can be made that
can be used by policy and decision makers, land use and resource managers, urban
planners, and those examining possible mitigation and/or adaptation strategies
to global change impacts in coastal areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.