* 1854779
* CDS&amp;E-MSS: Geometric and Statistical Foundations for Modeling Cell Shapes
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2023
* Zhiliang Xu, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 06/30/2023
* USD 287,937.00

The project aims to develop new mathematical and statistical tools for studying
cell shapes by combining knowledge from several fields such as mathematics,
statistics and biology. It concerns an integrated research and education program
at the forefront of these fields. The project will use combined mathematical and
statistical modeling and simulation to learn underlying the mechanisms of cell
morphology. Incorporating this valuable information of cell shapes into analysis
can lead to new discoveries of cell functions and has the potential of advancing
new understanding of the underlying biological processes such as cell
morphology, which is very important for example in understanding cancer
mechanisms. The award will provide support of graduate student training through
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main goal of the project is to
develop new geometric and statistical framework that allows practitioners to
incorporate valuable information of cell shapes into analysis. Geometric
foundations will be first developed by characterizing both the intrinsic and
extrinsic geometry of the space of cell shapes (the cell shape space). Next we
will develop a new suite of statistical models and tools for cell shape analysis
that can appropriately incorporate the geometry of the cell shape space. A new
mathematical model for studying morphology of cells by geometric evolution
equations will be proposed. Another key theme of our research is to combine
mathematical modeling with statistical inference to form a systematic approach
for cell studies. We will use statistics for mathematical model validation and
refinements, and employ data simulated from the refined mathematical model for
statistical model validations. The developed methods will be applied to an
important study on the role of RBCs (red blood cells) morphology during the
formation of blood clots.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.