* 1854185
* IRES Track 1:  Energy, Environment, and Future Electric Transportation Systems (E-FETS)
* O/D,OISE
* 03/15/2019,10/31/2023
* John Lesko, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 10/31/2023
* USD 360,000.00

Approximately 95% of all land, sea and air vehicles in the world today rely on
petroleum to move passengers and freight both locally and internationally. This
transportation fuel mix produces ~25% of all greenhouse gas emissions and is
projected to grow in the future with modernization of developing countries.
International energy agencies note that if transport is to contribute to CO2
reductions to meet the 2 degree C global average temperature target, use of
technologies such as hybrid electric and all electric transportation will have
to increase in the future. Thus, advances in transportation technologies are
clearly a national and international issue, and require globally-minded
engineers and scientists to advance interdisciplinary technologies to develop
cleaner regional and global transportation systems. Virginia Tech (VT) proposes
to expand upon the Future Electric Transportation Systems ( FETS) IRES
partnership with the University of Nottingham (UoN), with a broadened scope and
stronger engagement with industry and the UK government to establish the Energy,
Environment, and Future Electric Transportation Systems (E-FETS) IRES program.
E-FETS cohorts of ~9 per year will investigate next generation electrical power
systems for environmentally-friendly fuels and extraction methods; energy-
efficient, hybridized power train vehicles and systems; light-weighting of
vehicle structures; and the human factors issues that accompany their use and
adoption. Among the broader impacts of this IRES program are the promotion of
international research collaborations that foster innovative technical leaders
capable of creating and effectively integrating electric transportation systems
into our society as a means to address efficient energy use.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;E-FETS will provide an intensive ten-week research
experience to undergraduates and graduate students with five of the University
of Nottingham's internationally recognized research groups. These include power
electronics, human factors, geo-energy, composites and manufacturing, and
aerospace propulsion and advanced diagnostics. The program will consist of two
phases. The first phase includes three pre-departure workshops plus three weeks
of mentorship and research preparation at VT to orient students to the
experience and the project scope. This pre-departure preparation aims to build
the E-FETS student cohort team in preparation for their work individually and
together. The second phase consists of 7 weeks at the UoN engaged in
concentrated research with UoN faculty mentors and facilities. In addition to
supervision from a VT and UoN faculty member, students will work collaboratively
as part of a large research team including faculty, Ph.D. students and
postdoctoral research fellows. To facilitate additional professional
development, students will also be matched with an industry mentor who will meet
with the student before, during and after their research experience. These
mentors will enhance the students? experience with international career
exploration, professional development, and networking in their field and
industry. Seminars focused on the scope of E-FETS research goals are planned
during each phase of the program, providing students with the opportunity to
connect their individual research projects with the unified research theme of
E-FETS, and present and get feedback on their IRES experience. By engaging
industry partners with IRES projects, the E-FETS IRES seeks to leverage industry
and UK government to grow the IRES program and develop a basis for
sustainability beyond the grant.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.