* 1854725
* Belmont Forum Collaborative Research: WILD HEALTH: How does environmental health affect wildlife health?
* GEO,RISE
* 05/15/2019,04/30/2024
* Donald Spalinger, University of Alaska Anchorage Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 04/30/2024
* USD 180,000.00

Innovative research on the complex interaction of socio-economic and global
environmental trends on biodiversity and ecosystem services is needed to help
develop more informative scenarios for addressing environmental and human
development challenges. To overcome these challenges coupled natural-human
systems approaches and analyses are needed. These provide improved scenarios of
biodiversity and ecosystem services that couple the outputs of direct and
indirect drivers such as land use, invasive species, overexploitation,
biodiversity, environmental change, and pollution. The resulting models provide
a methodological state-of-the art that results in more accurate quantitative
assessments, better land use, and more effective ecosystem services. Employing
this methodology, the funded project, which is an international coalition
between US scientists and those from two Scandinavian nations, seeks to examine
whether microbes on the skin and in the gut of wildlife have positive health
benefits (i.e., fewer allergies, increased disease resistance, etc.) that are
comparable to those discovered in humans with high endemic microbial diversity.
The work also seeks to determine how and/or if wildlife and their endemic
microbiomes change under differently managed environments. Boreal forest
wildlife (moose and voles) were selected for study because ~80% of global
terrestrial biodiversity is found in boreal forests and because these two
species allow comparison between species inhabiting different habitats and
interacting with different parts of the ecosystem. Samples will be taken from
both species and examined for diverse measures of "health", such as internal and
external microbial community diversity, parasite/pathogen infection, body
condition, etc. Work will focus on quantifying the role microbes play (e.g.,
supplying energy, inducing or reducing inflammation, increasing or decreasing
parasite/pathogen burden) in wildlife health and species response to
environmental changes/conditions. It will also address how the microbiome of
wildlife is impacted as a result of changes in biodiversity that is driven by
changes in land use, different forest management practices, habitat, diet,
etc.). Broader impacts of the work include international collaboration between
the US, Finland, and Sweden. Results will help provide better understanding of
challenges in biodiversity conservation and the role of global change and
forestry management practices on wildlife. The work is also likely to provide
new avenues for improved ecological monitoring. In addition, this work provides
important information from which to determine whether forest biodiversity
impacts human health, via a potential increase in parasite burden due to
decreased microbiome diversity in forest wildlife that may increase zoonotic
disease risks for humans. Additional impacts include the integration of research
and education and the training of students to be part of the new generation of
international scholars. The project also funds an institution in an EPSCoR state
(i.e., Alaska).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports US researchers
participating in a project competitively selected by a coalition of 26 funding
agencies from 23 countries through the Belmont Forum call for proposals on
"Scenarios of Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services". The call was a multilateral
initiative designed to support research projects that contribute to the
development of scenarios, models, and decision-support tools for understanding
and solving critical issues facing our planet. The goal of the competition was
to improve and apply participatory scenario methods to enhance research
relevance and its acceptance and to address gaps in methods for modelling impact
drivers and policy interventions. It was also to develop and communicate levels
of uncertainty associated with the models, to improve data accessibility and
fill gaps in knowledge. Using this methodology, the funded project will test the
hypothesis: Environmental biodiversity has a positive effect on wildlife health.
To test this, state-of-the-art genomics methods, molecular biology, and
bioinformatics will be combined with data and measurements from forest community
ecology, empirical data, and field experiments. Funds for US participants in the
larger international consortium support the part of the larger study that
focuses on Alaskan boreal forest moose that are exposed to both direct and
indirect human impacts. Indirect impacts would include the increase in human
fossil fuel consumption which is contributing to global warming. This warming
contributes to increased fire intensity and frequency in Arctic and boreal
ecosystems. Direct impacts are when humans use fire as a tool to manage forest
habitats to improve wildlife diversity and/or productivity. Although in Alaska,
burning generally increases the availability and diversity of woody deciduous
browses for moose, it also results in juvenile stages of plant growth, reduces
ground shading, and increases water stress in plants. This changes plant
resource allocation patterns by increasing production of polyphenolics and other
structural components. Thus, while fire may produce more browse and support
higher densities of moose, their food may be of substantially lower nutritional
quality, something that can reduce individual animal productivity and
survivorship. The US component of this project addresses the impact of plant
chemistry on the microbial composition and function of moose rumen to examine
impacts on moose health and population productivity. Microbiome samples of skin,
nasal, and moose lower gastrointestinal tracts will be taken and analyzed to see
if such impacts extend to other important microbiomes of the animals and to what
extent these contribute to overall wildlife health. The hypothesis that browse
diversity and nutritional quality influence moose diets will be tested by
quantifying what moose eat, using fecal samples collected from the rectum of
anesthetized wild moose and fresh fecal samples collected during field work
associated with characterizing the diversity and abundance of foods available to
moose in the study sites. Rumen contents of immobilized moose (ten individuals)
in unburned and adjacent burned areas of two different moose ranges in interior
and southcentral Alaska will also be analyzed. Diets will be characterized using
cuticular alkane/long-chain alcohol signatures of feces and foods as well as
plant DNA metabarcoding methodologies. Habitat food diversity and nutritional
characteristics (digestibility, tannins, etc.) will be determined at each of the
study sites through plotless surveys of plant diversity and abundance and via
standard nutritional analytical procedures. This research will also test the
hypothesis that moose diets influence the diversity and function of rumen
microbial communities. Rumen and fecal microbiota will be taken and analyzed
from each of the moose captured and sampled using high throughput DNA sequencing
of 16s rDNA to test this hypothesis. In addition, the hypothesis that microbial
community diversity of moose is negatively related to their parasite/pathogen
loads will be tested by examining external and intestinal parasite loads of
sampled individuals using standard protocols for parasites. These results will
be compared using microbial diversity measures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.