* 1854853
* Data Mining for Large Data Sets of Shapes Deformations
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Jiwen He, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 07/31/2023
* USD 405,996.00

This project aims to reconstruct and quantify the dynamic deformations of soft
organ shapes which are routinely observed by clinicians or researchers in
medical imaging data. Our mathematical and computational approaches can
potentially impact many domains, ranging from computer aided medical diagnosis,
to automatic shape recognition in computer vision, as well as automated
clustering, classification, and fast retrieval of biomedical image sequences. We
will study movies recording dynamics of three dimensional biomedical shapes, for
instance in live echo-cardiographic imaging of patients beating hearts. We will
quantify shape distortions by computing "elastic distances" between deformable
shapes and by large numbers of "strain values" evaluating local deformation of
tissues. In turn these deformations characteristics enable the use of artificial
neural networks for automatic classification and clustering of deformable
shapes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our work is motivated by the increasing
availability of large databases of movies recording in 3D the dynamic
deformations of "soft" shapes, such as human organs. We aim to generate
quantified comparison between any pairs of movies recording the dynamic
deformations of similar biomedical shapes, such as the mitral valves of
cardiology patients. We will use one large seed set of actual echo-
cardiographies of mitral valves dynamics to generate a large set of N = 1000
random diffeomorphic 3D surfaces deformations. In the spirit of computational
anatomy, for each such movie, we will compute a time dependent diffeomorphic
registration of successive frames, and extract an associated detailed strain
map. For each pair of movies M1 and M2, after time registration, we will
implement diffeomorphic registrations between corresponding key time frames of
M1 and M2. This involves the numerical solving of a high dimensional variational
calculus problems by innovative fast non-linear optimal control. From all these
diffeomorphic registrations, we will extract multiple characteristics of each
movie as well as quantitative "similarities" between pairs of movies. At this
stage, powerful data mining techniques such as support vector machines and
artificial neural networks will become implementable to generate multi-scale
clustering as well as classification of shapes deformations. To handle the heavy
computing challenges, we will implement highly parallelized computational
schemes on remote high power computing resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.