* 1854562
* Collaborative Research: Adaptive Gaussian Markov Random Fields for Large-scale Discrete Optimization via Simulation
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2023
* Barry Nelson, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 06/30/2023
* USD 163,934.00

Major federal agencies, including the Department of Veterans Affairs, Department
of Defense, Department of Homeland Security, Federal Aviation Administration,
Department of the Treasury, Internal Revenue Service, Centers for Medicare and
Medicaid Services, Department of Health and Human Services, and others, seek
government and non-government assistance with the application of scientific,
data-driven methods to help them execute effectively on their critical missions.
Because their mandate is typically large-scale, complex, and involves inherent
uncertainty, computer simulation is often the only tool for representing their
problems in a comprehensive way. Similar problems occur in the private sector,
especially in health care delivery, computer networks, warehousing and
distribution, and transportation systems. Unfortunately, "large-scale, complex,
and involving inherent uncertainty" are the features that make "optimizing" a
simulated system hard, particularly when the decisions are how to allocate
discrete units of resources such as personnel, vehicles and facilities. The
proposed research marries high-performance computing, smart numerical methods,
and state-of-the-art statistical methodology to significantly increase the size
and complexity of simulated systems that can be optimized. As a result, agencies
such as those listed above will be able to more fully solve their "system of
systems" resource-allocation problems using computer
simulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research tackles statistical and
computational challenges that arise in solving large-scale stochastic
optimization problems when the objective function may only be evaluated by
executing a stochastic simulation. Such optimization problems are often with
respect to a high-dimensional, discrete-valued decision variable in a large
solution space. The modeling flexibility of simulation comes at a cost:
arbitrarily complex stochastic simulations may not be optimized using tools from
mathematical programming. As a result, the scale of problems that can currently
be solved by simulation with an optimality gap guarantee is limited. The
investigators propose to create theory, algorithms and software for large-scale
discrete-decision-variable simulation optimization that converge to the global
optimum asymptotically, and provide optimality-gap inference when terminated.
The proposed methods are based on inferential optimization, which models the
unknown objective function by a Gaussian Markov Random Field (GMRF), a type of
Gaussian Process defined by a graph on the discrete solution space; the
investigators have shown that GMRFs provide better inference for a discrete
problems than Gaussian processes defined on a continuous domain. The conditional
distribution of a GMRF provides inference for selecting solutions to simulate
and for search termination when the inferred optimality gap is small. However,
the computational cost of numerical linear algebra increases faster than the
number of feasible solutions. To facilitate the solution of large-scale
problems, three core topics are proposed: exploiting high-performance computing;
creating a restricted search scheme and tailored computational linear algebra
that significantly reduces the computations in GMRF updates; and attacking
limits on dimensionality via an adaptive multi-resolution GMRF and projections
to lower dimensions. This award will provide support of graduate student
training through research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.