* 1854532
* CDS&amp;E: Data-Driven Modeling and Analyses of Extreme Waves
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Balakumar Balachandran, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Reha Uzsoy
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,070,111.00

Rogue (freak) waves are rare events but they pose one of the greatest maritime
risks. This Computational and Data-Enabled Science and Engineering (CDS&amp;E)
award would be used to develop a unified, data-driven framework and tools to
advance the analysis and prediction of oceanic freak waves. The results of the
research would provide key information for risk-based design of civil
engineering and marine systems such as offshore platforms, wind turbines, and
ships. The framework and tools would also benefit fundamental research on other
complex systems that generate large amounts of data that must be processed--
ranging from manufacturing processes to disaster planning and response. The
researchers' work on identifying signatures of rare events within big data sets
could advance fundamental research in a variety of areas from medical
diagnostics to airport security and the development of advanced materials.
Collaborations with the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA)
and the US Navy will help to ensure that the work will be used to enhance
weather forecasting and safety on the seas. The new framework is to be
incorporated into a software package, which is used by NOAA, and is to be made
available to researchers, students, and the public. Students will participate in
the research and the results will be integrated into course materials and
outreach activities for students in the University of Maryland, the US Naval
Academy, and Women in Engineering. The researchers will also provide art-in-
science displays on extreme wave phenomena for K-12 students. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This research will be used to integrate statistical learning, signal
processing, and Koopman operator theory to develop software tools and processes
that can be configured to identify energy localizations across a variety of
domains--including ocean waves-- to provide a prediction capability. As rare
events, there are few measurements of rogue waves but there is a wealth of
information on storms, other atmospheric events and wave behavior. An
interdisciplinary team will integrate existing NOAA databases, General-Purpose
Graphics Processing Units (GPGPU) computing, and the application of machine
learning. The investigators will advance our understanding of how to use
parallel processing of large-scale computations done by combining the processing
power of GPUs and Central Processing Units (CPUs). This enhanced understanding
will advance fundamental research in dynamical systems by enabling more
effective use of a suite of simulation and signal processing tools, such as
wavelets, Fast Fourier Transforms, and Monte Carlo
simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.