* 1854993
* PREEVENTS Track 2: Collaborative Research: Predicting Hurricane Risk along the United States East Coast in a Changing Climate
* GEO,RISE
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2023
* Ning Lin, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 05/31/2023
* USD 321,808.00

Changes to hurricane activity in the coming century has the potential to
catastrophically impact the entire economic landscape of American coastal
region. Unfortunately, significant uncertainty in projections of future
hurricane risk exist because the climatic drivers of changes in hurricane
activity is poorly known. This is exacerbated by the exceedingly short
instrumental record of hurricane occurrence in the western Atlantic, which makes
diagnosing the climatic controls on hurricane activity difficult. This project
utilizes historical and long-term geological reconstructions of hurricane
activity in the western North Atlantic, which extends our knowledge of hurricane
occurrence back centuries and even millennia. This approach allows assessment of
how the risk posed by hurricanes along the east coast of the United States has
changed. Further, the researchers will use state of the art numerical models to
both diagnose the key climatic conditions that contribute to changes in
hurricane activity and to provide improved projections of future hurricane risk.
Many of the lessons learned from this work will be used by the broader
scientific community and planners and decision-makers to improve our
preparedness and resilience to possible future changes in hurricane risk. The
results will inform risk modeling, which in turn informs the insurance and re-
insurance industries, as well as efforts to mitigate tropical cyclone hazards at
the city, state and federal levels. Finally, the project will provide the
opportunity to train and educate the next generation of scientists with the
engagement of graduate, undergraduate and high school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study takes an integrated research approach
that addresses two broad questions: 1) How is the risk of floods changing due to
(a) storm surge and (b) rainfall? 2) How do processes like changes in ocean
circulations (e.g., Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation) and the
response to low latitude volcanic eruptions modulate hurricane activity, both
generally and specifically for US landfalling storms? Reconstruction of past
changes in hurricane landfalls along the Northeast US, Florida east coast, and
northwestern Gulf of Mexico will be coupled with hydrodynamic modeling of
tropical cyclone related storm surges and waves and downscaled estimates of TC-
related rainfall. This approach will allow determination of changes in risk of
TC-induced flooding over the last millennium. This will form the baseline for
examining future risk and for examining critical forcing mechanisms that may
significantly alter future regional landfall probabilities. Downscaling the
latest (CMIP6) global model output coupled with hydrodynamic modeling of surge
and waves will be used to assess current and future risk of TC-induced flooding.
In addition, we will explore the potential influence of volcanic aerosols that
penetrate the stratosphere on TC activity. Further, this study plans to examine
the influence of changes in ocean circulation on TCs, which affects the
probability of intense hurricane landfalls by altering the amount of ocean heat
content available to TCs close to landfall.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.