* 1854974
* Collaborative Research:  Conformal and robust integrated infrared spectroscopic sensors
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2020
* Mo Li, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* John Zhang
* 08/31/2020
* USD 149,665.00

The program aims to pioneer a flexible optical sensor which can be conformally
attached to human skin for continuous physiological monitoring. Unlike
conventional optical sensors which are often bulky, costly, and involve
mechanical moving parts which compromise their robustness, the proposed effort
will leverage advanced integrated photonic technologies to combine miniaturized
optical components on a flexible polymer membrane. The proposed sensor is
ideally suited for continuous glucose monitoring. Instead of relying on
fingertip pricking with lancets to draw blood for intermittent analysis, the
proposed sensor will assume a minimally invasive, tattoo-like form factor for
continuous monitoring of glucose concentration in body
fluids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Integrated photonic devices are uniquely poised for
in-vivo sensing, diagnostics, therapeutics, and stimulation functions, given
their small form factor, low power consumption, robustness, large multiplexing
capacity, as well as strong light-molecule/tissue interactions enabled by tight
optical confinement in these devices. Nevertheless, conventional photonic
integration is predominantly based on rigid semiconductor substrates, and their
mechanical stiffness makes the resulting devices inherently incompatible with
soft biological tissues. Further, while optical spectroscopy based on bench top
instruments has become the gold standard in analytical chemistry, integrated
spectroscopic sensors remain largely unexplored. This program aims to resolve
the challenges by combining flexible photonic integration and on-chip infrared
spectroscopic sensing technologies to pioneer a wearable photonic sensing system
on conformal plastic substrates. Specifically, a minimally invasive epidermal
sensor for continuous glucose monitoring will be demonstrated as a proof-of-
concept model platform. The two-fold intellectual merits of the program lie in
the unconventional multi-material photonic integration approach on conformal
substrates as well as the innovative spectroscopic sensor design. Photonic
integration on conformal substrates poses a diverse set of often mutually
conflicting requirements on the mechanical and optical properties of constituent
materials. In this program, a transformative multi-material, multi-functional
integration approach on flexible substrates will be pursued where each material
is seamlessly integrated into the process flow and strategically shaped and
positioned so as to make use of its advantageous properties while circumventing
its limitations. On the spectroscopic sensing front, miniaturization and
integration of spectrometers present a major technical barrier towards
spectroscopic sensor integration onto chip-scale platforms. Rather than
downscaling traditional spectrometers, the program will develop a novel sensor
design with significantly improved system simplicity, ruggedness,
reproducibility and specificity, enabling wearable sensing applications. The
scientific research will be tightly integrated with curriculum development,
undergraduate student training, and development of hands-on modules for optics
education. In addition to augmenting classroom education at both institutes, the
program will promote the free sharing and distribution of knowledge by
developing online courses through the MIT OpenCourseWare and edX initiatives.