* 1854214
* IRES Track I: US-CERN Summer Program on ATLAS Experiment of LHC at CERN for the California State University System
* O/D,OISE
* 03/15/2019,02/29/2024
* Yongsheng Gao, California State University-Fresno Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 02/29/2024
* USD 300,000.00

This project will provide international research experience for students from
the California State University (CSU) system through collaborative research
projects and educational experience on the ATLAS experiment of the Large Hadron
Collider (LHC) at the European Organization for Nuclear Research (CERN) in
Switzerland. This program will send 6 CSU students per year to work on ATLAS
research projects for ATLAS detector upgrades and incoming ATLAS Run-3 data
taking and physics. The physics potential of incoming Run-3 will be over 10
times greater than Run-1 during which the Higgs boson was discovered. The Higgs
discovery by ATLAS and CMS experiments of LHC in 2012 has captured the attention
and imagination of the public and students throughout the world. This
International Research Experiences for Students (IRES) project will support 18
students over three years working on ATLAS experiment of LHC at CERN. This
project is focused on the largest university system in the country with 23
campuses and a total student population of ~490,000. Because CSU has very large
minority and first-generation college student populations, student recruitment
in this project will attract underrepresented as well as female students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CSU students will validate the ATLAS Monte Carlo
simulations, improve ATLAS software packages, and work on searching for new
physics from ATLAS data. On ATLAS detector upgrades, the students will work on
the installation, operation, and data analysis of ATLAS pixel detector, and
improving software packages in monitoring various inner detector components. On
ATLAS Trigger and Data Acquisition (DAQ), the students will install and test
Fast Tracker (FTK) boards, improve and optimize FTK variable resolution
patterns, and conduct offline and online testing of FTK performance. The
students will also attend the renowned CERN Summer Student Lecture Series given
by top physicists from all over the world. Upon returning to the US, student
participants will give colloquia, seminars, and invited talks at CSU campuses,
high schools, and local communities about their ATLAS research work and the CERN
summer experience. Through the CSU Fresno PHYS 168S (?Physics Outreach?) course,
the ATLAS students in PHYS 168S will visit at least two new K-12 classrooms each
week to teach kinds about the CSU ATLAS and IRES programs and encourage them to
pursue science. These outreach efforts will reach very large number of schools,
their students and students? families in the Fresno and Central Valley
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.