* 1854114
* IRES Track I: Comparing the influence of economic incentives and land use patterns on the conservation of tropical forests and primates in Panama, Costa Rica, and Uganda
* O/D,OISE
* 03/15/2019,02/29/2024
* Michael Wasserman, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 02/29/2024
* USD 299,877.00

Biodiversity loss, climate variability, and pollution are major threats to
ecosystem functioning and quality of human life. Addressing these human-
environment interactions is particularly important for tropical forest
ecosystems as they contain approximately half of all living species, play an
important role in climate regulation, and filter pollutants from water and air.
Despite their importance, current policies are still largely ineffective as
indicated by continued significant tropical forest loss over the past several
decades. This NSF International Research Experience for Students award will
support U.S. student projects across forests in Panama, Costa Rica, and Uganda
to analyze how international variation in environmental policies influences land
use practices and how these practices affect conservation outcomes related to
forest condition and primate biology. By examining similar forests with
different environmental policies and different forests with similar
environmental policies, we will be able to evaluate the largescale effectiveness
of conservation incentives, such as payments for ecosystem services (PES) and
ecotourism, alongside the effects of agricultural practices linked to
deforestation, air and water pollution, and biodiversity loss. Through this
research program, underrepresented students in anthropology, human biology, and
the environmental sciences will gain international field research experience in
collaboration with the Organization for Tropical Studies and Makerere University
Biological Field Station. Students will work closely with local field assistants
and communities during their research, thus providing multiple opportunities for
cultural exchange. At the end of the 10-week program, students will present
their initial results to local communities and host country scholars at a public
forum and will be encouraged to communicate their final results through peer-
reviewed publication and presentations at professional conferences. An
additional end product associated with this program and utilized by the IRES
students will be a fully functioning laboratory capable of running immunoassays
for quantifying primate hormone levels in the field, thus transferring
scientific knowledge and infrastructure. Results from this research program will
provide important insight useful to the design of policies for sustaining both
biodiversity and human livelihoods. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tropical forests are
one of the world's most important ecosystems, containing at least half of all
species, regulating climate, purifying air and water, and providing resources
for local communities. Nonetheless, over the past few decades widespread
deforestation has significantly reduced the extent of tropical forests, leading
to declines in wildlife populations that depend on them through habitat loss and
fragmentation. Primate populations have been especially affected with more than
60% of all species considered vulnerable or endangered by the IUCN. Efforts to
preserve the remaining forests and threatened species dependent on them have
largely focused on creating protected areas, such as national parks. However,
citizens often rely heavily on natural resources for subsistence and
environmental laws are regularly breached, thus weakening the effectiveness of
protected areas. As a result, conservation policies have evolved from
exclusionary protected areas to strategies that focus on local communities by
providing economic and other incentives. Despite the increasing promotion of
community-based alternatives by both scholars and practitioners, little evidence
exists that they are any more effective than protected areas at maintaining
forest quality or sustaining primate populations. Therefore, this NSF IRES
research program has two main objectives: 1) To utilize international variation
in environmental policies that integrate conservation and development
objectives, such as payments for ecosystem services (PES) and ecotourism, for an
analysis of the effectiveness of conservation strategies for both protecting
tropical forests and their primates and maintaining human livelihoods; and 2) To
provide international field research experience to underrepresented students in
anthropology, human biology, and the environmental sciences. To meet these
objectives, 15 upper level undergraduate and early career graduate student
projects will examine the extent to which differing economic and participatory
incentives and agricultural practices influence conservation outcomes as
measured by on the ground data collected on forest condition (e.g., fragment
size, % canopy cover, biomass) and primate biology (i.e., physiology, behavior,
and population size) across forests in Panama, Costa Rica, and Uganda. At these
sites, students will survey primate populations using line transects, quantify
differences in primate behavior, measure primate fecal hormone levels with
immunoassays, conduct interviews and surveys of local landowners, government
officials and other stakeholders, and quantify forest characteristics using GIS
and field methods. Students will also examine the effects of these strategies on
local community livelihoods and how these effects influence local perception of
environmental policy. Results from this project will add significantly to the
knowledge of how economic and participatory incentives can affect conservation
decisions and outcomes. As a breakdown in socio-environmental systems will
negatively affect both humans and biodiversity, quantifying the effectiveness of
various environmental management strategies to maintain biodiversity and local
community livelihoods is necessary to ensure that these policies are actually
meeting their sustainability and conservation goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.