* 1854174
* IRES: Preparing U.S. Undergraduates for Global Chemistry Research with Training in Germany and Singapore
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Bradley Miller, American Chemical Society (ACS)
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 05/31/2024
* USD 381,474.00

This project is jointly funded by OISE and MPS (DMR and
OMA).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Undergraduate chemistry, chemical engineering and
materials science students face grueling curriculum requirements that hinder or
prohibit participation in valuable study abroad experiences. Participating in
this International Research Experiences for Students (IRES) program, selected
students will have the opportunity to sharpen their research skills in an
unfamiliar environment while developing the capacity to work effectively across
cultures. Significant literature has demonstrated the important role that
international education experiences play in strengthening the professional skill
set of the workforce, especially STEM practitioners. Building opportunities for
STEM students (especially those of underrepresented backgrounds) to engage in a
unique research experience, without disrupting their curriculum calendars,
allows the IRES participant to build cross-cultural communication skills, build
a global network, be exposed to new perspectives and techniques and a refreshed
knowledge base. As global scientific research collaboration increases, the
American Chemical Society IRES program will help prepare students for a global
research career which boosts competitiveness among the U.S. chemical workforce,
instills an interest in expanding his/her perspective and apply local solutions
to global challenges. ACS will select seven (7) qualified, diverse U.S.
undergraduates to spend time in Germany (in partnership with the German Academic
Exchange Service-DAAD) and three (3) at the National University of Singapore
(NUS). While fostering intellectual growth and maturity, the IRES experience is
intended to catalyze students' desire to continue their graduate studies;
deliver a substantial research experience; produce excellent scientific
publications; instill a respect for other cultures and science professionalism;
and provide an appreciation for the global scientific enterprise. &lt;br/&gt;On
a reciprocal basis, ACS will work to place students from Germany and Singapore,
at no cost to the hosting university or funding agency, in existing IRES/IREU
programs in the United States. This model also brings a global perspective and
network to domestic programs and allows those participants to learn from their
colleagues from other parts of the globe. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This IRES
program will prepare selected U.S. undergraduate students for advanced training
in chemistry and materials sciences labs at advanced institutes in Germany and
Singapore. Building upon a previous IRES program (2007-2016), this program
prepares students to engage in chemistry, chemical engineering and materials
science research in cross-cultural context. Students selected for the ACS IRES
program will receive training in professional topics such as manuscript
publishing, ethics in research, cross-cultural communication, science
communication, collaboration and more. The research experience, coupled with
professional skills training in an international context will increase the
global competitiveness of future chemistry practitioners. &lt;br/&gt;During the
research experience, seven students participating in the IRES program in Germany
will be placed in leading research labs through the German Academic Exchange
Service (DAAD). Three students will be placed in labs in the National University
of Singapore. Students will work with graduate students to contribute to
research projects, many resulting in publication or attribution in a leading
journal. Throughout the research experience, IRES students have regular check-in
sessions with ACS staff, including a PI visit. Students are expected to complete
a research report on their experience in the style of a Journal of the American
Chemical Society (JACS) manuscript (with feedback provided by editors) and
present their research findings (via oral presentation and abstract) and
experience at the spring ACS National Meeting. &lt;br/&gt;Selected IRES students
come from a diverse background and significant effort will be placed into
recruiting participants from underrepresented communities. To build a global
network among U.S. IREU/IRES programs, ACS will work with our partners from
Germany and Singapore to place (at no cost to the NSF) students from these
countries in existing domestic IRES/IREU programs. &lt;br/&gt;Student
researchers will explore a variety of technical topics touching on chemistry,
chemical engineering and materials science. Select proposed research topics
include: understanding the role of fermentation in food risk assessment,
influence of solid-state structural changes by cycloaddition reaction on
photophysical properties and understanding catalysts for the production of fuels
from the renewable sources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.