* 1854763
* Collaborative Research: Determining the Fundamental Cognitive Properties of Decision Making
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2023
* Mario Fific, Grand Valley State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 04/30/2023
* USD 147,646.00

Non-technical Description of the Project&lt;br/&gt;In nearly every decision a
person makes, they are required to combine multiple, sometimes conflicting
sources information. Thus, understanding how people use these multiple sources
of information is fundamental to understanding and predicting choices.
Established approaches within psychology allow examination these processes in
some situations. For example, to explore decision stages, a decision-maker may
be asked to describe her thought process when making a choice, and that
description is used to inform the researcher. In many situations, direct
information about the choice processes is not accessible. For example, a
decision maker may search her memory to find the information that could be used
for choosing between options. When memory search is fast, people rarely have
clear insight into how the memories were accessed and used. To allow for
investigating decisions based on multiple sources of information across the
widest range of situations, the principal investigators will integrate a
powerful methodology based on mathematical cognitive modelling with standard
decision-making research methodologies. The research will accomplish three
objectives: (1) to gain an important understanding how multiple sources of
information are combined during decision making, (2) conduct new empirical tests
of the fundamental process across different decision making tasks, and (3)
rigorously compare among the top decision making theories based on the new
empirical findings. These results will inform decision makers, allow assessment
of decision making efficiency, and enable better models of choice
behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;Over the years,
several decision-making models were proposed that can account for many of the
typical findings in human decision making, using both choice accuracy and
response time output measures. However, no clear agreement about the underlying
cognitive mechanism has been reached. These models can often be distinguished by
strong implications about the processes that lead to a decision. Specifically,
these models imply (a) how information is searched for, (b) when this
information search is stopped, and (c) how the acquired information is
integrated to reach the decision. Nonetheless, the disagreement remains. In part
this is due to model mimicking: Without appropriate experimental design and
analysis, different theories can make equivalent predictions. For example,
inferences based on traditional mean response time (RT) analysis are limited due
to model mimicking, as different decision-making models can imply exactly the
same mean response time patterns. To overcome this limitation, we will integrate
the powerful systems factorial technology (SFT) with traditional decision-making
methods. SFT has been successfully applied in a wide range of perceptual and
cognitive tasks to identify processing order, stopping rule and process
dependency (a, b, and c from above), but has only been applied to decision
making in very limited way. Our research will link SFT to the classical methods
in judgment and decision making to improve our understanding of the cognitive
processes underlying decision making. Our project will also contribute to
improving the professional academic development of undergraduate and graduate
students at two state universities that traditionally have fewer research
opportunities for students. All aspects of this research project, from
methodology to theoretical development, will be communicated at national and
international professional Furthermore, the research will be submitted for
publication in high-quality, peer-reviewed journals. One of the aims of the
proposed research is to disseminate the findings to a broader audience through
our respective university press offices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.