* 1854767
* Belmont Forum Collaborative Research: An inclusive approach to assessing integrative scenarios and visions for protected area management
* GEO,RISE
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2023
* Carena van Riper, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 03/31/2023
* USD 180,001.00

Innovative research on the complex interaction of socio-economic and global
environmental trends on biodiversity and ecosystem services is needed to help
develop more informative scenarios for addressing environmental and human
development challenges. To overcome these challenges coupled natural-human
systems approaches and analyses are needed. These provide improved scenarios of
biodiversity and ecosystem services that couple the outputs of direct and
indirect drivers such as land use, invasive species, overexploitation,
biodiversity, environmental change, and pollution. The resulting models provide
a methodological state-of-the art that results in more accurate quantitative
assessments, better land use, and more effective ecosystem services. Employing
this methodology, this research project, which is an international coalition
between scientists in the US and six European nations, seeks to establish a
process that accounts for multiple viewpoints in decision-making on the future
of conservation and resource management using sites in the US, Sweden, Spain,
and the Netherlands as case studies, with the US site consisting of the Denali
National Park and Preserve in Alaska. Selected sites were chosen because
protected wilderness areas designations in the US and Europe are among the most
ambitious in the world, yet these areas face unprecedented threats from changing
socio-ecological dynamics and diverging societal visions for conservation.
Common challenges for protected wilderness areas include inconsistent priorities
between local and national governments, a need to expand stakeholder involvement
in conservation initiatives, and an imbalance between biodiversity conservation
goals and economic objectives. Thus, over a three-year period this research will
develop processes and forums that link local, national, US, and European policy
makers with researchers, civil society members, and the private sector to foster
dialogue that seeks to accommodate multiple visions for biodiversity
conservation. The project will construct strategies that span interest groups
and enable protected area management agencies to develop policy that is
responsive to community needs and preferences for future growth using
participatory scenario modelling, multi-narrative platforms, knowledge co-
creation, and capacity building through local and inter-site knowledge
alliances. Research results will deliver useful means and models for advancing
policy, developing communities of practice, and contribute to the advancement of
scientific literature in biodiversity and social science conservation. The
Program found the broader impacts of the work to be strong. These include
international collaboration with scientists from six nations (Germany, Spain,
the Netherlands, Sweden, the UK, and Switzerland), improving the interaction
between local communities; the private sector; conservation groups; and
government such that common visions and sustainable policies can be envisioned
and enacted to protect wilderness areas. The project also provides training of a
postdoctoral researcher in international transdisciplinary conservation
work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports US researchers participating in a
project competitively selected by a coalition of 26 funding agencies from 23
countries through the Belmont Forum call for proposals on "Scenarios of
Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services". The call was a multilateral initiative
designed to support research projects that contribute to the development of
scenarios, models, and decision-support tools for understanding and solving
critical issues facing our planet. The goal of the competition was to improve
and apply participatory scenario methods to enhance research relevance and its
acceptance and to address gaps in methods for modelling impact drivers and
policy interventions. It was also to develop and communicate levels of
uncertainty associated with the models, to improve data accessibility and fill
gaps in knowledge. Using this methodology, this research project involves seven
integrated work packages that are designed to engage and learn from various
stakeholders and local communities associated with protected wilderness areas to
help them collectively identify ways to balance social, ecological, and economic
well-being. This approach involves novel strategies for communicating and
engaging with inter-site and local site knowledge alliances as well as
mobilizing and synthesizing multiple types of knowledge and ways of engaging
with and better knowing the benefits and resources of protected areas. A model
for inclusive conservation will be developed through site-based, social-
ecological inventories, systematic scientific literature reviews, and oral
histories of diverse stakeholders including those of environmental managers,
indigenous peoples, non-native subsistence users, industry, local businesses,
local government, and educators. The hands-on tool, STREAMLINE, will be used to
examine the consequences of different scenarios and visions for protected areas
that take into account all perspectives. Results will be quantified and
visualized in easy-to-use, visually appealing, graphical formats. The work will
also include development of experiments to determine how, why, and to what
extent values of different stakeholders shift over time. This will be achieved
using participatory mapping methods (e.g., Maptionnaire) and the translation of
stakeholder visions into potential management strategies that incorporate
estimates of uncertainty. An additional goal of the project is to establish
workable governance models using social network analysis, characterizing power
relationships, and providing for co-creation of knowledge which is essential for
viable conservation approaches. Research results will be broadly disseminated to
stakeholders and the public via outlets such as factsheets, policy briefs,
webinars, film, and festivals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.