* 1854321
* CPS: Synergy: Collaborative Research: Control of Vehicular Traffic Flow via Low Density Autonomous Vehicles
* CSE,CNS
* 03/19/2018,12/31/2018
* Daniel Work, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 12/31/2018
* USD 57,603.00

In the next few decades, autonomous vehicles will become an integral part of the
traffic flow on highways. However, they will constitute only a small fraction of
all vehicles on the road. This research develops technologies to employ
autonomous vehicles already in the stream to improve traffic flow of human-
controlled vehicles. The goal is to mitigate undesirable jamming, traffic waves,
and to ultimately reduce the fuel consumption. Contemporary control of traffic
flow, such as ramp metering and variable speed limits, is largely limited to
local and highly aggregate approaches. This research represents a step towards
global control of traffic using a few autonomous vehicles, and it provides the
mathematical, computational, and engineering structure to address and employ
these new connections. Even if autonomous vehicles can provide only a small
percentage reduction in fuel consumption, this will have a tremendous economic
and environmental impact due to the heavy dependence of the transportation
system on non-renewable fuels. The project is highly collaborative and
interdisciplinary, involving personnel from different disciplines in engineering
and mathematics. It includes the training of PhD students and a postdoctoral
researcher, and outreach activities to disseminate traffic research to the
broader public.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project develops new models,
computational methods, software tools, and engineering solutions to employ
autonomous vehicles to detect and mitigate traffic events that adversely affect
fuel consumption and congestion. The approach is to combine the data measured by
autonomous vehicles in the traffic flow, as well as other traffic data, with
appropriate macroscopic traffic models to detect and predict congestion trends
and events. Based on this information, the loop is closed by carefully following
prescribed velocity controllers that are demonstrated to reduce congestion.
These controllers require detection and response times that are beyond the limit
of a human's ability. The choice of the best control strategy is determined via
optimization approaches applied to the multiscale traffic model and suitable
fuel consumption estimation. The communication between the autonomous vehicles,
combined with the computational and control tasks on each individual vehicle,
require a cyber-physical approach to the problem. This research considers new
types of traffic models (micro-macro models, network approaches for higher-order
models), new control algorithms for traffic flow regulation, and new sensing and
control paradigms that are enabled by a small number of controllable systems
available in a flow.