* 1854513
* CDS&amp;E-MSS: Computational Developments of Power Series Methods to Solve Polynomial Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Jan Verschelde, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 07/31/2024
* USD 236,000.00

Polynomial systems occur in many mathematical models. For example, the design of
a robot arm requires the solutions of a system of polynomial equations, as those
solutions determine the design parameters of the robot arm, for it to reach
desired positions. The proposed research project develops algorithms and
software to solve polynomial systems more efficiently and accurately. Massively
parallel algorithms on graphics processing units (GPUs) will be capable of
solving large polynomial systems. A web server at www.phcpack.org will give
anyone via the internet access to the developed software, the free and open
source package PHCpack and its scripting interface phcpy. The award will provide
support graduate student training through research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research addresses several computational challenges occurring in the
exploitation of the sparse structure when solving a polynomial system. The
tropical prevariety provides a collection of polyhedral cones of pretropisms,
which are candidates leading forms of Puiseux series of positive dimensional
solution sets of the polynomial system. As faces of cones may correspond to
higher dimensional solution sets, the exploration of the tropical prevariety
will proceed by generalized cascade homotopies which move from higher to lower
dimensional solutions. The second computational challenge concerns the
robustness of numerical algorithms to track solution paths defined by polynomial
homotopies. Using rational approximations based on power series developments,
singularities near a solution path are detected which allows to reduce the step
size to avoid divergence from the solution path. Following the theory of
analytic continuation, rational approximations are very effective tools to
deduce information about singularities of the solution paths as function of the
continuation parameter in the homotopy. The third challenge concerns the
integration of pipelining, multithreading, and GPU acceleration into the solver,
as needed to solve large problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.