* 1854655
* Bayesian and Regularization Methods for Spatial Homogeneity Pursuit with Large Datasets
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Huiyan Sang, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 07/31/2023
* USD 226,405.00

Spatial data arises from the research of diverse disciplines such as
agricultural, geological, economic and social sciences. In many application
problems, practitioners are interested in studying the associations between
spatial responses and a set of explanatory variables. With the increasing
availability of big spatial data, there is a great need to investigate the
spatially varying patterns in such associations. In particular, detecting
clustering patterns in spatial relations is desired since it allows
practitioners to have straightforward interpretations of local associations. In
this project, the PI will develop new statistical models and efficient
computation algorithms for spatial homogeneity pursuit with both strong
theoretical flavor and realistic practical considerations. The overall approach
is interdisciplinary in nature. It integrates the advancements in statistics,
machine learning, computation, and geosciences.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the PI will consider a varying
coefficient regression model to study the clustered relationship between
responses and covariates. In particular, tree-based regularization methods will
be developed to encourage spatial homogeneity between regression coefficients at
neighboring locations. The PI will design both penalized optimizations and
Bayesian MCMC algorithms to implement the proposed models. The performance of
the proposed methods will be tested with simulation studies and applied to real-
life applications. The PI will also study theoretical properties concerning the
behavior of the regularization methods by combining the approximation theory of
piecewise constant functions, combinatorial and algebraic graph theory, and high
dimensional asymptotic theories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.