* 1854168
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Science in Court: An analysis of selected environmental litigation in the US from 1990 to 2018
* SBE,SMA
* 04/01/2019,12/31/2020
* Peter Linquiti, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Joshua Trapani
* 12/31/2020
* USD 31,514.00

Doctoral Dissertation Research: Science in Court: An analysis of selected
environmental litigation in the US from 1990 to 2018&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project evaluates how scientific methods and findings have been incorporated in
environmental litigation in the United States between 1990 and 2018. The project
focuses on three, key areas: 1) the types of scientific evidence used in
litigation and how that evidence influences judicial decisions; 2) the factors
that lead litigants to seek scientific information for use in the courtroom, as
well as the factors that motivate scientists to provide that information; and 3)
how uncertainties in environmental science are framed and addressed in legal
disputes. This project has the potential to transform our understanding of how
science is introduced, discussed, framed, and used in the judicial branch and,
more broadly, in governmental policymaking. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will use both qualitative and quantitative methods to study about 400 lawsuits
that have addressed environmental matters between 1990 and 2018. There will be a
systematic review of the briefs and decisions from these cases, complemented by
in-depth interviews with a sample of individuals who participated in the cases.
The study will link the defining factors of the cases (e.g., year, type of
litigants, location, legal issue, scientific issue, and judicial decision) to
the outcomes of interest. Doing so will facilitate an investigation of how
litigants and the courts are reacting to scientific advances and to efforts by
scientists to communicate their work in more accessible ways to nonscientific
audiences. By linking the characteristics of the scientific evidence to the
outcomes of cases, the research permits future litigants to better understand
how scientific information can be more effectively incorporated in legal
reasoning and argumentation. In turn, courts' decisions may reflect a stronger
link between science and legal reasoning. Furthermore, the results of this
research can be utilized by funding agencies to better support research in this
area. By characterizing the demand for and supply of environmental science in
the courtroom, this project bridges the gaps between science, law, and public
policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.