* 1854350
* Large Deviations and Driven Processes for Stochastic Models of Gene Expression and Its Regulation
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Rahul Kulkarni, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Standard Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 08/31/2024
* USD 309,998.00

This project will develop mathematics to predict and characterize rare, random
events affecting gene expression in a population of cells. The survival and
evolution of cell populations under stress often depends on a small fraction of
outlier cells. For example, drug exposure leads to cell death for most cancer
cells in a tumor, but a small fraction survive and lead to development of drug
resistance. Recent research shows that such cellular differences are driven by
rare events during gene expression, and there is a need to develop quantitative
models of rare events in stochastic descriptions of gene expression. This
project, supported jointly by the Divisions of Mathematical Sciences and
Molecular and Cellular Biology, will develop and apply approaches from non-
equilibrium statistical mechanics and large deviation theory to create a
framework for rare events in gene expression and its regulation in diverse cell
processes. The theory will address current research questions: (1) How do cell
regulatory mechanisms control probability of rare events in gene expression? (2)
How can one characterize gene expression conditional on rare event occurrences?
(3) Can control mechanisms be determined to realize desirable rare events? The
answers will have applications ranging from synthetic biology to understanding
latency in HIV-1 infections. Graduate and undergraduate students will be
mentored in interdisciplinary research on biological systems, and research
activities will be effectively integrated with teaching at graduate and
undergraduate levels. The integrated research, teaching and outreach activities
will prepare future scientists to apply stochastic mathematics to molecular
biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rare events which lead to phenotypic transitions
are a recurring theme in current biological research. In several cases
phenotypic switching is driven by the intrinsic stochasticity of gene
expression. Correspondingly, there is a need to develop a theoretical framework
for analyzing rare events in stochastic models of gene expression. Recent
developments in non-equilibrium statistical mechanics, using large deviation
theory, have led to a framework for analyzing Markovian processes conditioned on
rare events and for representing such processes by conditioning-free driven
processes. The goal of this project is to apply and further develop this
theoretical framework to quantitatively characterize large deviations in
stochastic models of gene expression and its regulation. The specific aims will
focus on developing analytical and computational approaches for characterizing
large deviations in general models of gene expression with a) promoter-based
regulation, b) post-transcriptional regulation and c) feedback regulation. This
research will lead to quantitative insights into how cellular regulatory
mechanisms impact rare event probabilities which can be used to design optimal
control mechanisms for realization of desired rare events. A particular focus
will be modeling latency in HIV-1 viral infections. The analysis requires tools
and approaches from physics and applied mathematics which will be integrated
with teaching efforts to effectively train students and future scientists
focusing on interdisciplinary research in the life
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.