* 1854966
* PREEVENTS Track 2: Collaborative Research: Multi-scale processes impacting the predictability of severe convective weather events
* GEO,RISE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Morris Weisman, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Continuing Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,366,908.00

Extreme weather events (EWEs) that threaten life and property can occur across a
variety of time and space regimes. On the largest scales, persistent weather
patterns produce clustered convective weather events, extended drought, and
excessive precipitation. On regional scales, EWEs develop when intense
precipitation systems give rise to tornadoes, hail, straight-line winds, and
flash flooding. This research seeks to improve short- and long-range predictions
of EWEs associated with convective storms and to better understand their
predictability limits. The objectives of the project are to 1) develop
understanding of the multi-scale physical processes that inhibit skillful local
hazard prediction, and 2) improve the usefulness of numerical model forecasts of
EWEs by better representing forecast uncertainty. The project has societal value
due to its focus on providing better predictions to protect the public from
severe weather hazards. The PIs conduct a series of meetings to help operational
forecasters and emergency managers understand their research results. The
meetings also allow forecasters and emergency managers to show the PIs how they
incorporate forecast guidance and uncertainty information into their decision
process, thereby promoting a constructive two-way dialogue. The project also
provides education and training to two graduate students and a postdoctoral
research associate.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The research is conducted in three
phases. Phase I identifies multi-day severe weather episodes, and the chain of
processes leading to the development of favorable environmental conditions for
convective outbreaks across the central and eastern United States. Tools
including object-based verification, time-averaged physics tendency diagnostics,
and ensemble sensitivity analysis are used to conduct a process-based
investigation of high-impact weather events. Phase II uses the Model for
Prediction Across Scales to produce a suite of convection-permitting ensemble
predictions of convective EWEs. Diagnostics developed in Phase I are then used
to understand how uncertainty in physical processes leads to uncertainty in the
evolution of EWE precursors and their impact on downstream pre-convective
environment. Phase III investigates the sensitivity of physical process
representation to model resolution and cumulus parameterization. The research
looks specifically at how simplifications in physical process representation
limit predictive skill for downstream severe weather.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.