* 1854049
* IRES Track I: U.S.-Czech Student Research Experience on Software Test Automation and Quality Assurance
* O/D,OISE
* 03/15/2019,08/31/2023
* Tomas Cerny, Baylor University
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 08/31/2023
* USD 288,282.00

This IRES project will provide six U.S. undergraduate students with an eight-
week summer research experience every year for three years in Brno, Czech
Republic. The research experience will enable the students to gain new knowledge
and skills related to testing, quality assurance, and code-inspection of
distributed software systems used for large enterprises. The students will be
mentored by internationally-renowned researchers in the field. The students?
projects in the field of testing and quality assurance will be led by
researchers from the Czech Technical University and experts from Red Hat, the
world's leading provider of open-source enterprise software solutions. The
student research and experiments will be performed at the Software Testing
IntelLigent Lab at the Czech Technical University in Prague and at the Red Hat
research facility located in Brno, Czech Republic. Students will gain complete
knowledge of the test development cycle, modern testing toolkits, production-
level development, and research skills. Students will research novel code-
inspection techniques, further enabling knowledge in this field and boosting the
capabilities of the U.S. software industry. The remote sites selected for the
research experiences will provide students with a unique opportunity to work
with an internationally-renowned research team that has extensive expertise in
model-based testing. These experiences will enable the participating students to
start their research or academic careers. The students will bring their new
expertise and skills back to the U.S., leading to improved economic
competitiveness in the field of distributed software systems, quality assurance
and stronger partnerships between academia and
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide computer science
students with the opportunity to research novel code-inspection mechanisms for
extracting module information and ensuring the proper functioning and
interaction between all modules in a distributed software system. The research
collaboration will involve Baylor University, the Czech Technical University in
Prague, and industry partner Red Hat. Collaborators from the Czech Technical
University in Prague specialize in test automation, experimental model-based
testing, coverage optimization algorithms, and verification models. Red Hat is
the market leader in open-source middleware and enterprise technologies, with
unmatched expertise in production-level quality assurance and testing practice.
Baylor University collaborators specialize in code inspection and code
transformations. Interaction and collaboration of these three partnering groups
will facilitate knowledge exchange and improvements of test automation and
quality assurance of distributed systems. Student researchers will use existing
open-source code-inspection tools and help develop and apply new ones. This IRES
project will advance knowledge of code-inspection techniques to improve module
testing and quality assurance processes in distributed systems. It will also
help with the automation of model construction for model-based testing
approaches that will lead to improved test generation, test coverage validation,
verification of module information compliance, and more in this field. Student's
individual open-source projects created during their research experience will
directly contribute to improved testing and quality assurance in distributed
software systems. The results will, in the end, help reduce efforts and costs
related to testing and improve quality assurance of future software products,
leading to fewer defects and bugs in products before customer
release.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.