* 1854034
* IRES Track I: Tephritid fruit fly Multidisciplinary Australian Research Collaboration for Biosecurity
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Matthew Siderhurst, Eastern Mennonite University
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 03/31/2024
* USD 298,707.00

Tephritid fruit fly Multidisciplinary Australian Research Collaboration for
Biosecurity (T-MARC-BIO), a Track I IRES project at Eastern Mennonite University
(EMU), will engage 18 undergraduate students from the state of Virginia to gain
multidisciplinary research experience in Australia that will advance basic
science and address internationally significant challenges in ensuring
biosecurity and a robust global food supply chain. Students will be recruited
from EMU and neighboring institutions to conduct research on fruit flies
(Tephritidae), which are among the most damaging horticultural insect pests
worldwide, constituting pest management issues, trade barriers, and invasion
threats for Australia, the U.S., and throughout the tropics and subtropics. The
results of this research will have an impact on integrated pest management,
which is a critical component of sustainable agro-ecological systems in the U.S.
and worldwide. With good cause, the public is becoming increasingly concerned
about the health and environmental impacts of synthetic pesticides, and their
use is becoming highly restricted. The T-MARC-BIO program will add to the
toolkit of effective, long-term strategies for both pest control and monitoring
of invasive species, while minimizing the impacts of pesticides on human and
environmental health. American students will gain valuable research experience
through conducting projects in the multidisciplinary settings in Australia, as
well as the life-changing learning, interpersonal skills, empathy, and global
awareness that come from living and working in a foreign country. T-MARC-BIO
will contribute to developing a diverse, globally engaged scientific workforce
pipeline by recruiting highly qualified female, low-income, and minority
students, who are underrepresented in the sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through
T-MARC-BIO, students will (1) participate in a semester-long pre-travel research
preparation and cross-cultural program, (2) conduct rigorous individual research
projects on tephritid fruit flies during a seven-week period in Australia, (3)
immerse themselves in Australian culture as they participate in research fields
with global interest and impact, and (4) communicate their research through
scientific journals and presentations, and in the local community. The U.S. and
Australia make significant research investments to both enhance control of
existing pest fly populations and improve interdiction of invasive flies
entering the respective countries. The results of T-MARC-BIO student-assisted
research will advance knowledge in three areas: tephritid fruit fly physiology
and behavior, organic analysis and synthesis of fruit fly lures, and field
ecology and management techniques. Collectively, these results will address gaps
in understanding of how fruit flies metabolize secondary plant compounds, what
they smell and what attracts them, how they move in the environment, and how to
develop more effective control techniques, such as attractant fruit fly lures.
Evaluation findings about the T-MARC-BIO project will be applicable to small
(two- and four-year) colleges, their administrators, and STEM faculty. T-MARC-
BIO students will share the benefits of enriched, multidisciplinary academic
research training and participating in publishable research that advances STEM
fields, as well as basic and applied science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.