* 1854452
* Collaborative Research: From Surface Dynamics to Strata: Quantifying the Signals of Surface Processes in Space and Time
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2019,10/31/2023
* Arvind Singh, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Continuing Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 10/31/2023
* USD 174,333.00

River deltas are complex landforms which transport water and sediment from
continents to oceans. They are extremely sensitive to environmental changes,
e.g. sea-level rise, sediment and water supply, and therefore communities that
rely on the resources of these dynamic and sensitive landscapes are at risk. The
past dynamics of deltas are partially preserved in their sedimentary records,
and these records represent valuable templates for testing predictive models of
future change. To understand these systems, the researchers propose to create a
predictive framework that enables them to relate the arrangement of channels and
floodplains on the surface of deltas to the record of past dynamics preserved in
their sediments. Much like river deltas, the earth science field also needs to
be responsive to changing demographics in the scientific community through
strategic distribution of resources and opportunities. This project provides
support for underrepresented minority lead scientists, early career
investigators, and inclusive research experiences for students, allowing the
researchers to leverage the knowledge and experience that comes from a diverse
research team. The framework of support proposed here could be a valuable
template for creating a more diverse and inclusive scientific community,
particularly in earth science, which continues to have the lowest (9%) rates of
ethnic and racial diversity of all other STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Records of past environmental states contained
within the sedimentary deposits of river deltas, while amongst the most complete
on Earth, are extremely challenging to decipher. The premise of the proposed
research is that the sedimentary record of deltaic systems is mediated by a
combination of their autogenic dynamics (e.g. avulsion and lateral migration
rates) and allogenic forcings (e.g. climate, tectonics, sea level). The
researchers propose to develop an integrated statistical framework to
characterize deltaic transport systems and their sedimentary records across a
range of spatial and temporal scales. To construct this framework, they will
iterate between data from physical and numerical experiments, and field data-
sets, providing quantitative constraints on scale-dependent dynamics and their
contribution to filtering signals stored in the subsurface sedimentary record.
This information is crucial for (1) developing and constraining delta evolution
models, (2) inferring paleo-environmental conditions from the stratigraphic
record, and (3) aiding the management of natural resources (e.g. coastal
aquifers, hydrocarbon reservoirs, etc.) by improving predictions of subsurface
reservoir properties over a range of scales. This project is jointly funded by
the Geomorphology and Land-Use Dynamics Program and the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.