* 1854952
* PREEVENTS Track 2: Fire Spread at the Wildland-Urban Interface (WUI) Modeling and Data Assimilation for Prediction and Risk assessment (WUI MAPR)
* GEO,RISE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Kayo Ide, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,377,742.00

Large wildland fires threaten communities at the margins of wildlands and the
urban environment. For example, the Northern California wildland fires in
October 2017 destroyed over 8900 structures and killed 44 civilians with
projected losses exceeding $9.4 billion. The rate of destruction from these
types of fires has increased over the last decade. The investigators will use
numerical models to simulate the spread of wildland fires into communities. They
will test these models using data from the National Institute for Standards and
Technology (NIST) and the California Department of Forest and Fire Protection
(CalFIRE). The findings will be shared with the research community, federal
incident managers, local community planners, and the public. The project will
encourage people to engage in wildland fire research through outreach events and
undergraduate research opportunities. The investigators will promote
international collaboration by presenting their results at international
meetings, such as the European Geophysical Union (EGU), the International
Symposium on Combustion (Adelaide, Australia, 2020) and International Symposium
on Fire Safety Science (Waterloo, Canada, 2020).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will model brands or embers and how they contribute to the spread of
fires at the Wildland-Urban Interface. This is a challenging research problem
because there are different fuels, different types of brands, winds, and the
pile up of brands in specific locations. The research plan is to modify an
existing stochastic wildland fire model (FIREFLY) using information synthesized
from the recent literature. The investigators will examine observational data of
fire perimeters and observed fire spread, and use these observations to validate
model improvements. The improved predictive capability of the FIREFLY model
could be useful in society for planning and emergency response during real fire
events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.