* 1854133
* IRES Track 1: Envisioning the Water, Electricity, and Sanitation Utilities of the Future through a US-Kenya Collaboration
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Emily Kumpel, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 03/31/2024
* USD 299,993.00

This International Research Experience for Students (IRES) project will engage a
diverse group of US students on addressing the challenges faced by the water,
sanitation, and electricity utilities of the future. In cities and towns in low-
and middle-income countries, water, sanitation, and electricity services are
provided through a patchwork of options: water may be provided only a few times
a week through pipes, while houses use groundwater in the interim; electricity
may be delivered through unreliable grids combined with decentralized solar home
systems. At the same time, utilities in high-income countries are confronting
changes in their industries: water and electricity utilities need to generate
revenue while also encouraging conservation; wastewater facilities are
transitioning from treatment and disposal to recovery of energy and nutrients.
This presents an exciting opportunity to reimagine the future of these
utilities. The forefront of innovation is occurring in low-income but rapidly
developing cities like Nairobi, Kenya, which are open to new ideas given their
more limited previous investments in centralized infrastructure.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The IRES project will engage seventeen students over the
course of three years to spend 10-12 weeks working alongside collaborators in
Nairobi, Kenya, including researchers from the University of Nairobi and
Strathmore University. The research focuses on addressing the common challenges
faced by water, electricity, and sanitation utilities in rapidly changing
cities. Example projects include: designing a sensing system for electric
vehicles to provide grid balancing in Kenya; comparing the environmental and
human health impacts of neighborhood- and city-wide human waste management
options; improving water supply operations and planning; and quantifying the
flexibility of industrial electricity consumption in Kenya. Students will be
recruited from multiple disciplines, with a focus on ensuring participation by
students traditionally underrepresented in STEM. To prepare for the summer spent
in Kenya, students will enroll in a one-credit course. Projects will be designed
such that students have clear objectives and can accomplish data collection and
analysis within the given timespan, and integrate their project into their
overall student experience. Students will also have the opportunity for
professional development, including engaging with industries and government in
Kenya and participating in a one-week workshop on writing and data presentation.
The result will be a cohort of US students equipped with the ideas, skills, and
motivation to improve the service delivery of the water, sanitation, and
electricity utilities of the future and function as members of global
workforces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.