* 1854282
* IRES Track I: The origins of magnetite-pipes in the Bushveld Complex, South Africa and their strategic-mineral resources
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Callum Hetherington, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 08/31/2024
* USD 299,997.00

The project will recruit three cohorts of students from Texas Tech University
(TTU) to participate in an International Research Experience for Students (IRES)
studying the origins and development of magnetite-pipe structures in the eastern
limb of the Bushveld Complex, South Africa. Participant cohorts will include
students with media and communication training who will document the research
experience via real-time social-media platforms, and collate media materials to
produce short documentaries of the IRES experience. The students will pursue
Geoscience-centric research documenting the occurrence of the pipe-like
structures, and apply laboratory techniques to understand their composition,
physical properties and origins. The pipe-structures contain significant
abundances of magnetite, an important iron-ore resource, and may also contain
economically significant abundances of phosphor, vanadium titanium and rare
elements such as zirconium, niobium and tantalum. The students will develop
research and communication-skills in describing and analyzing these important
mineral and metal resources that are critical to economic priorities in the
high-tech, defense and telecommunication industries. Participants will also have
opportunities to visit mining locations to learn about the extraction and
processing of these strategic resources. A parallel research stream will seek to
address why Study Abroad Program participation rates by Hispanic students are
significantly lower compared to institutional enrollment demographics. Using
student produced media, customized communication strategies that appeal to
different student populations at TTU will be used to develop models for
broadening participation in Study Abroad Programs. Through collaboration with
South African researchers and students the program will foster exchange of
knowledge, perspectives, cultural experiences and raise awareness of global-
scale challenges in mineral resource exploration, exploitation and supply-chains
in U.S. students. The Media &amp; Communication products will be available to
the TTU Office of International Affairs for promotion and recruitment purposes.
More broadly, the materials will be used by the institution to promote the
global nature of a Texas Tech education under the ?Bear our Banners Far and Wide
? Communication in a Global Environment? Quality Enhancement Plan. Participants
will receive an array of value-added educational and professional development
opportunities (communication skills, leadership, cultural awareness) that will
promote and advance their preparation for entering the work-
place.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Magnetite-ilmenite-apatite assemblages that are
enriched in iron-titanium-phosphor (Fe-Ti-P) are found in a variety of
localities worldwide. Some deposits contain uncommonly high abundances of
titanium (Ti) and vanadium (V) and may be exploited for these more valuable
resources, which are increasingly sought after for applications in the energy,
electronics and high-technology sectors. The Bushveld Complex contains perhaps
as much as 90% of the world?s proven V2O5 resources, significant proportions of
which are concentrated in layers and pipe-like structures dominated by
magnetite. Despite their economic potential the pipes are little studied
features that have an unknown distribution, occurrence and volume, poorly
constrained relationships with the larger Bushveld Complex and the few
descriptions of their petrology have disagreed on their petrogenetic origin. A
parallel media and communication research-stream will inform strategies for the
recruitment of more diverse student cohorts to STEM and Study Abroad programs.
Building participant cohorts from different disciplines will enable perceptions
held by STEM and non-STEM students about other fields of study to be examined
and strategies to promote inter-disciplinary awareness on complex global
structures, such as the strategic-mineral industry, will be examined. The
longer-term goal will be to foster familiarization with scientific research
methods among participants, particularly from under-represented communities, who
are considering applying to graduate programs. Inclusion of the IRES program on
R?sum?s will strengthen graduate program application packages increasing their
competitiveness for funded offers of admission, which is recognized to be an
important consideration for under-represented and first-generation college
students considering graduate school. The program will also promote success of
participants in graduate research by providing a level of preparedness to
counter common challenges faced with students from such cohorts (e.g. imposter
syndrome, sense of belonging and place, integration into a research-intensive
Department).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.