* 1854945
* PREEVENTS Track 2: Collaborative Research: Flash droughts: process, prediction, and the central role of vegetation in their evolution.
* GEO,RISE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Trevor Keenan, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 06/30/2024
* USD 305,321.00

Drought is often thought of as a creeping disaster; one that emerges slowly over
time. In contrast, "flash droughts" intensify dramatically in just a few weeks.
A number of these events have struck the United States in recent years, leading
to significant and unexpected damage to agriculture and the economy. Flash
droughts are poorly represented in current forecast systems, hindering drought
preparedness. This project is motivated by the need to advance understanding of
flash droughts in order to improve our ability to predict them. To do this, we
will focus on the critical role that plants play in the development of a flash
drought. New satellite technologies and field measurement methods make it
possible to detect water stress in plants weeks before that stress can be seen
by eye. When plant stress increases rapidly there is a high risk of flash
drought. Using this understanding, we will produce flash drought definitions and
detection systems that cover the entire contiguous United States. We will then
categorize flash droughts according to the ways in which weather and vegetation
interact to cause the drought. These interactions can be very different for
different regions or land uses, so identifying categories is an important step
for improving prediction. Using these categories, we will apply recently
developed statistical methods to combine plant stress observations with weather
forecasts to predict flash drought risk from two weeks to three months in
advance. Predictions at these time scales can inform planting decisions and
relief efforts. Finally, highly damaging flash droughts will be selected for
detailed study using advanced weather models, in order to understand how land
management and climate contribute to particularly severe
events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will advance flash drought
understanding and forecasting by targeting three known characteristics: (1)
observations of vegetation and soil moisture can provide early indications of
flash drought risk at significant lead times; (2) evaporative demand is a
leading driver of flash drought onset, and it is amenable to skillful
subseasonal-to-seasonal (S2S) forecasts; (3) vegetation plays a central role in
flash drought development via soil moisture and turbulent heat fluxes. To
leverage these features for prediction, we propose a new framework for defining
flash droughts based on the understanding that a rapid increase in vegetation
stress is the core defining flash drought characteristic. This framework makes
use of advanced satellite and ground observations. We will classify historic
flash drought events across the Contiguous United States on the basis of
meteorological, hydrological, and ecological factors, allowing us to distinguish
different types of event that have distinct processes and predictability
characteristics. This classification will support probabilistic statistical and
machine learning forecast models that combine information from recently
developed observation datasets and global S2S forecasting systems. Analysis of
drought classes and predictability will, in turn, be used to select cases for
detailed dynamically-based simulation studies that isolate the role of
vegetation and its contribution to predictability. Finally, the simulation
infrastructure established during the project will be used to examine climate
and land cover sensitivities of flash droughts, contributing to projections of
future flash drought risk and assessment of land management options. Taken
together, these activities will bring new tools to flash drought prediction,
contribute to dynamically-based simulation of drought, and place both
understanding and prediction of these extreme events into the broader context of
climate trends and the terrestrial carbon balance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.