* 1854760
* Collaborative Research:  PREEVENTS Track 2:  Quantifying the Risk of Extreme Solar Eruptions (Quest)
* GEO,RISE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Xudong Sun, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Mangala Sharma
* 07/31/2024
* USD 304,339.00

Solar activity is the primary driver of severe space weather at Earth. The
potentially most dangerous events are eruptive X-class flares/Coronal Mass
Ejections (CME) that can cause major geomagnetic storms and hazardous solar
energetic particles. The 1859 "Carrington" event, if it were to happen in the
present day, would cause significant damage to our technological infrastructure.
Extreme solar eruptions of similar magnitude to the Carrington event have
occurred in the space age, but fortunately were not primarily Earth directed.
Observations of other stars, and glimpses into our past using measurements of
cosmogenic radioactive nuclides, suggest that even more violent eruptions may be
possible. The driver for all of these events is magnetic energy that is stored
in powerful solar active region magnetic fields and then explosively released.
This project will (1) fundamentally enhance our understanding of the regions
that produce extreme solar eruptions, and (2) identify the conditions that
foreshadow imminent extreme events and their possible magnitude. To make the
science accessible to the general public, the team will leverage and enhance an
ongoing partnership between the Community Coordinated Modeling Center and the
American Natural History Museum of New York to provide compelling visualizations
for high-impact public shows. This project will support the dissertation
research of a PhD student at the University of Hawaii and thus contribute to the
educational goals of NSF. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research focuses on five
science questions: What determines how much energy can be stored to drive major
solar eruptions? What determines the fraction of stored energy that is released
in these eruptions? What is the largest possible eruption, based on known solar
active regions? What roles do multiple eruptions play in maximizing geoeffective
structures? What is the statistical likelihood of Carrington-like or greater
size eruptions? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These questions will be addressed using
nonlinear force-free field models, magnetohydrodynamic simulations, analytic
flux-rope models, and the theory of partially open fields to investigate
eruptions for some of the largest and most complex ARs that have been observed
during the space age. By propagating the associated CMEs to Earth's orbit, the
maximum values will be inferred for space-weather relevant parameters that the
most extreme events can produce at Earth. Magnetic data from solar active
regions spanning four decades will be used to bound the size of the largest
eruption for known regions. Finally, statistical techniques (previously used to
estimate the occurrence-probability of extreme geomagnetic storms) will be
employed to calculate the probability of a Carrington-like or worse solar
eruption in a given decade.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.