* 1854415
* Impact of Curvature-Induced Secondary Flows on Mechanotransduction and Cell Biochemical Signaling in 3D Bioprinted Artery Models with Physiological Inflow
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2023
* Michael Plesniak, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 04/30/2023
* USD 599,390.00

Heart disease is the leading cause of death for men and women in the United
States and throughout the world. In addition to the detrimental effects on human
health and loss of life, the economic impact of cardiovascular diseases is tens
of billions of dollars annually in the US. Diseases associated with plaque
formation, such as atherosclerosis, are triggered by the biochemical signals
expressed by the arterial lining cells in direct contact with the blood, the
endothelial cells. It is known that the endothelial cells transmit biochemical
signals to adjacent smooth muscle cell layers that control the properties of the
arteries, such as their stiffness and cross-sectional area through which the
blood flows. These biochemical signals are, in part, the response of the cells
to the mechanical forces that they see as the blood flows past. The objective of
this project is to study how these cells respond to complex flows, such as those
that occur in various parts of the vasculature (e.g. regions of curvature,
constrictions, branching). This project will produce novel, 3D bioprinted blood
vessel models with endothelial cells based on actual physiological arteries.
These realistic bioreactors will then be subjected to blood flow that mimics the
natural physiology. This study will improve the understanding of the
interactions of blood flow and arterial lining cells under realistic conditions.
This advancement in understanding may eventually translate to research to
address the onset and progression of vascular diseases. The project also
supports substantial outreach to enhance the participation of underrepresented
students in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project includes a
combination of experimental and computational modeling along with the
development of realistic bioreactors for the assessment of endothelial response.
Vascular structures are complex, and the combination of external and internal
geometry, including curvature, tortuosity, and stenoses, leads to flow fields
that are variable in both space and time. In the first aim, the research will
use state-of-the-art, non-invasive laser-based techniques, such as Particle
Image Velocimetry, to measure the entire flow field in patient-specific vascular
geometries. This will be combined with the assessment of wall shear stress
distributions determined from computational simulations. These realistic
geometries will create the complex physiological and pathophysiological flows,
including secondary flows and stenosis-induced flow separations, that are seen
in natural vascular structures. In aim 2, the patient-specific geometries will
be replicated through 3D bioprinted structures that include endothelial cells.
These realistic bioreactors will be used to measure cellular biochemical
signaling within these vessels under different flow conditions through cell
staining, immunofluorescence imaging, and gene analysis. By integrating these
two approaches from different disciplines, the project will be able to examine
the cause and effect between the complex blood flow and the resulting cell
response.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.