* 1854761
* PREEVENTS Track 2: Collaborative Research: COEXIST: COnnected EXtremes In Space and Time
* GEO,RISE
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Daniel Swain, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 05/31/2024
* USD 345,446.00

The project goal is to improve our ability to withstand extreme floods and
droughts. A single flood or drought event can cause problems, yet the
devastation wrought by a series of back-to-back floods or dramatic swings
between drought and flood conditions can be much worse. California, for example,
is all too familiar with dangerous mudslides triggered by flash flooding on top
of burn scars left over from prior drought conditions. The central U.S. is also
no stranger to back-to-back expansive flooding episodes that drive destructive
surges down the major rivers. These grouped events seriously test our ability to
manage flood and drought and ensure protection of lives and property. Scientists
do not fully understand the weather conditions that cause these grouped events.
Nor do they know how good we are at forecasting them 2 weeks to 2 months in
advance. Experts from insurance, reservoir design and emergency responders will
gather with scientists to identify how these grouped events cause problems. This
knowledge will then be used to craft the research necessary to support
solutions. New scientific discoveries are anticipated about what causes floods
and droughts to group together across the U.S. This new knowledge will then be
used to develop ways to forecasts these grouped events 2 weeks to 2 months in
advance. These new forecasting approaches will support our ability to prepare
and reduce impacts. Through supporting enhanced protection of lives and
livelihoods this project ultimately strengthens our national welfare and
economic competitiveness. In addition to new science and better forecasts the
project has a number of other potential benefits. The integration of research
and education is central to the project, and will be achieved through the
training and career development of the project team and one graduate student.
The project is also committed to diversity and inclusion. Participation of
underrepresented groups will be broadened through the mentoring of students
underrepresented in science each summer. To promote additional scientific
research the project will adhere to, and promote, best practices in open,
accessible and reproducible science. The project will also engage non-scientists
through a series of media interviews, newspaper/TV appearances, and science
writing regarding the special risks to humans and environment posed by connected
floods and droughts, and strategies to reduce their impacts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work is structured around three objectives: 1)
Identify potentially connective regimes and formulate hypotheses about the
underlying shared processes by applying statistical models to observation-based
datasets of U.S. extreme wet and dry events; 2) Advance the hypotheses by
conducting a targeted suite of multi-scale dynamical model experiments for at
least six instances of connected events; 3) Understand shared predictability
sources by developing and testing a suite of prototype sub-seasonal to seasonal
statistical-dynamical forecast systems. Potential contributions include
understanding the shared physical processes connecting extreme wet and dry
events, demonstrating extended forecast capacity for wet and dry extremes using
forecast systems that emphasize connecting processes, and transforming how
scientists conceptualize extreme events. Key project outcomes include a
physical-process based definition of connected extremes, and a novel generalized
research framework that co-advances shared-process understanding and forecast
capacity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.