* 1854326
* CAREER: Exploring the Transcriptional Regulatory Networks Controlling the Early Stages of Legume Nodulation
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Marc Libault, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Courtney Jahn
* 07/31/2022
* USD 573,573.00

A group of bacteria called rhizobia convert atmospheric nitrogen to a chemical
form available to support growth and reproduction of plants in the legume
family. The bacteria establish a symbiotic relationship with their legume hosts,
residing in root nodules where specialized structures develop to facilitate the
exchange of nutrients between the two partners. This is an economically
important process as it reduces the amount of nitrogen fertilizer needed to grow
crops and is a key component in sustainable agriculture. Thus, a better
understanding of the molecular mechanisms controlling the nodulation process
should lead to insights about more effective ways to capture and fix atmospheric
nitrogen and to the transfer of this capacity to non-legume plants. One notable
achievement in our understanding of legume nodulation is the characterization of
the signaling steps that control the infection of the plant root hair cell by
rhizobia, the initial step of nodulation. This symbiotic pathway is regulated by
almost 2000 genes in legume root hair cells. The investigators will characterize
a network of genes essential in controlling the early stages of nodulation. In
addition to its impact on legume research, the broader impacts of this project
include the development of unique educational programs dedicated to Oklahoma
high-school and undergraduate students from under-represented groups, promoting
strong integration between research and education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
CAREER project is built on the hypothesis that regulatory networks directly
under the control of one or several transcription factors of the symbiotic
pathway orchestrate the proper activation and timing of gene expression in root
hair cells in response to rhizobia. Specifically focusing on the Nodulation
Signaling Pathway1 (NSP1) regulatory network, this project will address two key
questions: What is the identity of the soybean and medicago root hair genes
directly under the control of NSP1? What are the protein complexes asscociated
with NSP1 and how do they control the expression of root hair genes in response
to rhizobial inoculation? To answer these questions, the investigators will 1)
characterize the soybean root hair genes directly under the control of the
transcription factors GmNSP1a and b in response to Bradyrhizobium japonicum
through high-throughput sequencing technologies and by applying DamID-seq or
ChIP-seq methods, 2) identify the protein partners of the GmNSP1a and b in root
hair cells inoculated with B. japonicum by co-immunoprecipitation of the protein
partners in root hair cells upon rhizobia inoculation; 3) validate the
conservation of the root hair gene regulatory networks between soybean and
Medicago truncatula, the model legume.