* 1854791
* Collaborative Research: Geometric Harmonic Analysis in Learning and Inference: Theory and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Zhizhen Zhao, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 07/31/2024
* USD 210,000.00

Pairwise comparison of objects is an important way human beings learn to reason
from massive data sets. In many modern science and engineering fields, large-
scale high dimensional data sets are generated with abundant structural
information within each object, allowing people to conduct detailed pairwise
comparisons between individual objects. To preserve the fine structural
information of the data, it is important to take into account both the scalar
similarity measure and the transformations that describes the relation between
the data points. When the transformations admit an algebraic structure such as a
group, the additional algebraic rigidity constraints shed new lights upon
efficient learning and inference strategies largely unexplored in existing
literature. The PIs aim to utilize the two sources of low-dimensional structures
in data: (i) the manifold underlying the data, and (ii) the algebraic
consistency among the group transformations, to devise highly accurate and
computationally efficient statistical methods for extracting patterns in massive
complex data sets emerging from social, biomedical, and comparative biological
sciences. This project will involve educating and training the next wave of
students, and equipping them with the necessary tools to work in data science.
Dissemination of research results and building connections among different
fields through organizing workshops are also important aspects of the proposed
work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is to develop novel geometric
harmonic analysis methods to extract information and perform inference on large-
scale datasets equipped with group transformations. This will involve
foundational theoretical work and algorithm development in the following three
interrelated objectives: (i) angular synchronization across frequency channels,
(ii) extended vector diffusion maps on multiple associated vector bundles of a
common principal bundle, and (iii) community detection in conformation spaces of
molecules and shape spaces of biological anatomical surfaces through multiple
irreducible representations of group-valued pairwise interactions. On the
practical side, the PIs propose to apply these newly developed techniques to
high impact domain applications in biomedical and comparative biological
sciences, including (1) cryo-EM and cryo-electron tomography (ET) image
denoising, (2) shape space analysis in evolutionary and comparative biology, and
(3) learning conformation spaces and dynamical structures of biomolecular
machines. The techniques developed during the project period will be broadly
applicable across disciplines, where the observations are noisy, incomplete, and
possibly modified by a latent transformation through the action of an unknown
group element.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.