* 1854573
* Fully Integrated Parametric Filters for Extensive Phase-Noise Reduction in Low-Power RF Front-Ends and Resonant Sensing Platforms
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Marvin Onabajo, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 08/31/2023
* USD 436,944.00

Numerous handheld medical devices and other consumer products rely on homodyne
or super-heterodyne receivers for wireless connectivity. The maximum data rate
achievable by such wireless nodes depends heavily on the frequency stability of
the internal oscillators that generate the reference signals for the frequency
conversion stages. Furthermore, significant research efforts have been directed
towards the development of integrated closed-loop resonant sensing platforms,
which rely on reliable oscillators to track the resonance frequency shifts
induced in low-power micro and nano mechanical structures upon exposure to
targeted physical or chemical signals. While such miniaturized resonant sensors
have the potential to achieve unprecedented sensitivities, their detection
capability is strongly limited by the stability of the oscillator employed as
frequency readout. This research program aims to develop new techniques to
achieve an unprecedented level of frequency stability in low-power and high-
frequency integrated oscillators, addressing one of the most critical challenges
that is currently limiting the performance of RF receivers and resonant sensing
platforms. In particular, the proposed research entails the development of a new
class of integrated solid-state low-power stabilization circuits, referred to as
parametric filters. These integrated circuits exploit the complex nonlinear
dynamics of parametric systems to implement the unique functionality of a filter
for the phase noise reduction. By increasing the stability of frequency sources,
the proposed parametric filter will allow to reduce the power consumption of
battery-operated wireless sensor nodes deployed for Internet-of-Things (IoT)
applications. In addition, the drastic phase noise reduction in the frequency
readout of resonant sensing platforms will allow to surpass the resolution
limits of state-of-the-art resonant sensors, leading to unprecedented detection
capabilities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A parametric filter consists of a non-
autonomous feedback network that includes a passive parametric frequency
divider. When a parametric filter is designed to operate in proximity to a point
of marginal stability for the parametric frequency divider, it exhibits an
increase in relaxation time that renders it immune to the rapid phase
fluctuations of its driving signal. As a result, the output signal of parametric
filters exhibit orders of magnitude lower phase noise than their input signals.
An aim of this project is to develop novel integrated parametric filters that
can be connected at the output of gigahertz frequency generators. To demonstrate
this concept, a 2.4 GHz frequency generator and the auxiliary circuits will be
designed with an overall power consumption less than 0.6 mW. Phase noise
improvements exceeding 30 dB at 1 MHz offset from the 2.4 GHz carrier are
expected through the use of the new parametric filter architecture. Furthermore,
a fundamental goal of this research is to develop a systematic design and
simulation approach that allows to manipulate the stability of integrated
passive parametric circuits. In particular, the efforts to develop parametric
filters for low-power phase-noise reduction will provide means to understand the
behavior of parametrically driven circuit components and their capability to
manipulate the dynamics of non-autonomous feedback networks. In addition, the
project will use commercial circuit simulators to capture such complex dynamics,
which will greatly benefit circuit designers in the research community and
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.