* 1854934
* Causal Inference Methods for Mediation and Comparisons of Confidence Regions
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2018,05/31/2022
* Judith Lok, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 05/31/2022
* USD 153,267.00

In epidemiology, clinical research, and the social sciences, inferences about
the causal effects of treatments and risk factors are used to design more
effective interventions. This project focuses on the development of statistical
methods for causal inference. The first part of this project will develop a
causal inference method for mediation analysis. If a treatment has a beneficial
effect on an outcome, it is often of interest to investigate what are the
pathways by which it affects the outcome. Direct and indirect effects decompose
the effect of a treatment into the part that is mediated by a covariate (the
mediator) and the part that is not. For example, in HIV/ AIDS research, it is
important to estimate how much of the effect of Antiretroviral Therapy (ART) on
mother-to-child-transmission of HIV is mediated by the effect of ART treatment
on the HIV viral load in the mother's blood. In medicine, psychology, political
science, and economics, differentiating between indirect and direct effects has
become increasingly important. Therefore, it is paramount that appropriate
statistical methods are developed to estimate direct and indirect effects in a
variety of settings, including the setting in which there are post-treatment
common causes of the mediator and the outcome. The second part of this project
will compare confidence regions. Recently, there has been extensive discussion
in the statistical community about a move away from p-values. P-values can lead
researchers to conclude that a treatment has a significant effect even if that
effect is very small, and clinically irrelevant. Confidence regions are the
obvious alternative to p-values, as they provide a range of values of the
parameters of interest that are most consistent with the data. While comparisons
of p-values have been extensively researched and confidence regions are
routinely reported, comparison of confidence regions has received relatively
little attention. In this project, confidence regions will be compared based on
the notion of asymptotic equivalence. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Natural direct and
indirect effects use cross-worlds counterfactuals: outcomes under treatment with
the mediator "set" to its value without treatment. Cross-worlds counterfactuals
can never be observed, as they involve quantities under two different treatments
where only one treatment is given to any particular patient or unit. The PI has
recently proposed organic direct and indirect effects to avoid the use of cross-
worlds counterfactuals. Organic direct and indirect effects also apply when the
mediator cannot be "set". For example, the HIV viral load in the mother's blood
cannot be set; if it could be set, doctors would set it to zero. In the first
part of this project, organic direct and indirect effects will be extended to
settings with post-treatment common causes of the mediator and the outcome. It
will be shown that, in contrast to natural direct and indirect effects,
estimators and confidence intervals can be developed in that setting for organic
effects. The second part of this project will compare confidence regions. Most
work on the comparison of confidence regions has studied coverage probabilities,
confidence interval length, and small sample properties. In this project,
confidence regions will be compared for large samples, based on the asymptotic
behavior of the Hausdorff distance between the different confidence regions. The
Hausdorff distance between partly overlapping intervals is simply the maximum of
the difference between the left limits and the right limits of the intervals.
The Hausdorff distance has also been defined for non-convex sets and in higher
dimensions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.