* 1855908
* Computational Prediction of Enantioselectivity in Metal-Catalyzed Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Paul Helquist, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 08/31/2023
* USD 560,000.00

Many molecules are chiral, which means that they can exist in two forms that are
mirror images, analogous to right and left hands. Very often the right and left
hand forms interact differently with biological systems, sometimes with profound
consequences. One hand may be beneficial while the other hand may also be
beneficial, have no effect, or be harmful. As a result, the handedness property
is an extremely important consideration in the design and manufacture of
molecules such as pharmaceuticals. The most efficient syntheses of chiral
molecules use catalysts that are also chiral. Unfortunately, the synthesis of
chiral catalysts often requires inefficient trial and error approaches. In this
project, Professors Wiest and Helquist at the University of Notre Dame employ
computational chemistry, machine learning, and organic chemistry to develop
efficient, fast, and accurate methods to predict how to make chiral molecules.
In collaboration with a major pharmaceutical company, these methods are
improving access to molecules of importance to the pharmaceutical industry. This
new approach to computationally-driven synthesis and the close, long-term
collaboration with industry creates unique experiences for their students. These
students participate in industrial internships and interdisciplinary training at
AstraZeneca in Sweden. The two senior researchers are actively engaging in
broadening participation initiatives at the University of Notre Dame and in the
Midwest. These activities include mentoring undergraduate students from
underrepresented groups through the Building Bridges program and summer research
for high school students.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;With funding from the Chemical
Catalysis Program of the Chemistry Division, Dr. Wiest and Dr. Helquist of the
University of Notre Dame continue the development of the quantum guided
molecular mechanics (Q2MM) method for the automated parameterization of
transition state force fields (TSFFs) which are then used for the high-
throughput virtual screening of enantioselective catalysts (CatVS). A number of
methodological improvements, such as machine learning, new interfaces, and
automated parameterization procedures, and TSFFs for new reactions of interests
for the synthetic organic community are developed. On the application side, the
new methods are used for rapid prototyping of novel catalysts for hydrogen atom
transfer reactions and for high throughput screening of virtual libraries for an
enantioselective version of a novel cross-coupling reaction developed by the
team. The Q2MM and CatVS code, as well as the validated force fields continue to
be available to the scientific community free of charge via github.com/q2mm. The
combined computational and experimental approach, combined with the close
collaboration with AstraZeneca, provides a unique interdisciplinary training
environment for the undergraduate and graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.