* 1855465
* CDS&amp;E: Molecular Modeling of Solute Precipitate Nucleation
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Erik Santiso, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 06/30/2023
* USD 328,991.00

Crystallization is a process that plays a crucial role in the production of food
products, specialty chemicals, and pharmaceutical molecules but remains poorly
understood. For example, many active pharmaceutical ingredients are difficult to
crystallize, have poor solubility, or have multiple crystalline forms with
different physical properties, yet these properties have a direct impact of the
efficacy of the drug. Accordingly, computer models capable of predicting
molecular crystallization behavior can be valuable in guiding drug development
strategies. The first stages of crystallization involve a process called
nucleation, where molecules come together into a solid-like cluster large enough
to grow into a crystal. Nucleation typically involves only a few molecules and
can be drastically affected by small impurities or defects in surfaces, making
it challenging to study experimentally. Nucleation is also directly related to
the crystallizability of a drug and to the crystalline form that emerges. With
support from the Division of Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental, and
Transport Systems and from the Chemical Theory, Models, and Computational
Methods program in the Division of Chemistry, this project will develop new,
generally applicable computer simulation methods and software to study the
nucleation of crystal molecules from a solution. These methods will be used to
study the nucleation of active pharmaceutical ingredients and to understand the
role of the solvent and experimental conditions on their crystallization. The
software and fundamental understanding developed over the course of the project
will yield direct benefits to society through the production of new drugs,
advanced materials, and new high-tech jobs. The research will be integrated in
outreach efforts geared toward the education and inclusion of minorities
traditionally underrepresented in higher STEM
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to develop new, generally
applicable molecular simulation methods to study the nucleation of molecular
crystals from solution. These methods will directly model precipitation at
constant supersaturation and will explicitly include collective variables
measuring the structure of the solvent, rather than just the solute. The methods
will be used to study how solvents qualitatively change the nucleation mechanism
and to provide a molecular-level explanation for the different precipitation
behavior observed in many pairs of chemically similar molecules. Toward this
goal, the project will: (1) develop a method to generate order parameters
sensitive to the structure of bulk solvents, and use it to analyze data from
previous studies on solvent effects on nucleation mechanisms; (2) develop a
general method to generate minimum free energy paths for solute precipitation,
under constant supersaturation conditions, including order parameters sensitive
to solvent structure; and (3) use the new methods to obtain nucleation paths for
sulfadiazine and sulfamerazine, two nearly identical molecules with very
different crystallization behavior, and elucidate the causes for those
differences. The proposed method is a new formulation of the String Method in
Collective Variables (SMCV) that can be used in open-system ensembles such as
the osmotic, grand canonical, and Gibbs ensembles. The PI (Santiso) has
successfully used the SMCV to study the nucleation of pure substances from
undercooled melts, and this new formulation will enable modeling solute
precipitation under realistic conditions. The tools resulting from this research
will enable the scientific and engineering community to simulate and study
crystallization using realistic molecular models. This toolbox will accelerate
innovation in the computational design of drugs and other solid products.
Furthermore, methods and software enabling simulation of activated processes in
open systems will enable applications in other areas such as catalysis,
separations, and solution chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.