* 1855383
* Efficient Modeling of Fluid-Structure Interaction in Flapping, Flexible Wings for Real-Time Control and Parametric Design
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Mark Jankauski, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 09/30/2023
* USD 374,244.00

Flexible flapping wings are an important component in several developing
technologies with potential to benefit national infrastructure and welfare. For
example, miniature robotic vehicles with flapping wings could be deployed to
identify leaks in dense networks of pipes, to survey air quality, or even to
artificially pollinate crops. Flapping wings could also be used to harvest
energy and thus power a sensor network for specific applications. However,
engineering tools are not sufficiently evolved to utilize flexible flapping
wings for these emerging technologies. Methods currently used to predict the
physics of flapping wings are inefficient, often requiring long time to estimate
the performance of just a single flapping wing system. As such, they cannot be
used for real-time control applications where the system must adapt rapidly to
dynamic environmental conditions. The primary goal of this award is therefore to
develop efficient and rapid experimental methods to predict the physics
governing flapping flexible wings. Such methods will advance the design for
flapping wing technologies. This award will support American Indian students
recruited through Montana State University's EMPower program. It will also
promote science, technology, engineering and math fields through public outreach
activities including Montana State Family Science Day and National Biomechanics
Day. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project specifically aims to realize a reduced-
order fluid-structure interaction model of flapping wings. Conventional fluid-
structure interaction models rely on coupled finite element and computational
fluid dynamics solvers, both which require considerable computational resources.
Existing low-order approaches are typically restricted to rigid wings and cannot
account for the aerodynamic forces that result from elastic structural
deformation. The model developed through this work will deliver solution
accuracy near that of high-fidelity solvers with the computational efficiency
achieved by low-order methods. This model will be applied to study both
artificial wings as well as real insect wings and will be realized by
accomplishing the following objectives. First, wings will be geometrically,
structurally, and aerodynamically characterized via a combination of micro-
computed-tomography scans, computational fluid dynamics, experimental modal
analysis, and model updating routines. Second, the fluid-structure interaction
framework will be derived using a novel deformable blade element momentum
approach. Deformed wing aerodynamics are accounted for e&amp;#64259;ciently
through a predetermined look-up table of coe&amp;#64259;cients and dynamic
correction factors that will be incorporated into the quasi-steady model as
necessary. This low-order model will initially be benchmarked against direct
high-fidelity computational simulation. Third, the model will be validated
experimentally. A linkage mechanism will be used to generate flapping
kinematics. Wing strain, aerodynamic forces and torques will be measured and
compared to theoretic predictions. The expected outcome of this project is a
robust fluid-structure interaction framework capable of supporting real-time
control as well as parametric design of flapping, flexible wing
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by CBET-Fluid
Dynamics, the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR),
and BIO-IOS programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.