* 1855598
* Interactions between Newton-Okounkov Bodies, Cluster Algebras, and Orbit Closures
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2019,12/31/2023
* Laura Escobar Vega, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 12/31/2023
* USD 172,750.00

The interplay between combinatorics, which studies with discrete structures, and
algebraic geometry, which is concerned with solutions of polynomial equations,
has immensely enriched both areas. Combinatorics provides discrete objects that
can be used to encode information about an algebraic variety. Conversely, the
rich structure of a combinatorial object is often better understood when seen as
a discrete shadow of an algebro-geometric phenomenon. The research in this
project develops the interplay between these areas utilizing tools which include
degenerations of varieties and high-dimensional analogues of
polygons.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to understand various aspects
of the interplay between combinatorics and algebraic geometry for Newton-
Okounkov bodies, symmetric orbit closures, and subword complexes. Generalizing
the relation between polytopes and toric varieties, Newton-Okounkov bodies
provide tools from convex geometry to study algebraic varieties. The PI will
develop the theory of Newton-Okounkov bodies by constructing combinatorial
parameter spaces for these bodies together with a wall-crossing formula. The
study of symmetric orbit closures is relevant to the theory of Kazhdan-Lusztig-
Vogan polynomials and Harish-Chandra modules for a certain real Lie group,
mirroring the connection of Schubert varieties to Kazhdan-Lusztig polynomials
and representation theory. The PI will investigate the projections of symmetric
orbit closures to Grassmannians. Knutson and Miller introduced subword complexes
to study the cohomology of Schubert varieties. The PI will relate these
complexes with toric degenerations of Schubert varieties and their
desingularizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.