* 1855467
* Mechanisms of Radical-Initiated Alkylation of Alkenes, Peptides and Proteins - A Green Chemistry Route
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2024
* Lisa Kelly, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Richard Johnson
* 06/30/2024
* USD 450,000.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamic &amp; Mechanism B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Lisa Kelly of the Department of
Chemistry at the University of Maryland, Baltimore County (UMBC) is
investigating the light-induced production and fate of reactive free radicals
using new precursors which absorb light at long wavelength. Radicals are a
versatile class of reactive chemical species that are useful to carry out
carbon-carbon bond formation without the requirement of toxic reagents or harsh
reaction conditions. In polymer chemistry, radicals initiate formation of the
polymer. In biochemistry, radicals can be used to label proteins in order to
identify the sites of weak intermolecular interactions. Materials science makes
use of radicals to attach specific molecules onto surfaces. This research uses a
class of compounds called naphthalene diimides that undergo the light-induced
release of carbon dioxide (CO2) to produce reactive radicals. The chemistry is
carried out with light in aqueous solution and does not require other harmful
additives. Because this chemistry produces only CO2 as a byproduct, it
represents a green route to carry out otherwise difficult chemical
transformations. Integrated with her research activities, Professor Kelly
develops curriculum innovations to teach entrepreneurial chemists and chemical
engineers how to make field-portable computerized sensor platforms that monitor
photochemical reactions in the environment. Through these advanced laboratory
projects, chemistry students build electronic circuits and develop basic
computer programming skills that might serve as a technology basis for future
start-up ventures. Professor Kelly is an active participant in UMBC's diversity-
advancement initiatives. These activities include mentorship for chemistry and
biochemistry students who are members of underrepresented minorities by sharing
her experiences and facilitating networking opportunities with graduate alumni
in government, industry and academia. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Photochemical
transformations are attractive because they do not require heat and can be
initiated in specific locations "on demand." Using pulsed laser spectroscopies,
this research identifies and maps the mechanism of photoinduced electron
transfer (PET)-induced decarboxylation. The chromophores, naphthalene diimides,
absorb very strongly in the long-wavelength UV region of the spectrum, requiring
significantly lower concentrations than other radical-producing compounds. A
novel set of the naphthalene diimides are synthesized and the rate constants for
radical production and decay are measured. Specific aims of this work are to
first understand the kinetics and quantum efficiency of radical production, then
investigate viable reactivity targets that are relevant to protein labeling and
polymer formation. Applications in photoaffinity labeling and deactivation of
specific enzymes are also being tested. While the products from
photodecarboxylation have been characterized in a number of peptide and alkyl
carboxylates, there has been little direct evidence for the involvement of
carbon-centered radicals. Photoinduced decarboxylation of naphthalene diimides
is expected to have broad utility in environmentally friendly synthetic organic
chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.