* 1855160
* Nebraska Conference for Undergraduate Women in Mathematics
* MPS,DMS
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2020
* Alexander Zupan, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 02/29/2020
* USD 49,486.00

The 21st Annual Nebraska Conference for Undergraduate Women in Mathematics
(NCUWM) will take place January 25th-27th, 2019 at the University of Nebraska-
Lincoln. Since its inception in 1999, nearly 4000 undergraduate women have
participated in NCUWM. The main purpose of the conference is to prepare women
mathematics majors to attend graduate school, to increase their success in
graduate school, and to help them identify potential careers using mathematics.
In 2019, conference components include three plenary talks from prominent women
mathematicians, 48 undergraduate student talks, an undergraduate student poster
session with over 60 posters, panel discussions with invited graduate students
and professionals in academia and industry, small-group breakout sessions on
specific topics, and other networking opportunities. The conference has a
special focus on mentoring, connecting undergraduate students not only with
their peers but also with a number of successful women at a broad range of
career stages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 2019 slate of plenary speakers include
Christine Darden of the NASA Langley Research Center, who was featured in the
famous "Hidden Figures" book, Zhilan Feng, a Professor of Mathematics at Purdue
University, and Margaret Holen, a retired partner at Goldman Sachs and Lecturer
at Princeton University. In addition to learning cutting edge mathematics from
the plenary speakers, student attendees will also learn about current
developments at the frontier of undergraduate mathematics research from an array
of student talks and poster presentations. The focus on vertical mentoring at
NCUWM leads to professional development opportunities for all of the conference
attendees. A comprehensive assessment prepared by RMC Research Corporation
following NCUWM in 2015 concluded that NCUWM strongly influences the attitudes
and beliefs of the undergraduate participants related to pursuing graduate-level
mathematics and mathematics related careers. RMC Research continues to gather
data after each conference in the form of participant surveys, and this data is
used in part to ensure that the conference also well serves underrepresented
populations. The conference webpage is available at
https://www.math.unl.edu/~ncuwm/21stAnnual/&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.