* 1855681
* Unique Group Transfer and Coupling Reactivity Promoted by Middle and Late Transition Metals in Bulky Alkoxide Ligand Environments
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2019,05/31/2024
* STANISLAV GROYSMAN, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* John Gilje
* 05/31/2024
* USD 450,000.00

Carbodiimides are a type of molecule that are frequently used in chemical and
pharmaceutical industries. Likewise ketenimines are molecular starting points
for the production of complicated medicinal chemicals and azoarenes are commonly
used dyes in the textile and food industries. While all of these are valuable
industrial reagents, a serious disadvantage of all of them is that they are
obtained from wasteful processes that involve toxic reagents such as mercury and
isocyanate. In order to reduced these problems, the development of new routes to
these compounds is an important goal. Dr. Stanislas Groysman, Chemistry
Department, Wayne State University and Dr. Richard Lord, Chemistry Department,
Grand Valley State University, are supported by the Chemical Synthesis Program
of the Chemistry Division to develop new, efficient methods to prepare
azoarenes, carbodiimides, and ketenimines. The research develops new cost-
effective reagents that exploit metals like iron and cobalt to efficiently
produce these molecules. The laboratory experiments are carried out in Dr.
Groysman's laboratories and the results are interpreted using computational
chemistry conducted by Dr. Lord and his students. Wayne State is a graduate
research university, while Grand Valley State is a primarily undergraduate
institution. The collaboration provides the opportunity for students from both
institutions to be part of both graduate and undergraduate research experiences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The reactivity of metal-bound carbene and nitrene depends
on the electronic structure of the metal complex, which is underwritten by the
metal type and its ancillary ligand environment. Most existing middle and late
nitrene/carbene complexes utilize strong-field ancillary ligands which stabilize
formally high-valent metal centers. This project seeks to develop middle and
late transition metal complexes featuring weak-field bulky bis(alkoxide)
ligation. The electronic properties and the steric bulk of the alkoxide ligands
allow the formation of reactive low-coordinate species. The chemistry is
explored across the first-row transition metals from Cr to Ni. The effect of the
alkoxide ligand field on the electronic structure is explored by computational
chemistry. The synthetic work is carried out in the Groysman lab at Wayne State
University and the computational work in the Lord lab at Grand Valley State
University. This collaboration between a research university and a primarily
undergraduate institution provides a valuable experience for students at both
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.