* 1855937
* INFEWS/T2: Identifying Sustainability Solutions through Global-Local-Global Analysis of a Coupled Water-Agriculture-Bioenergy System
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2019,01/31/2025
* Richard Lammers, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Brandi Schottel
* 01/31/2025
* USD 2,546,074.00

Over the next 40 years, the global Food-Energy-Water System (FEWS) will face
significant sustainability challenges that are interconnected: solutions
implemented in one biophysical system or spatial location will inevitably affect
others. Decision makers that do not account for these interconnections risk
inadvertently pursuing unsustainable FEWS policies. The research team will
develop and apply a novel integrated approach that highlights when different
policies or management activities support vs. negate one another. This
integrated approach will provide new knowledge about how local decisions combine
to affect broader issues, or spill over to other systems. A more complete
understanding will show how outside factors like economic or climate variability
alter and constrain management decisions at local scales and influence national
FEWS results. This new freely-available analysis system, available through NSF-
funded computer systems, will allow anyone an access to computational
capabilities that will transform the way global and local FEWS analyses are
linked and shed new light on the diverse impacts of proposed sustainability
solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our team will strategically build on a portfolio
of internationally vetted analysis tools the team has authored, including global
models of hydrology and water quality, food, bioenergy and U.S. agro-ecology, to
produce an open-source, reproducible, and accessible framework. Project goals
are to: 1) establish system behavior and identify the performance of individual
policy options and feedbacks to the larger integrated system via cascading
pathways of impacts; 2) use the integrated system to identify high-performing
strategies composed of multiple options that reveal the trade-offs, synergies
and economic costs associated with managing FEWS challenges; and 3) foster
development of a community of practice utilizing the Global-Local-Global
paradigm to examine integrative solutions to these FEWS challenges. This
framework will be powered by NSF-funded technologies: GeoHub on HUBzero,
utilizing geospatial data analysis building blocks (GABBs), and the XSEDE
computational backbone to enable fine-scale analysis across broad geographies.
GeoHub will also provide local and regional FEWS analysts and decision makers
with boundary conditions such as changes in crop production, prices, cropland
area, irrigated area, nutrient applications and surface water loading, bioenergy
production and water in-flows at any spatial aggregation for use as inputs into
local sustainability studies. Results from locally-based studies will be
incorporated back into this multi-system, multi-scale framework to assess their
national and global impacts. This first-time capability will enable the FEWS
community to explore alternative policies and sustainability strategies within a
seamless, transparent, flexible, and replicable framework. By making new tools
for exploring sustainability solutions freely available on the GeoHub, the
project will accelerate development of a diverse FEWS community of practice
through which those analyzing global change can be effectively linked to
researchers conducting local and regional FEWS studies. Informed short courses
and high school engagement will further prepare next-generation FEWS researchers
and practitioners and will help to fill a gap in secondary education economics
curricula. A National Press Club event will extend impact far beyond this
project?s time horizon to contribute to a vibrant and informed community of
practice focusing on Global-Local-Global FEWS
interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.