* 1855021
* I-Corps:  MultiRep Biofilm Reactor Customer Discovery
* TIP,TI
* 11/01/2018,10/31/2019
* Christine Salomon, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 10/31/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to accelerate
the discovery and development of new antimicrobial agents, including
pharmaceuticals, disinfectants, preventative coatings, and more. Biofilms have
serious economic and safety impacts on healthcare, food, industrial, and defense
markets. They are responsible for an estimated $4.4B in annual healthcare costs
from hospital acquired infections, $7B in costs from food borne illness, and
billions of dollars in costs in lost agricultural crop production. In the
industrial and defense industries, microbial induced corrosion from biofilms is
estimated to be responsible for billions in costs per year. Novel anti-biofilm
technologies are needed to reduce the safety and economic burdens of biofilms.
In vitro screening of anti-biofilm activity is widely used in the discovery and
development of anti-biofilm agents. Relevant research and development spending
on in vitro screening is approximately $150M per year for companies developing
disinfectants, $270M per year for companies developing antimicrobial drugs, and
$140M per year for companies developing agrochemicals.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is focused on a novel technology for
growing highly accurate biofilms in vitro with significantly higher throughput
than the current state-of-the-art. This new biofilm reactor can be used to grow
biofilms for in vitro screening of anti-biofilm activity. It can grow up to 96
biofilm samples at once, and uses a flow-through setup to continuously pump
fresh nutrients over biofilm cultures and recreate the conditions many biofilms
experience outside of the lab. The biofilm reactor contains 12 channels, each
channel containing 8 wells that accept a growth substrate (in the form of a 5mm
diameter coupon disc) to culture the biofilm on. A variety of relevant growth
substrate materials can be used to best replicate relevant conditions. A version
of this new biofilm reactor has been made out of high-quality, autoclavable
polypropylene and tested using Psuedomonas aeruginosa bacteria, a model biofilm
forming organism. The biofilm reactor was able to reproducibly grow robust
biofilms that were consistent from sample-to-sample.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.