* 1855214
* ACE (Adolescent Comprehension Evaluation)
* TIP,TI
* 11/15/2018,04/30/2019
* Lori Severino, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Vipin Chaudhary
* 04/30/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is multi-
faceted. Reading comprehension is an essential life skill, which needs to be
assessed in middle and high school. If teachers are provided a quick, easy
process to assess students' comprehension ability and get on-time feedback
regarding student areas of need, they can more easily adjust instruction based
on student needs which may impact reading abilities of struggling students and
general education students. ACE (Adolescent Comprehension Evaluation) may also
help districts to improve overall reading scores of students and impact the
results of state standardized assessments. In addition, as comprehension is also
essential in many careers, employers may be looking for a way to determine if
applicants are able to comprehend the necessary material to perform their
duties. ACE may be able to provide that opportunity. Lastly, the medical field
is searching for a process to determine if patients understand the information
presented to them regarding certain medicines or procedures. The process used in
ACE may be applicable in this area.

This I-Corps project is currently being validated using a patent-pending,
multifaceted set of procedures. ACE includes 60 original passages for grades six
through eight with 10 questions for each passage. A teacher dashboard provides
immediate data that can be used to flexibly group students and differentiate in
order to improve students' reading comprehension. Think Aloud protocols validate
the patterned distractors for each of the reading comprehension questions. In
what is believed to be the first use of brain-based technology in internal
structure validation, ACE represents an innovation in the assessment space. The
multidimensional validation process includes the use of fNIRS (functional near
infrared spectroscopy) technology which allows making an evidence-based claim
that the test questions are text-based and less influenced by background
knowledge than other assessments. This is a critical need in an educational
landscape where student cultural, geographic, and socioeconomic diversity
influences the outcomes of assessments. ACE uses weighted answers to its reading
comprehension questions, to allow for partial credit. This means that ACE
provides a more sensitive measure of growth than other assessments. Each of the
weighted answers corresponds to a specific error in thinking, which means ACE
gives teachers near instant feedback that can be used for instruction,
intervention, and student groupings.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.