* 1855531
* Photoactivation of Stable Bonds for Energy Conversion and Photoredox Catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Daniel Nocera, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 08/31/2023
* USD 900,000.00

Professor Daniel Nocera's research goal is to convert the U.S. energy sector's
focus from fossil fuels to renewables, with a long-term goal of creating a solar
fuels industry. The ample supply of solar energy can meet growing energy
demands, but it is intermittent due to the daily rising and setting of the sun.
A strategy to compensate for this solar cycling is to convert solar energy to
carbon-containing fuels in a sustainable and scalable manner. Thus, solar energy
would be harnessed in the form of chemical bonds. The basic science needed to
drive such a restructuring of the U.S. energy industry begins with an
understanding of how light is absorbed by molecules and then transformed into a
chemical reaction - a process known as photochemistry. In this project, Dr.
Nocera's group at Harvard University is developing an understanding of how to
capture light energy by molecules and then productively direct the energy to
drive useful chemical reactions. Dr. Nocera is actively engaged in outreach
activities that introduce talented students to forefront problems in chemistry
and science. He and his research team provide these students with a broad
technical skill set so that they can address critical problems in their
independent professional careers. Professor Nocera engages with the public to
relate how chemistry can address challenges in energy and photochemistry through
outreach activities in a variety of forums including national news, TV, radio
programs, movies, and other public venues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With funding
from the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry Division, Dr. Nocera of
Harvard University is developing a better understanding of the generation of
highly energetic species that are critical to storing energy in the form of
fuels. Through the interplay of spectroscopy and synthesis, new reagents,
reactions and processes are created for the generation of high energy species
from stable M-X (M = metal, X = halogen atom) and M-O (O = oxygen) chemical
bonds. Photoactivation of M-X bonds is driven from charge transfer excited
states. Ligands are crafted that have favorable secondary coordination spheres
so as to allow the halogen atom to be escorted from the primary coordination
sphere upon photoactivation of the M-X bond. Mechanistic studies focus of
stereoelectronic factors of the ligand design that deliver the halogen atom in
high yields. The photointermediates are channeled to productive and selective
C-H activation and functionalization. The research also focuses on photodriven
production of M-O bonds and their subsequent activation at bimetallic centers
residing in novel macrocyclic ligands. A new approach for generating reactive
M-O bonds by light excitation exploits pre-coordinating oxoanions to the
bimetallic center. The ability of light to drive the production of an energetic
metal-oxo-metal bond opens an avenue to photo-oxidize C-H bonds. Dr. Nocera is
actively engaged in outreach programs with the public to convey how chemistry
can address important societal challenges. His outreach activities also focus on
the recruitment of female students and students from underrepresented groups. In
further support of the broader impacts of the project, Dr. Nocera has developed
a new undergraduate curriculum in the subject of inorganic chemistry and
photochemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.