* 1855006
* EAGER: Dimerization of Heterotriquinacenes to Heterododecahedranes
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/2019,06/30/2022
* Mark Mascal, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Paul Blakemore
* 06/30/2022
* USD 225,000.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Synthesis Program of the Division of
Chemistry, Professor Mark Mascal of the Department of Chemistry at the
University of California Davis is exploring the production of new molecules that
have curved surfaces. The approach involves the use of light to join two bowl-
shaped molecules into products that are in the shape of a dodecahedron, one of
the Platonic solids. This research has the potential to change the way chemists
approach the synthesis of spherical molecules, which can have far-reaching
applications in other branches of science including applied material science and
nanotechnology. Graduate students are involved as teaching assistants in a
chemistry study-abroad program. The researchers participate in a University of
California Professional Development Program and undergraduate researchers from
underrepresented groups participate in hands-on research activities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project consists of three separate approaches to
effecting the photochemically-allowed dimerization of triquinacenes and/or
heterotriquinacenes to dodecahedranes/heterododecahedranes. The first approach
involves the use of aggregation effects on cycloaddition reactions in water
suspensions, which can dramatically increase rates by exerting pressure on the
components within aqueous cavities. A second approach is to pair a
triquinacenium cation-based amphiphile with a water-soluble, anionic
triquinacene and organize the cation at the air / water interface. Strong ion
pairing and hydrophobic forces may bring the components together in the right
orientation for dimerization. Finally, a crystal engineering approach is also
being adopted which may induce triquinacenes to orient with concavities in
sufficiently close contact to allow topochemical (solid state) dimerization. The
broader impacts include training students in interdisciplinary research
encompassing organic synthesis, photochemistry, theoretical chemistry, and
nanotechnology. Student researchers from a broad representation of ethnicities
are engaged at all levels in this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.