* 1855922
* Conjugated Systems Containing Antiaromatic Cyclobutadienoids: Synthesis and Study of the Multifaceted Effects of Local Antiaromaticity
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2022
* Yan Xia, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 07/31/2022
* USD 440,975.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamic &amp; Mechanism B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Yan Xia of the Department of
Chemistry at Stanford University is developing a diverse family of carbon-rich
conjugated molecules containing unusual antiaromatic cyclobutadienoids (CBDs) to
control and understand the complex effects of antiaromaticity for future organic
electronic applications. Conjugated molecules are critical materials for various
optical and electronic applications. While they predominantly consist of
aromatic frameworks, introducing CBD antiaromatic motifs has long been sought as
a novel strategy to achieve favorable molecular properties, but conjugated CBDs
are previously challenging to access. The proposed research will generate
several unprecedented series of CBD-containing conjugated molecules, new
fundamental insights into the control and influence of antiaromaticity, and new
types of conjugated materials. This project integrates organic synthesis, design
and advanced physical measurement of conjugated materials, and computation,
providing a highly interdisciplinary and collaborative environment for training
and outreach at graduate, undergraduate, and high school levels for students at
Stanford and from the Bay Area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Carbon-rich conjugated
molecules are of significant fundamental and technical interest for their
optoelectronic properties and applications. Conjugated systems containing 4 pi-
electron antiaromatic cyclobutadienoids (CBDs) have been challenging to
synthesize, thus limiting the understanding of the multifaceted effects of CBD
in extended pi-systems. This project will leverage the methodology that the
Professor Xia's group has recently developed to synthesize several series of
CBD-containing polycyclic conjugated hydrocarbons with different topologies,
sizes of conjugation, conformations, and electronic characteristics.
Experimental and computational investigations of these series of molecules will
be carried out to answer the following questions: 1) How to modulate the degree
of CBD antiaromaticity? 2) How does antiaromaticity affect frontier molecular
orbitals, pi-bonding structures and conformations, optoelectronic properties,
and carrier mobility? 3) How to tune these molecular properties of aromatic
frameworks by designed fusion of CBD motifs?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.