* 1855176
* GOALI: Structural and Topological Controls on Viscoelasticity and Relaxation Processes in Chalcogenide Glass-Forming Liquids
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Sabyasachi Sen, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Nazanin Bassiri-Gharb
* 08/31/2023
* USD 771,231.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Chalcogenide (non-oxide alloys or compounds
containing sulfur, selenium or tellurium) glasses are an important class of
materials with wide-ranging applications in the areas of photonics,
telecommunication, memory storage, photovoltaics and environmental remote
sensing. A fundamental understanding of the dynamical processes associated with
the temperature- and composition- dependent flow behavior of the parent melts or
liquids from which these glasses are derived, is crucial in all stages of their
industrial production. This project aims to provide unique knowledge regarding
the connection between the "microscopic (atomistic)" and the "macroscopic"
aspects of the dynamical behavior of chalcogenide liquids for the very first
time, using a combination of cutting-edge characterization techniques. This
knowledge is key to the optimization of the chemistry and processing parameters
of these materials for improved and novel functionality, thereby enabling their
application in modern transformative technologies with strong societal impact.
Scientifically, this work impacts materials science, physical chemistry, and
solid-state physics. The interdisciplinary nature of this work transfers
knowledge between fields and provides students with unique opportunities for
intellectual growth. Graduates typically find employment in both academia and in
glass and semiconductor industry. The impact of this project in terms of
education and outreach is in three major areas: (1) participation by students in
research, (2) active and tight-knit collaboration with industry (Corning, Inc.)
where students are mentored and gain understanding of industry priorities, and
(3) dissemination of knowledge about glass science and technology to the broader
scientific community. The research findings are embedded into special topics
courses that are offered to students in materials science, chemistry, and other
related fields; and they contribute to campus programs for women and minority
students and to the recruitment of promising students from underrepresented and
economically-disadvantaged groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: The
dynamical processes in supercooled glass-forming liquids, associated with their
viscous flow, structural relaxation and annealing near the glass transition,
control all aspects of the processing and technological utility of the resulting
glasses and glass-ceramics. However, surprisingly enough, little is known
regarding the connection between the atomic structure, its connectivity and
topology and the temperature dependence of the flow behavior of chalcogenide
liquids. Historically, therefore, much of the approach for designing new
chalcogenide glasses has been largely empirical and lacked the predictive power
needed for their compositional optimization and processing methods. This GOALI
project brings together investigators with complementary expertise and common
interests from UC Davis (Sen, PI) and from Corning Incorporated (Aitken, co-PI),
to investigate the effects of structural connectivity and topology on the
temperature dependence of the viscoelastic behavior and relaxation processes in
supercooled chalcogenide (sulfide and selenide) liquids, using a unique
combination of state-of-the-art oscillatory parallel-plate rheometry, dynamical
nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy and differential scanning
calorimetry measurements. Predictive atomistic models of structure-relaxation-
viscous flow relationships, built on the basis of the results obtained in this
project, may enable the optimization of the chemistry, synthesis, and processing
parameters of these complex materials for a wide range of modern technological
applications. The focus of this project, namely how and why, the various aspects
of the atomic structure control the temperature dependent viscoelasticity,
relaxational behavior and related phenomena in chalcogenide glass-forming
liquids is in itself crosscutting materials research. The breadth, flexibility
and interdisciplinary nature of this project prepare the students with powerful
experimental skills and research experience in both academic and industrial
settings that may open many future career opportunities. It also enriches the
graduate education and training experience through numerous scientific
interactions between the collaborating scientists and participating
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.