* 1855980
* Electrocatalytic Studies at Single, Structurally Well-defined Nanoparticles
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Richard Crooks, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 08/31/2022
* USD 495,000.00

Professors Richard M. Crooks and Graeme Henkelman of the University of Texas at
Austin are supported by the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Division of
Chemistry to undertake fundamental studies of catalytic materials. The project
is aimed at developing a better understanding of nanometer-scale
electrocatalysts. The historical approach for developing new catalysts is based
on the Edisonian method of using scientific intuition followed by trial-and
error-testing. With the advent of very powerful computers, however, it has
become possible to imagine designing catalysts using sophisticated calculations.
Accordingly, the main scientific goal of the present research project is to
experimentally test the validity of this approach to catalyst design. To
accomplish this goal, individual, well-defined nanoparticles are first
synthesized, structurally characterized and their electrocatalytic properties
evaluated. This initiates an experimental-theoretical iterative relationship
intended to refine theoretical tools to the point that they will eventually be
sufficiently sophisticated to be used to design more effective electrocatalysts
from first principles. Electrocatalysts are important for converting chemical
fuels, like hydrogen, into energy, and also for the opposite family of reactions
in which energy is converted to and stored in the form of fuels. With rising
concerns over the security and sustainability of the nation's energy future, and
the scarcity of several key catalytic materials, it is more important than ever
to efficiently design more accessible and effective electrocatalysts. During the
course of conducting this research, students are provided with the technical
knowledge necessary to contribute toward a clean-energy future and the
communication skills necessary to convey the importance of energy-related
science to citizens and the nation's political leadership.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central objective of this project is to synthesize,
characterize, and evaluate the electrocatalytic performance of individual
nanoparticles (NPs), and then correlate their properties to those calculated
using first-principles theory. To address this objective, three specific aims
are identified. Specific aim 1 commences with the discovery of methods for
controlling the electrosynthesis of single platinum NPs (PtNPs) onto the tips of
individual, nanometer-scale carbon electrodes. Detailed surface structural
characterization of these materials is determined using electron microscopy,
nanobeam diffraction, and scanning tunneling microscopy. This structural
information is used to predict, using first-principles theory, the
electrocatalytic efficiency of these materials for carbon monoxide (CO) and
formic acid oxidation. CO oxidation is selected for study because it is one of
the simplest electrochemical reactions reported in literature in which clear
effects of NP structure on electrocatalytic activities have been observed. It
also often forms as an intermediate or by-product in electrocatalytic oxidation
reactions of organic fuels. The theoretical approach involves defining
particular descriptors for these reactions. Initially, these descriptors will be
determined by postulating reaction mechanisms and then calculating binding
energies of reaction intermediates. The resulting theoretical predictions are
then experimentally tested. Specific aim 2 advances the foregoing methodology by
expanding the library of achievable surface structures, which in turn provides a
more rigorous test of theory. Finally, in specific aim 3, the scope of the
project expands further to include other single-NP systems, including gold NPs
and single-atom alloyed NPs. In this part of the project, theory guides the
choice of electrocatalytic reactions and the combinations of materials tested.
The goal of this aim is to demonstrate the scope of the methodology and to
further challenge the predictive reliability of
theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.