* 1855111
* Quenched Disorder in Frustrated Magnets
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Rajiv Singh, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 09/30/2023
* USD 314,751.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports research and
education on theoretical and computational modeling of the properties of
magnetic materials, where quantum mechanics plays a central role. Magnetism is a
phenomenon associated with the electron's tiny intrinsic magnetic moment, called
spin. In the best-known magnetic materials, such as iron, electrons in the
material have their spins lined up parallel to each other and produce magnetic
fields at macroscopic scales. We experience these through their magnetic forces.
In another class of magnetic materials, spins line up anti-parallel with their
neighbors. Such materials do not exhibit macroscopic magnetic forces, but their
behavior can still be understood within a classical framework.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Frustration in the context of magnetism is a technical
term that denotes the existence of competing forces at the microscopic level.
Frustration can destabilize any arrangement of spin order and lead to far more
complex behavior. Quantum mechanics is essential for describing such magnetic
phases. Materials having these magnetic phases can harbor new types of particles
and show new types of responses to temperature changes, electric current, or
electromagnetic fields. They could provide platforms for a new generation of
quantum devices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In recent years, many such quantum
magnetic materials have been synthesized and are being studied. However, real
materials always come with imperfections or impurities. Such impurities can
sometimes degrade and sometimes stabilize exotic properties. This project seeks
to understand in detail the role of impurities in frustrated
magnetism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to their scientific value to the
understanding of exotic quantum materials and technologies, these studies also
provide excellent training ground for undergraduate and graduate students in
theoretical and computational methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports research and education on the
role of quenched disorder in frustrated magnets using theoretical and
computational methods. The quest for exotic quantum spin-liquid phases of matter
is poised at an interesting juncture. Several families of magnetic materials
have been synthesized that exhibit absence of conventional magnetic order. A
theoretical framework is in place for understanding quantum spin-liquid phases
of matter that includes exactly solvable models and emergent gauge theories. In
parallel, computational methods have been developed that can address realistic
quantum spin models needed to study quantitative macroscopic properties of such
materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will address such quantum spin
models with quenched impurities by a number of theoretical and computational
techniques. These techniques include series expansions and numerical linked
cluster expansions developed by the PI and his group. By calculating
thermodynamic properties such as entropy and specific heat, dynamical properties
such as spin-currents and spin-diffusion, and various response and scattering
properties, the work should provide quantitative support to various experimental
studies including transport, neutron scattering and NMR experiments. These
studies should help develop a comprehensive understanding of these class of
materials and prepare them for their possible use in next-generation quantum
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to their scientific value to the
understanding of exotic quantum materials and technologies, these studies also
provide excellent training ground for undergraduate and graduate students in
theoretical and computational methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.