* 1855211
* Collaborative Research: Influence of drinking water chemical composition on biofilm properties and decay of disinfectant residual: an experimental and modeling study
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Timothy Ginn, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 08/31/2023
* USD 197,701.00

Tap water treated and monitored by the water distribution system has generally
thought to be safe. However, several recent failures of water infrastructure
that we rely on for this safety have highlighted the need to better understand
and monitor the Nation's water quality. Recent research has shown that water
quality can deteriorate from the source at the drinking water treatment plant to
the taps in homes. A focus of this research is on in-building "premise
plumbing", the least understood and monitored part of the water distribution
system. Premise plumbing has the highest surface-to-volume ratios in the
distribution system, making it susceptible to pipe surface chemical and
biological reactions. In addition, water can often sit stagnant in small pipes
for days, resulting in loss of residual disinfectant activity and resulting
pathogen growth in pipe surface biofilms. This project will determine how to
reduce the decay of disinfectant, the formation of toxic disinfectant
byproducts, and the growth of pathogens in biofilms that grow on premise
plumbing surfaces. This will be achieved by controlled experiments with
disinfectants and molecular level characterization of the microbes present in
the biofilm. Results will be shared with the drinking water industry, water
regulators, and other stakeholders to develop best management practices for
ensuring the safety of home drinking water.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A systematic
study is proposed to understand how, when, and where risk occurs in premise
plumbing. The research is based on the following hypotheses: (H1) drinking water
chemical constituents control the porous structure of premise plumbing biofilms;
(H2) these biofilm properties control the mass exchange of disinfectant between
the biofilm and bulk aqueous phases and consequently the residual concentrations
of disinfectants; and (H3) laboratory biofilms grown in the presence of drinking
water will have diffusion and reaction properties of biofilms occurring in
premise plumbing networks supplied from those sources. A collaborative research
program will test these hypotheses through a multi-stage research program.
First, biomass growth under stagnant conditions with depleted disinfectant
concentrations on PEX and PVC, common premise plumbing materials using tap water
amended with anti-scaling and/or anti-corrosion chemicals to simulate treated
drinking water. H1 will be tested by analyzing 3D porous structure of biofilm
matrix based on optical coherence tomography of biofilms grown from these
different waters. H2 will be tested by quantifying the interaction of
disinfectant with biofilm via coupon- and pipe-section scale reactive transport
experiments and modeling. H3 will be tested by quantifying free chlorine decay
and formation of disinfectant byproducts in building scale experiments at the
University of Illinois and Washington State University under different
stagnation times. Successful completion of this research will transform our
knowledge of biofilm growth and disinfectant chemistry in premise plumbing and
help regulators and other stakeholders better manage water supply systems to
protect human health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.