* 1855923
* Animating Lewis Dots: the development of transferable sub-atomistic force fields for efficient, intuitive, turnkey simulations of chemical reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2019,12/31/2022
* Judith Herzfeld, Brandeis University
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 12/31/2022
* USD 435,000.00

Judith Herzfeld of Brandeis University is supported by an award from the
Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program to develop reactive
force fields for molecular simulation. Her goal is to make theory a nimbler
partner with experiment in exploring and understanding the pathways of complex
chemical reactions. Ideally, computational chemistry should be accurate,
versatile, efficient and user-friendly. This is a tall order so computational
chemistry usually prioritizes only a couple of these goals. Herzfeld and
coworkers are developing a new approach that seeks to combine accurate
versatility with efficiency and user-friendliness. This work is expected to
provide researchers with useful computational tools for simulating chemical
reactions in a broad range of realistic solvents. This research may have impacts
in catalysis and advanced manufacturing. The project also provides educators
with visualization tools that are useful for instructing students in the
mechanisms of chemical reactions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The handiest tool for
thinking and communicating about reactions has been the semi-classical "Lewis
dot" picture. This century old rubric is "classical" in the sense of thinking of
valence electrons and kernels as independently mobile particles, and "semi" in
the sense that these particles follow non-classical rules. Herzfeld's work seeks
to provide a quantitative version of this heretofore qualitative picture by
developing force fields for Lewis' sub-atomistic particles that effectively and
efficiently incorporate quantum effects. This project builds on their earlier
work on the acid-base chemistry of non-metals (with paired valence electrons)
and the ionization and spin states of nonmetals and metals (with valence
electrons modeled singly). In particular, the researchers are using an improved
understanding of the exchange contributions to the energy to extend the range of
applicability. The work involves training, validating and demonstrating the
potentials that describe the interactions between the particles. The goal is for
these simulations be "turn-key" in the sense of requiring no input as to
reaction intermediates or products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.