* 1855747
* Multitasking anti-pathogen activities of the sea urchin SpTransformer protein family:  insights into an evolutionarily divergent metazoan immune system
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2019,05/31/2024
* Leon Grayfer, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Shisler
* 05/31/2024
* USD 774,962.00

Sea water has lots of marine bacteria. So, how do animals (sea urchins) that
live in sea water protect themselves against infections? Answers to this
question apply to successful management of marine populations and productive
aquaculture. The sea urchin immune system lacks important aspects that are
present in humans. For example, sea urchins do not produce antibodies. Instead,
they express a family of anti-pathogen proteins called Transformer proteins
(they change shape!). At least one of the Transformer proteins acts very
broadly, and can bind to bacteria, fungi, and other pathogens. This is very
different from one antibody that binds only one target. The hypothesis is that
each Transformer protein has a slightly different repertoire of targets, which
gives sea urchins great flexibility to protect themselves against pathogens with
similar, different, or overlapping targets. Because of the large variety of
slightly different Transformer proteins, their complex anti-pathogen activities
are likely essential for sea urchins to survive. This project integrates
research with education in the following manner. Artistic illustrations of
science are effective for communicating science to the general public. An
Introductory Biology course will be designed and taught specifically for fine
arts majors by faculty in Biology and the Arts. Artist/scientist collaborations
can improve whether people learn and understand important concepts in science,
which will aid in science literacy. Furthermore, improved science understanding
by environmental policy students could have impacts on official government
policy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sea urchins have a complex and robust anti-
pathogen innate immune system comprised, in part, of SpTransformer (SpTrf;
formerly Sp185/333) proteins. The recombinant (r)SpTrf-E1 protein binds to
Vibrio and yeast but not to Bacillus. It binds LPS, beta-1,3-glucan, and
flagellin, but not peptidoglycan. rSpTrf-E1 is intrinsically disordered and
transforms to alpha-helical in the presence of anionic targets such as PO4
groups. The investigators predict that other versions of SpTrf proteins act
similarly but recognize different but overlapping targets. They will attempt to
define the binding sites for rSpTrf-E1, define the targets bound by other rSpTrf
proteins, determine whether other rSpTrf proteins undergo conformational
transformation like (r)SpTrf-E1, and test the anti-pathogen activities of other
SpTrf proteins in vitro and in vivo. Outcomes are expected to clarify the
binding and structural characteristics of the SpTrf proteins and their
activities in host defense, providing a unique example of immunological
adaptations by a basal deuterostome. Art to illustrate science is an effective
way for communicating science to the general public. However, art students
generally do not learn much in standard introductory science courses. Hence, an
Introductory Biology course will be designed and taught specifically for fine
arts majors by faculty in Biology and the Arts. The art inspiration will be the
science learned from lectures, discussions, and contact with scientists.
Outcomes will highlight opportunities for artist/scientist collaborations such
as improved data illustration, and for environmental science policy students to
learn about important concepts in science, which may have impacts on official
government policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.