* 1855750
* The Ninth International GEOS-Chem Meeting (IGC9); Cambridge, Massachusetts; May 6-9, 2019
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2022
* Daniel Jacob, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 12/31/2022
* USD 25,000.00

This project support student and early career travel to the 9th International
GEOS-Chem Meeting (IGC9). The GEOS-Chem Meeting is held at Harvard every two
years and is a major event for the global atmospheric chemistry modeling
community, with about 200 attendees and a very broad range of topics. GEOS-Chem
is an open-source global 3-D model of atmospheric composition used actively by
over 150 research groups around the world, including 52 in the US. This meeting
will bring together experts to exchange information that will inform and
stimulate fundamental research in modeling of atmospheric composition with links
to climate dynamics, biogeochemistry, and air quality.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Applications of GEOS-Chem span a very wide range of
atmospheric composition problems including oxidants, aerosols, carbon gases,
stratospheric chemistry, mercury, persistent organic pollutants, and others.
GEOS-Chem links with Earth System Models for studies of chemistry-climate-
ecosystem interactions, with meteorological data systems for chemical data
assimilation, with regional models for air quality applications, and with
assessment models for policy applications. The GEOS-Chem model is centrally
managed at Harvard with guidance from a Steering Committee including 17 US
university professors. A GEOS-Chem Support Team based at Harvard, University of
Colorado, and Dalhousie University is responsible for model development,
benchmarking, documentation, communication, and
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.