* 1855879
* CIF: Medium: Iterative Quantum LDPC Decoders
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2019,05/31/2024
* Bane Vasic, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 05/31/2024
* USD 1,171,862.00

Quantum information processing systems are far more susceptible to making errors
than conventional digital computers, and error correcting is vital in protecting
fragile qubits from errors. Quantum error-correction is at the heart of all
applications of quantum information processing, from fault tolerant quantum
computing to reconciliation in quantum key distribution, quantum sensing, and
reliable optical communications. This project will contribute to the practical
realization of scalable quantum computing and communications by finding
structured ways of achieving the benefits afforded by quantum error-correction.
This project will develop a novel class of error-correction codes and fault-
tolerant decoders and apply them in architectures for quantum computing, quantum
communications and networks. The project will contribute to the development of
workforce skilled in quantum information processing for the growing quantum
industries and quantum information programs in national laboratories. This
research is an integral part of the university-wide quantum engineering
initiative led by the team with a goal to establish a graduate program in
quantum information science engineering at the University of Arizona. It will
help the continued effort at the University of Arizona in involving under-
represented students into research, whose educational experiences will be
enriched by national and international
collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Error-correction is at the heart of all
applications of quantum information processing, e.g., in realizing fault
tolerant quantum computing, efficient reconciliation and privacy amplification
in quantum key distribution, building fault-tolerant quantum memories for
quantum repeaters used in a long distance entanglement distribution network, and
for attaining quantum limits of the rate of reliable optical communications.
Quantum low-density parity check (QLDPC) codes are the only known class of
quantum codes in the stabilizer family that have asymptotically nonzero rates,
and are an important cog in realizing scalable, fault tolerant quantum
computation, but an efficient decoding solution for QLDPC codes is still
lacking. In this project, the team will develop efficient and fault-tolerant
decoders that employ classical-quantum messages, to harness the full potential
of QLDPC codes. The approach is based on the concept of a trapping sets of
quantum decoding algorithms, which allows one to characterize decoding failures
combinatorially and through graph theory. This knowledge of trapping sets will
be then used to develop a framework for systematic decoder design. The resulting
decoder is a small fault-tolerant quantum computer built using noisy gates
wherein all computations remain local at nodes, and quantum communication
happens across nearest-neighbor edges on the decoding graph. The team will
characterize the performance of the QLDPC codes and fault-tolerant decoders in
recently developed architectures for scalable linear optical quantum computing,
and coded transmission-based all-optical repeaters for long-range quantum
communication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.