* 1855447
* Travel Grants for The International Conference on Architecture Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2020
* Tali Moreshet, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 01/31/2020
* USD 25,000.00

This proposal is for support of a travel to the 24th International Conference on
Architecture Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems (ASPLOS).
ASPLOS is a premier forum for multidisciplinary systems research spanning
computer architecture and hardware, programming languages and compilers,
operating systems and networking, as well as applications and user interfaces.
The research may target diverse goals such as performance, energy and thermal
efficiency, resiliency, security, and sustainability. The importance of such
cross-cutting research continues to grow as we grapple with the end of Dennard
scaling, the explosion of big data, scales ranging from ultra-low-power wearable
devices to exascale parallel and cloud computers, the need for sustainability,
and increasingly human-centered applications. ASPLOS embraces systems research
that directly targets these new problems in new ways.

This proposal aims to support 25 students to attend the conference. The intent
is to provide travel support for both the main conference, and the affiliated
workshops. The funding provided to students will enable much broader
participation by students, especially by those who may not have adequate support
at their educational institution and those underrepresented groups in the fields
related with the conference. Applications for travel support to ASPLOS will
specifically encourage underrepresented groups of students to apply.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.