* 1855610
* Polytopes and Matroids in Algebra and Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Federico Ardila, San Francisco State University
* Continuing Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 06/30/2023
* USD 269,999.00

In the last few decades combinatorics has grown and matured immensely as a
field, in response to the mathematical needs of modern computing and the
computational needs of all fields of mathematics. In particular, combinatorics
and geometry have benefitted each other tremendously in recent years, both by
the ways in which they are connected directly, and by learning from each other?s
philosophies and techniques. This project studies the discrete structure of
algebraic and geometric objects, and the algebraic and geometric structure of
matroids and polytopes. This interdisciplinary perspective offers unexpected and
effective approaches to long-standing problems. This research program
constitutes the academic backbone of a vibrant research and training
collaboration among primarily undergraduate institutions in the U.S. and
Colombia. Through research-based courses, vertically and geographically
integrated research projects, and the biannual Encuentro Colombiano de
Combinatoria, students participate in a truly international cooperation while
making substantial scientific contributions to combinatorics. Since 2007 this
initiative has trained more than 150 pre-Ph.D. U.S. students, more than half of
whom are members of underrepresented groups in mathematics, and more than 50 of
whom have gone onto Ph.D. programs. The initiative also serves mathematicians
worldwide through the distribution of course videos, lecture notes, and research
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project studies three interdisciplinary and
interrelated research directions: 1. By studying the geometric structure of
matroids, we obtain purely combinatorial results that seem intractable without
the geometric perspective, and we establish foundational results in tropical
geometry and combinatorial Hodge theory. 2. We measure polytopes of interest by
recognizing that they are part of ?the right? family of polytopes, and finding a
formula for the measure of all the polytopes in that family. The results have
consequences in toric geometry and representation theory. 3. We explore the
Hopf-algebraic structure of various families of polytopes. The resulting objects
are useful in numerous combinatorial and algebraic applications, and they raise
geometric questions of independent interest. At the heart of each of these three
projects lies a configuration of vectors - usually a root system - that plays an
essential role. The combinatorial theories of polytopes and (Coxeter) matroids
are designed to study such configurations, and the powerful toolkit that they
offer is the unifying thread of this project. Solutions to the proposed problems
will have a strong impact in combinatorics and discrete geometry, and will
further our understanding of central questions in algebra and
geometry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.