* 1855443
* Enantioselective Fluorescent Recognition of Amino Alcohols and Catalyst Screening
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Lin Pu, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 06/30/2023
* USD 460,000.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms-B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Lin Pu of the Department of
Chemistry at University of Virginia is developing new molecular sensors for the
recognition of chiral organic molecules. These sensors can be used to facilitate
high throughput screening of asymmetric reactions. As these asymmetric reactions
are widely used in fine chemical preparations such as pharmaceutical drugs and
their intermediates, these sensors can increase the efficiency of their
preparation and perhaps reduce cost. In this project, students and other
researchers receive education and training in diverse areas including organic,
analytical, and materials chemistry. The research team is also active in
outreach activities to K-12 students in science and technology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The molecular probes of high fluorine contents are being
designed and synthesized for enantioselective fluorescent recognition. These
probes can form covalent bonds with the targeted chiral substrates and bring
them into the fluorous phase for fluorescent detection. When these materials are
used to screen asymmetric reactions, their fluorescence responses toward the
reaction products can be measured in the fluorous phase, and this may minimize
the interference from other components in the reaction media since normal
organic and inorganic materials cannot be dissolved in the fluorous phase. In
comparison to the traditional chromatography-based methods, this fluorescence
measurement method may be much faster and more well suited to high throughput
analysis. This strategy could facilitate the discovery of chiral catalysts and
reagents for the asymmetric synthesis of chiral compounds with diverse
applications in areas such as biochemical, pharmaceutical and agricultural
industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.