* 1855888
* Collaborative Research: Hierarchical Intelligent and Adaptive Techniques to Enable Resilient DC Power Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2022
* Luis Herrera, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 08/31/2022
* USD 242,338.00

As the adoption of energy sources and loads with inherent dc voltage continues
to increase, an electric system based on dc power can offer tremendous
advantages over ac, with higher efficiency, less power conversion stages,
smaller footprint, and higher reliability. For these reasons, dc power systems
and microgrids are now used in electric vehicles, ships, aircraft, and in rural
areas. However, electrical faults in dc power networks can lead to extremely
dangerous situations which are more difficult to interrupt than their ac
counterparts, particularly due to the lack of zero voltage crossings. Moreover,
high impedance faults in the form of electrical arcs, such as those caused by
loose connections or chafed wires, are very difficult to detect because of the
low fault current. The high penetration of electronics loads with advanced
controllers make the fault detection and localization even more challenging. To
increase the safety and resiliency of dc based systems, the proposed project
will address these technical challenges in detecting high impedance faults in dc
power systems by developing intelligent and adaptive fault detection,
localization, and isolation techniques that are built upon a comprehensive and
systematic fault modeling and characterization study. These techniques can
significantly improve the performance of existing and future dc systems to
enable their wide adoption at larger scales, which can provide efficient and
reliable interfaces to many renewable resources, energy storage units, and
modern electronic loads and align with the nation's initiatives in using clean
and green energy. This project is intrinsically multidisciplinary by bringing
advanced and exciting modern control theories, artificial intelligence, and
signal processing techniques into electric power engineering. The tasks in this
project involve a wide range of expertise and experience from software
simulation and control algorithms to hardware testing; from circuit level study
to system level implementation, which provides a unique and high quality
training opportunity for future engineers. The proposed educational activities
will also broaden participation of women and other under-represented
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the proposed research is to develop
fault detection, localization, and isolation techniques for modern dc power
systems through a hierarchical approach with intelligent and adaptive
functionalities. It addresses the most challenging issues in the protection of
dc power systems with a systematic and transformative effort. The fault modeling
and characterization study of the proposed project will generate fundamental and
critical knowledge of high impedance faults in modern application settings
through comprehensive experimental and analytical approaches. The proposed high
impedance fault detection and localization techniques will take into account the
effect of advanced controllers through dynamic parameter estimation. The
adaptive and integrated fault detection and localization schemes to be developed
will significantly enhance the existing protection system design and online
stability assessment methodologies by adopting modern nonlinear control theory
and artificial intelligence tools. The proposed research is expected to produce
significant results of both theoretical and practical values to the field of dc
power systems. When successfully completed, the project has the potential to
revolutionize the control and protection aspects of dc power systems, minimizing
the adverse impact of high impedance faults and constant power loads. The
proposed techniques can be applied to dc systems in different scales ranging
from isolated dc distribution networks to interconnected dc microgrids, to
improve the fault protection effectiveness and therefore their
resiliency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.