* 1855461
* Collaborative Research:  Seismic Attenuation and Anelasticity in the Upper Mantle: the Effect of Continuous Far-Field Dislocation Creep
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2024
* David Goldsby, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Hearn
* 04/30/2024
* USD 128,104.00

Thermal convection in the Earth's mantle drives plate tectonics, at the origin
of numerous hazards such as earthquakes and volcanic eruptions. The upper
mantle, which lies beneath the crust to depths of 410 km, is largely
unreachable. Seismology is, thus, a major tool when investigating mantle
features. Seismic-wave energy can be absorbed by the materials through which
they pass, a process called seismic attenuation. This allows to identify
structures at depth like the presence of melt. Each attenuation process must
first be characterized in the laboratory. Wave amplitude can be attenuated by
back-and-forth motions of dislocations, which are linear defects shearing
minerals during deformation. Here, the team measures experimentally the effects
of rocks' microstructure, such as dislocations and grain orientations, on the
attenuation of seismic waves. The researchers use water ice as analog for mantle
rocks because ice physical properties are well known. Ice can also be deformed
to high strain at modest pressure and stress conditions. During deformation, ice
specimens are here exposed to low-amplitude oscillating stress like those
induced by seismic waves, while the attenuation is quantified. Results from this
research provide critical insights to understand glaciers' and ice-sheet
behavior and the role of rocks microstructures on seismic attenuation. The
project has direct implications in Seismology and broader impacts in Material
Sciences and Planetary Science (icy planetary bodies). It also provides support
for an early-career female scientist, training for a post-doctoral associate in
the field of Rocks Physics and outreach to high-school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team expands on their previous studies of ice
behavior by exploring seismic-wave attenuation as a function of strain in
polycrystalline ice. The study is designed to explore upper mantle conditions in
terms of microstructure: dislocation density, sub-grain size and crystal
preferred orientation. The goal is to measure the attenuation signature for
materials experiencing a high background stress in the dislocation creep regime.
Preliminary laboratory studies have identified an increase in attenuation in
highly strained samples. Yet, the controlling parameters and the nature of how
dislocation damping scales to the mantle is not known. Here, samples are pre-
deformed to high strain in either shear torsion or compression in the high-
pressure cryogenic deformation apparatus at University of Pennsylvania. Their
microstructure is characterized by light microscopy and back scatter diffraction
in a cryo-scanning electron microscope. Specimens are then tested for
attenuation over a broad frequency range in the ambient-pressure cryogenic
apparatus at Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory (Columbia University). The results
are used to estimate the effect of both mantle stress magnitude and fabric
strength on seismic attenuation. They will also have applications to glaciers
and ice sheets on Earth and icy planetary bodies experiencing tidal
forcing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.