* 1855287
* I-Corps:  Secure and Compliant Smartphone Readable Diagnostics via Machine Intelligible Matrix Assays
* TIP,TI
* 11/01/2018,01/31/2023
* Todd Giorgio, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 01/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project empowers
everyday users to participate in a new healthcare trend called 'self-
quantification.' Self-quantification allows individuals to obtain a deeper
understanding of the state of their body, empowering them towards more proactive
and precise approaches to optimize their health. Our innovation provides an
approach for low-cost, consumer scale self-quantification. Our technology
simultaneously provides the health platform providers a secure, compliant
transmission service for self-quantified data. We have identified four primary
customer segments which include 1) professional diagnostic developers, 2)
digital and mobile 'self-quantification' health providers which include
smartphone health/fitness mobile applications, 3) academic/corporate clinical
investigators and 4) epidemiologists. These customer segments act as
distribution channels to the end users who will use the product. Commercially,
our product will penetrate a $46 billion 2020 mobile health market. Broadly,
with widespread use and the expansion of this technology to include the patient
de-identified monitoring of a variety of prophylactic, disease and homeostatic
biomarkers, current healthcare surveillance programs would be enhanced with
geophysical data, improving both disease and wellness tracking. This would
enable the full implementation of predictive analytics, enhancing the way
researchers track, monitor and eventually predict wellness and disease
worldwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project seeks to perform a thorough
customer discovery process of 'self-quantification' users and digital health
platform providers to identify the most valuable product parameters before
formulating our innovation into a market-ready product. Our innovation provides
a seamless platform which empowers consumers to 'self-quantify' by tracking
biomarkers at home. This activity will generate useful data for research studies
and predictive/correlative health outcomes. Our turnkey solution enables any
mobile health platform with the ability to incorporate smartphone-compatible
rapid diagnostic testing (RDT) into its product portfolio while utilizing our
software service to securely transmit smartphone-readable diagnostic results to
online databases in accordance with government regulations. This aspect will be
an enabling technology for other uses in the expanding mobile health technology
ecosystem. Our RDT will use a lateral flow assay sandwich approach utilizing
metatype antibodies and gold nanoparticle synthesis. Proprietary smartphone-
intelligible patterns will be formed in the presence of urinary biomarkers. The
technological implementation of our approach uses gold nanotechnology processes
and protocols. For example, the underlying, fundamental synthesis processes and
protocols used to generate core-shell magnetometallic nanoparticles will be
utilized in the synthesis of nanozyme nanotechnology which comprises our
proposed smartphone-readable rapid diagnostic test.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.