* 1855708
* New Reaction Cascades for Organic Synthesis
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2019,09/30/2022
* Jon Njardarson, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Paul Blakemore
* 09/30/2022
* USD 561,788.00

With this award, the Chemical Synthesis Program of the NSF Division of Chemistry
is supporting the research of Professor Jon T. Njardarson in the Department of
Chemistry and Biochemistry at The University of Arizona. Professor Njardarson is
working with a group of graduate and undergraduate students on making novel
organic molecules that may benefit the pharmaceutical, flavors, fragrance,
agrochemicals industries. Specifically, Professor Njardarson and his team of
students are developing powerful new methods of chemical synthesis leading to
high value molecular target structures. Flat carbon-containing rings (aromatics)
and chiral molecules (compounds that have specific 3-dimentional structures) are
indispensable chemical industry building blocks. This research is focused on
developing new reactions for making both aromatic and chiral molecules. The
educational deliverables of this project include the participation of graduate
and undergraduate students in hands-on research. Professor Njardarson and his
group put together visually beautiful teaching tools such as free mobile
applications (app) and websites entitled Chemistry By Design, posters of the Top
200 pharmaceuticals, and Disease and Structure posters of drug targets. These
educational tools provide the public with new opportunities to learn about
organic chemistry and its importance to society. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor
Njardarson and his students design and develop new chemical reactions for the
assembly of important molecular building blocks such as aromatic and chiral
structures using innovative approaches. A reaction cascade in organic chemistry
is a process in which multiple reactions take place consecutively (in tandem) in
a reaction flask. Cascade reactions represent a powerful platform for
streamlining synthesis by allowing multiple bonds to be forged in one pot,
resulting in high-value structural output. Using simple chemical building
blocks, Professor Njardarson demonstrates that structurally complex aromatic and
chiral structures can be assembled using novel anionic or catalyst mediated
reaction cascades. These new reaction cascades are tunable and can be diverted
in a multitude of ways to provide access to a diverse array of important organic
building blocks. This research is focused on elucidating and understanding the
detailed reaction mechanisms of these cascades, so that the resulting knowledge
foundation can be of broad use and value. Broader impacts include the useful new
chemical reactions that are expected to find use in industry and academia.
Furthermore, the suite of novel chemical education products such as the Top 200
chemical target posters and the app "Chemistry By Design" are used in
instruction around the world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.