* 1855231
* COLLABORATIVE RET Site - Global STEM - Appropriate Technology for Developing Communities
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Kellie Schneider, University of Dayton
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 07/31/2024
* USD 331,650.00

This Research Experience for Teachers (RET) focuses on international engineering
research based on human-centered design and appropriate technology for
developing countries. This RET site is a collaborative effort between the
University of Dayton (UD) and Central State University (CSU) that will engage
both in-service and pre-service teachers with hands-on research experiences with
both domestic and international community partners. Participants will engage in
a transformative, twelve month experience with five distinct components: (1)
Intercultural competence and travel preparation; (2) Appropriate technology
related research and/or human-centered design with a faculty member at UD or CSU
who supports the work of an international community partner; (3) On-site work at
the international community partner's facility; (4) Two-week intensive
curriculum development with the participant cohort under the guidance of a
curriculum coach; and (5) Follow-on programming that includes continued research
with a faculty member, piloting, revising, and final submission of curriculum to
TeachEngineering or for sharing with other college faculty on CSU's and UD's
websites. This RET site will provide a transformational experience for teachers
that they will be able to bring into their curriculum and classroom. This
program will help develop intercultural competence in participants and
facilitate an understanding of engineering impact in a global context. Through
this unique program, participants will experience personal growth through
cultural immersion, and participate in creating and designing engineering
solutions to address specific social concerns. As a result of their experiences,
they will create highly integrated STEM curriculum that includes geography,
history, political science, and culture that incorporates best practices for
attracting underrepresented populations to
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This three year project will engage 36 G6-12
in-service and pre-service teachers in a variety of engineering research
opportunities through UDs ETHOS (Engineers in Technical Humanitarian
Opportunities for Service Learning) Center. In the fall of each year, 12
teachers will be recruited into the year-long research program which includes 2
months of on-site summer work and an additional 2.5 months of programming
throughout the year. From January to April, teachers will participate in a
series of orientation activities where they will meet their faculty mentors, be
introduced to their research projects that connect to UD's ETHOS center, learn
about appropriate technology and human-centered design, travel safety and the
community to which they will be traveling. The ETHOS Center, which has provided
service-learning experiences through technical immersions for more than 15
years, will coordinate participant travel. Prior to their international
immersion, the teachers will engage in research with their faculty mentor part
time during the school year. Throughout June and July, teachers will conduct
campus-based research as well as engage in a related project with an
international partner in a 2-4 week international placement. Upon their return,
they will continue to engage with this project and their international partners
using institutional research facilities and virtual communication technology.
Teachers will participate in an intensive, affinity structured and team-based
curriculum development program for two weeks, where they will develop lessons
using the TeachEngineering format under the guidance of a curriculum coach. The
follow-up program will include lesson piloting and publishing, continued
research, ETHOS retreat and closing presentation and celebration. Lessons will
be piloted, edited and published during the fall.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.