* 1855812
* Comparative cophylogenomics in a highly replicated system:  Tinamou lice
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Jason Weckstein, Academy of Natural Sciences Philadelphia
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Balakrishnan
* 05/31/2024
* USD 913,086.00

This project is a collaboration between several ornithologists and
parasitologists in the USA, Brazil, and Peru to study the family tree and
interactions between tinamous, one of the oldest avian lineages, and their
extremely diverse parasitic feather lice. The team will use modern next
generation genome sequencing approaches to analyze bird and parasite specimens
and their DNA to reconstruct the genealogies and history of associations between
these ancient birds and their parasites. This hyperdiverse tinamou-louse system
is a model for studying broadly important patterns and processes that are
critical for understanding parasite diversification and the history of
colonization onto new hosts. Thus, the data analyzed for this project will fill
critical knowledge gaps in our general understanding of the basic principles of
host-parasite interactions and therefore has implications for better
comprehension of the basic biological principles governing human parasite
interactions. Undergraduate students, graduate students, a postdoctoral
researcher, and three high school students will actively participate in the
project and several of these trainees are from underrepresented groups. Project
participants will also deposit high quality museum specimens and data into
publicly available museum collections and databases. Lastly, project personnel
will work with the Academy of Natural Sciences public education and exhibitions
departments to participate in public outreach events and to develop an exhibit
on parasite diversity and evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will use
next generation whole genome sequencing to collect DNA sequences of 9 genera and
47 species of partridge-like tinamous and eighteen genera of their feather lice
(Phthiraptera: Philopteridae). Tinamou feather lice are the most diverse
community of feather lice found on any avian host group. However, neither
tinamous nor their lice have been well studied and there are no complete
published genealogies available to reconstruct the history of their host-
parasite interactions over deep time scales. This exceptionally high parasite
diversity on one host lineage may be a product of the ancient history of
tinamous, providing extensive time for parasite speciation, colonization, and
back colonization. This project aims to reconstruct robust genealogies of the
tinamous and their feather lice using whole genome DNA sequence data to untangle
the cophylogenetic history of their host-parasite associations. The project plan
includes four major objectives: (1) reconstruct the genealogy of tinamou feather
louse genera, including other major feather louse lineages, to determine whether
tinamou feather lice as a whole are each other's closest relatives and whether
host-switching and back colonization between tinamous and other avian families
is prevalent in this louse group's diversification; (2) reconstruct a genealogy
of tinamou species; (3) reconstruct genealogies of tinamou feather louse species
from 10 focal genera; and (4) conduct analyses of these genealogies and
associated genetic data including (a) a comparison of the genealogies of tinamou
feather lice with the tinamou host phylogeny, (b) a comparison of the rates of
DNA change between tinamous and their lice, and (c) a test for correlation
between host and parasite body size, which is well documented in the literature
but has not been well tested.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.