* 1855962
* Speciation and social plasticity: signal-preference phenotypes in social and genetic hybrids
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Rafael Rodriguez Sevilla, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Colette St. Mary
* 05/31/2024
* USD 1,235,798.00

This project investigates how social interactions produce variants in animal
behavior, potentially leading to speciation. Besides the familiar pattern where
new mutations lead to new traits, recent work indicates that social interactions
may also expose existing genetic variation to selection much more broadly,
facilitating divergence and speciation. The implications for whether and how
natural animal populations adapt to new environments are of broad relevance and
utility to society, and this work helps to elucidate the conditions under which
adaptation to novel environments may be faster than currently anticipated. The
project integrates research, mentorship, teaching, and community outreach to
study plant-feeding insects that communicate with plant-borne vibrational
signals, and the ways in which behavioral encounters between closely related
species of these insects induce variation in their mating signals and mate
preferences. The project involves a trans-Atlantic collaboration between senior
and junior researchers; resource-development for researchers (making new
software tools broadly and freely available); a pilot program for alternative-
career training track in software development for PhD graduates; community
outreach for families; and leveraging the host university's position as an
urban-access university to broaden the participation of under-represented groups
in science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biologists can best conceptualize speciation
when population divergence in ecological and reproductive traits is accomplished
by changes in a single locus. But speciation often involves divergence in
complex suites of polygenic traits, and it is not clear how linkage
disequilibrium is established and sustained in these cases. This project will
test the hypothesis that social plasticity can cause polygenic traits such as
mating signals and mate preferences to co-diverge as if they were controlled by
a single locus. This could prevent gene flow between diverging populations early
in speciation and help build up linkage disequilibrium. This would extend the
efficiency of the simplest known speciation scenario to cases involving
divergence in polygenic traits. The project integrates both empirical and
theoretical approaches. The empirical component of the proposal will use the
Enchenopa binotata species complex of treehoppers. This group of plant-feeding
insects offer a case study of signal-preference co-divergence that provides
unusual resolution in the analysis of the causes and consequences of variation
in signals and preferences. Experiments will contrast phenotypic variation in
mating signals and mate preferences due to developing in conditions mimicking
first contact between closely related species with that due to genetic
hybridization. Support for the hypothesis requires that signals and preferences
co-diverge due to social plasticity upon first contact between nascent species.
The project will also assess geographic variation in the social plastic response
to test the competing hypothesis of reinforcement on signal-preference
plasticity. Theoretical work will generalize the empirical tests of the
hypotheses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.