* 1855153
* EAR-PF:  Quantifying the Difference between Volcanic and Meteorological Lightning: Using Globally Detected Lightning and Multi-Parametric Volcanic Monitoring.
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2021
* Cassandra Smith, Smith, Cassandra Marie
* Fellowship Award
* Aisha Morris
* 08/31/2021
* USD 174,000.00

Dr. Cassandra Smith has been granted an NSF EAR Postdoctoral fellowship to carry
out research activities at the U.S. Geological Survey Alaska Volcano
Observatory. This study investigates hazardous volcanic ash plumes, which pose a
danger to aircraft flying over the western US, Alaska, Hawaii as well as
globally. Volcanic ash has the potential to damage jet engines and often results
in flight delays or cancellations. Ash-bearing volcanic plumes also generate
lightning. However, understanding the difference between volcanic and
meteorological lightning has not yet been systematically investigated. Can we
determine if globally detected lightning is volcanic or meteorological in
origin? How do these differences present in the data - i.e. altitude, polarity,
or charge strength? Might these differences enable us to measure plume
parameters such as plume height, plume travel direction, the ash concentration
in the plume, or eruption rate? In summary: how will volcanic lightning
supplement current remote sensing methods for volcanic plumes? Dr. Smith will
use a combination of a systematic catalog of volcanic lightning events and
detailed case studies of the eruptions of 2016/2017 Bogoslof, AK and 2018 Anak
Krakatau, Indonesia to investigate these questions. This will allow the
scientific community to overcome the observational gap that currently hampers
the understanding of volcanic lightning. The PI is engaging in outreach with the
Alaska Native Science and Engineering Program in order to expose students to
volcanology and a greater understanding of their local Alaskan
geology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Explosive volcanic eruptions can evolve quickly,
producing ash plumes that can reach aircraft cruise altitudes (~10 km) within
minutes. Timely warnings depend on rapid characterization of developing ash
plumes, and one of the new tools to accomplish that is volcanic lightning.
Lightning is a characteristic signal of vigorous, ash-rich eruptions -it results
from electrical charging during the creation, collision, and motion of airborne
particles. Global lightning networks, both land-based and satellite-based, have
begun providing a rich source of data to understand volcanic processes at
individual volcanoes. Yet, the scientific community still has an incomplete
understanding of how and why volcanic plumes become electrified, and what
lightning can tell us about the injection of hazardous ash. This study will test
the hypotheses that: (1) volcanic lightning is correlated to eruption source
parameters, such as plume height or eruption strength, and (2) it is possible to
distinguish meteorological and volcanic lightning for improved eruption
detection. Dr. Smith will use spatial and multivariable statistics to integrate
satellite, geophysical, and meteorological data for volcanic eruptions at
differing latitudes, with particular focus on the 2016/2017 Bogoslof eruption in
the Alaskan Aleutians and the 2018 Anak Krakatau eruption in Indonesia. Results
from these analyses will explore the utility of volcanic lightning in the rapid
characterization of volcanic eruptions and enable its use as a powerful remote-
sensing technique for volcanoes on a global scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.