* 1855277
* LTER: Baltimore Ecosystem Study: Synthesis of long-term studies of how multiple human and biophysical factors interact to drive ecological change of an urban ecosystem
* BIO,DEB
* 12/01/2018,11/30/2023
* Claire Welty, Cary Institute of Ecosystem Studies, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 11/30/2023
* USD 2,263,958.00

For about 20 years, researchers with the Baltimore Long-Term Environmental
Research (LTER) project have studied ecology within the city of Baltimore. When
it started, the Baltimore LTER project was highly unusual because most
ecologists were working in more natural environments. This was one of the very
first urban ecology sites. A long-term approach was needed for urban ecology
because changes happen slowly and important events can be rare in urban
ecosystems. The team of scientists made many ground-breaking discoveries about
nature in cities. They figured out the basics of how an urban ecosystem works.
For example, they discovered how nutrients such as nitrogen flow through steams
and are affected by lawns. They also studied plants, mosquitoes and birds.
Results of these studies remain important for improving environmental quality in
cities and for helping reduce the global impact of human activities. The latter
is especially important because most humans live in cities. LTER scientists have
worked closely with teachers and students in Baltimore to share their findings
and engage a new generation in ecological discoveries. This proposal provides
support for the final three years of the Baltimore LTER project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research at the Baltimore LTER site has focused on natural
exogenous drivers, interacting with urban ecosystem structure to influence
function. Exogenous drivers include climate, species introductions, and economy;
urban ecosystem structure includes physical, biological, social, and built
components; and response functions include watershed biogeochemistry, the
composition of ecological communities, and human environmental decision making.
This framework was used to address questions about sources and sinks of water
and nutrients in urban watersheds, ecological communities and their capacity to
change over time, and environmental perceptions and behaviors of households and
organizations over the long term. During this final phase of the Baltimore LTER
project, the following activities will take place: 1) processing and analysis of
final samples, with limited new data collection; 2) ensuring data availability
in perpetuity; 3) analyzing and synthesizing data; 4) preparing publications
that use and present BES datasets; 5) developing a stable and static website
that describes the 20 year history of the project and provides links to data,
publications and other resources; and 6) decommissioning of long-term field
sites in Baltimore.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.