* 1855193
* EAR-PF Subsurface Nitrous Oxide Emissions Along River Corridors: Analysis Across Spatial and Temporal Scales
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2021
* Corey Wallace, Wallace, Corey David
* Standard Grant
* Aisha Morris
* 07/31/2021
* USD 174,000.00

Dr. Corey D. Wallace has been granted an NSF EAR Postdoctoral Fellowship to work
at the University of Cincinnati to examine how agricultural practices and
changes in precipitation patterns affect nitrous oxide production along rivers.
Some evidence suggests that fertilizers from agricultural activities near
streams could contribute to the release of greenhouse gases to the atmosphere, a
process that has accelerated as human food and energy demands have increased.
Surface water and groundwater mixing along rivers delivers this nitrogen to
river beds and banks, where it stimulates the formation of nitrogen gases. The
release may be influenced by the amount of rainfall, the characteristics of the
soil, and type of land use. Through experimental, field work, and modeling
activities, this work will study how streams contribute to the release of
greenhouse gases into the atmosphere and how such emissions might change in the
future. Results from this work will advance knowledge on how greenhouse gases
are released to the atmosphere and will contribute to the development of
management strategies to reduce these emissions. The postdoctoral fellow will
also enhance graduate and undergraduate education by hosting a field and
classroom-based course on the environmental effects of climate change and
agriculture.

As a redox process, the extent and magnitude of subsurface nitrogen cycling
changes with nutrient availability and groundwater flow patterns. Subsequent
nitrous oxide production is thus highly variable across spatial and temporal
scales. The working hypotheses of this study include: (a) sediment heterogeneity
increases subsurface nitrous oxide flux relative to a homogenous lithology in an
otherwise analogous geochemical environment, and (b) climate change related
shifts in precipitation patterns increase nitrous oxide flux along river
corridors, creating a positive feedback loop that further stimulates climate
change. The postdoctoral fellow will utilize the CV Theis Groundwater
Observatory at the University of Cincinnati to evaluate the riparian aquifer
adjacent to the Great Miami River at high spatial and temporal resolution and
elucidate the hydrologic and geochemical controls on nitrous oxide yield from
subsurface nitrogen cycling. These field measurements will inform numerical
model development, which in turn will provide information on the influence of
sediment heterogeneity and other factors on nitrous oxide production. Watershed-
scale effects will be assessed by concomitantly using simulated future climate
data and projected land use change to estimate nitrous oxide flux along river
corridors.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.