* 1855377
* Defects, Electronic and Magnetic Properties in Advanced Two Dimensional Materials beyond Graphene
* MPS,DMR
* 03/15/2019,08/31/2019
* J. Ardie Butch Dillen, Materials Research Society
* Standard Grant
* Germano Iannacchione
* 08/31/2019
* USD 10,000.00

This proposal mainly seeks to partially support 20 undergraduate students,
graduate students, postdocs,&lt;br/&gt;and underrepresented, female, junior and
retired faculty to attend and present at the symposium on&lt;br/&gt;"Quantum and
Nanomaterials" at the Spring Materials Research Society (MRS) national meeting
in&lt;br/&gt;Phoenix, AZ, April 22-26, 2019. This meeting is the world's
foremost international scientific gathering for materials research, the MRS
meeting showcases leading interdisciplinary research in both fundamental and
applied areas, coordinated by over 200 scientists from both academia and
industry in many countries around the world. The meeting's core is its technical
program, which includes 54 symposia organized into nine topical areas. Symposium
QN02 is in the "Quantum and Nanomaterials" cluster. This cluster involves 8
symposia addressing the physical properties and device concepts involving a wide
range of quantum and nanomaterials. Both fundamental scientific aspects and
applications will be covered. This cluster will focus on the forefront of
theory, discovery, and design of novel 2D materials beyond graphene, their
heterostructures and devices concepts. Part of the cluster highlights recent
significant developments in the experimental, theoretical, and computational
techniques that address the challenges in controlling heat transport mechanisms,
from Nanoscale to Multiscale Thermal Transport, Energy Conversion, Storage and
Thermal Management. In addition, Emerging Materials for Quantum Information and
Emergent Phenomena in Oxide Quantum Materials will also be covered. Recent
updates on the Colloidal Nanoparticles-From Synthesis to Applications will be
presented and discussed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.