* 1855379
* Enhancing Discovery-based Learning in STEM Education by Integrating Augmented Technology and Culture-based Pedagogy
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Jennifer Byrnes, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Regina Sievert
* 06/30/2024
* USD 498,340.00

The mission of the NSF Tribal Colleges and Universities Program (TCUP) is to
support the strengthening of STEM education and research capacity at Native-
serving institutions. The project titled "Enhancing Discovery-Based Learning in
STEM Education by Integrating Augmented Technology and Culture-Based Pedagogy"
and administered by the University of Hawaii-West Oahu, closely aligns with this
mission. The project focuses on improving curriculum and instruction in Anatomy,
Physiology, and Biology courses through the integration of locally relevant
content and the use of student-centered teaching methods and virtual reality
technology. Faculty involved in the project engage in professional development
to strengthen their teaching skills and cultural competence in preparation for
the changes in curriculum and instruction.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project
focuses on framing the curriculum in place-based content and contexts and
infusing the latest technology into an inclusive, interdisciplinary learning
environment. Courses in Anatomy &amp; Physiology and Human Skeletal Biology will
be restructured to employ research-based pedagogy and augmented reality tools
that enhance student engagement and learning. Unique learning experiences such
as field trips, guest speakers, and interactions with local STEM professionals
will be incorporated into curricula, aimed at introducing students to exciting
STEM research studies and career opportunities. Virtual reality tools create
engaging dynamic learning environments, providing students opportunities for
realistic interactions with 3D representations of anatomy. Eventual outcomes of
the project include a strengthening of STEM instruction at UHWO and an increase
in student retention and success in STEM degrees and careers, particularly for
students from underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.