* 1855657
* Collaborative Research: Regulating homogeneous and heterogeneous mechanisms in six-electron water oxidation
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Maureen Tang, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 12/31/2023
* USD 250,276.00

Professor John A. Keith of the University of Pittsburgh and Professor Maureen H.
Tang of Drexel University are supported by the Chemical Catalysis Program of the
Division of Chemistry to conduct a combined experimental/theoretical study to
understand the formation of ozone through the electrocatalytic oxidation of
water. The largest use of ozone (O3) is in the preparation of pharmaceuticals,
synthetic lubricants, and other commercially-useful organic compounds. Ozone is
also used to kill bacteria in municipal drinking water. Electrochemical ozone
production involves heterogeneous (on electrode surfaces) and homogeneous (in
solution) chemical steps. Specifically, the study seeks to understand how and
why this process occurs the way it does through the use of computational
catalysis modeling in tandem with experimental measurements. Once the mechanism
is established, recently developed computational high-throughput screening
methods will be used to theoretically design and experimentally validate
catalysts for ozone production. The project is expected to deliver fundamental
knowledge on electrocatalytic reactions. Success is expected to satisfy the
basic societal need for such a commodity. Students are trained in combined
experimental and theoretical chemistry research tools. Middle schools in urban
areas with high populations of underrepresented groups are targeted with
outreach plans. Existing activities that leverage the facilities of the Office
of Diversity and Drexel's Lindy Center are continued and expanded.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project addresses the production of ozone via
electrocatalytic oxidation of water. Specifically, the study seeks to understand
how and why electrochemical steps occur in solution phase (homogeneously) and on
an electrode surface (heterogeneously). Computational catalysis modeling while
accounting for local solvation environments are combined with experimental ex
situ electron paramagnetic resonance studies, differential electrochemical mass
spectroscopy, and photocatalysis techniques to develop a complete understanding
of the electrochemical ozone production mechanism (EOP). Three basic scientific
questions are addressed: 1) what is the key EOP intermediate that leads to ozone
and how is it generated? 2) why do certain catalyst materials and configurations
uniquely improve EOP selectivity? and 3) can improved mechanistic understanding
lead to novel and improved EOP catalysts? This project is expected to lay
important foundational work that is needed to understand fundamental
electrocatalysis reaction mechanisms that involve homogeneous and heterogeneous
steps. It is also expected to validate EOP as a means to sustainable production
of ozone.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.