* 1855902
* INFEWS / T1: Social and biophysical models to integrate local food systems, climate dynamics, built forms, and environmental impacts in the urban FEWS nexus
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2024
* Matthew Liebman, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 06/30/2024
* USD 2,500,000.00

The majority of people in the world live in urban areas with high population
densities, relying heavily on external sources of food, energy, and water, and
producing disproportionately large amounts of waste. These phenomena,
characteristic of many urban areas, result in serious and cumulative negative
effects, such as increased energy consumption, greenhouse gas emissions and
surface water pollution. The team will use simulation models and expert
knowledge to guide assessment of current conditions for individual and combined
systems in the urban food-energy-water (F-E-W) nexus, and to propose system
improvements to increase local food production and simultaneously decrease
environmental impacts. Investigators on this project will derive potential
solutions by integrating social and biophysical models in a co-simulation
approach to investigate these problems. The team will analyze current conditions
and make future predictions focusing on local food production in urban and near-
urban areas. The framework will include climate dynamics, land cover/land use
changes, built forms, energy use, and environmental outcomes, with consideration
of specific social, policy, crop management, technology, and market force
scenarios. Project investigators will quantify environmental effects (energy use
and water quality outcomes) for current food production systems. The team will
then explore environmental effects and changes in local food supply under
scenarios designed using data from producers and consumers in urban and near-
urban areas. The Des Moines-West Des Moines Metropolitan Statistical Area will
serve as a study area representative of cities in rain-fed agricultural regions.
The team will collaborate with local stakeholders who are interested in
improving local food systems as part of their sustainability
strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team will develop an innovative approach to
enable integration of social and biophysical models for urban and urban-adjacent
food-energy-water (F-E-W) systems. The hypotheses guiding this research are: 1)
data-driven co-simulation strategies will enable coupling of disparate F-E-W
system simulation models across spatial and temporal scales; 2) the
environmental footprint (energy use and water quality outcomes) for urban
systems can be significantly reduced and food supply can be substantially
increased through enhanced human food production in urban and urban-adjacent
areas; and 3) the potential effects of changes (social, economic, and
environmental) in urban areas and their adjacent landscapes will be synergistic.
The team will create an empirical agent-based model that describes current
actions and predicts the impacts of future decision-making by urban agricultural
producers and consumers. This project will advance understanding of and enable
projections to explore different scenarios for local food production to increase
city resiliency and sustainability. The team will link parameterizations of
single F-E-W system models that allow characterization of current and future
conditions in individual systems as well as for the urban food-energy-water
system-of-systems under predicted climate variability. The team will use co-
simulations to explore the influence of individual drivers of system changes and
allow analyses of critical system feedbacks, thresholds, and resiliency. This
project will evaluate five specific drivers (related to policy, crop management,
technology, social interactions and market forces) that influence human
decisions leading to F-E-W systems changes. Local meteorological data for
current conditions and predicted future conditions will drive modeling for
building energy use, crop growth, and water dynamics. Changes in model outputs
related to heat discharge from buildings and surfaces will be integrated as
feedbacks for modeling future conditions and impacts on crop growth and urban
water management. These analyses will provide critical new knowledge about how
impacts of urban F-E-W systems can be reduced and local food supplies can be
increased. The open-source coupling framework created in this project will be
made available to ensure the broader research community can use it to analyze
other F-E-W systems. This research will create scalable and transferable models
that will support efforts to improve local food production, reduce energy use,
and protect surface water quality in urban and urban-adjacent landscapes. This
project is jointly funded by INFEWS Directorates (ENG, GEO and SBE and others)
and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR); and
managed by the GEOSCIENCES Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.