* 1855474
* Unraveling how RNA helicase Mov10 regulates Ago2 function
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2024
* Stephanie Ceman, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 06/30/2024
* USD 634,278.00

Human and animal brains are made up of billions of specialized cells called
neurons that act together to drive behavior, learning and memory through the
mechanisms that we do not fully understand. Neurons communicate with each other
through their long cellular extensions that are composed of proteins, produced
in the cells from messenger RNAs. The subject of this research is a recently
characterized factor, Mov10, that regulates protein production by unwinding
messenger RNAs to facilitate their translation into proteins. Mov10 is necessary
for early embryonic development across species and for normal neuron development
that includes producing the branches that connect neurons. The goals of this
work are to identify the RNAs that Mov10 unwinds, to understand how Mov10?s
unwinding activity is regulated and to determine how Mov10 participates in the
production of the branching that is critical for neuronal function. This project
will involve the training of high school students, undergraduates and graduate
students in both scientific methodology and in the scientific process, including
hypothesis testing. In addition, this work will inform public talks by the PI
for presentation to local and state professional groups about scientific
discoveries and the importance of supporting basic
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bursts of protein translation are required for
normal development and neuronal function but it is unknown how this process is
regulated. The goal of this research is to explore the key role of RNA unwinding
on RNA fate. RNA helicase Mov10 binds in proximity to MicroRNA Recognition
Elements (MREs) in 3'UTRs. It unwinds secondary structures in RNA to allow
access of the primary effector protein of the miRNA pathway, Argonaute 2, to
MREs. Mov10 was shown to bind mRNAs encoding neuronal projection and
cytoskeletal proteins in developing brain, suggesting a role for Mov10 in
regulating translation in dendrites. The hypothesis being tested is that Mov10
binds RNA G-quadruplexes (GQs), which are stable RNA secondary structures, to
modulate Ago2 association to MREs in the 3?UTR. The Mov10-dependent Ago2 target
mRNAs will be identified using a brain-specific Mov10 conditional knockout mouse
(cko) on which Ago2-enhanced CLIP (eCLIP) will be performed. RNAs whose steady-
state expression is Mov10-dependent will be identified by RNA-seq followed by
Gene Ontology to identify cytoskeletal RNAs in both WT and Mov10 cko brain. MREs
in the target mRNAs will be identified by mutagenesis of the 3'UTRs expressed in
a reporter construct. Regulation of Mov10 activity will be examined by testing
the hypothesis that phosphorylation of Mov10 controls its helicase activity. The
model GQ, iSpinach, will be used to examine how Mov10 phospho-mimics that are
either constitutively phosphorylated or constitutively unphosphorylated unwind
GQs. It will also be studied how Mov10 regulates neuronal dendrite formation by
expanding on the observation that heterozygous loss of Mov10 leads to reduced
dendritic arbors in cultured neurons. The hypothesis being tested is that Mov10
regulates Ago2 association with neuron projection and cytoskeleton mRNAs. The
Mov10/Ago2-regulated cytoskeletal RNAs that mediate arborization will be
identified by introducing candidate genes from which the Ago2-regulatory regions
have been removed into Mov10 cko neurons.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.