* 1855425
* IIBR Informatics: Tools and databases for proteome-wide modeling and analysis of alpha-helix association in membrane, from folding intermediates to structural interactomes
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Andrei Lomize, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Jean Gao
* 06/30/2023
* USD 795,025.00

Single-pass (i.e. bitopic) transmembrane (TM) proteins are the most abundant and
functionally diverse, but the least explored class of eukaryotic membrane
proteins. Bitopic receptors, enzymes, adhesion proteins, and transcription
regulators play key roles in many vital processes, including cell growth,
proliferation, differentiation, migration, communication, apoptosis, and
malignant transformation. To perform their biological functions, these proteins
form dimers or larger complexes via their TM alpha-helices and water-soluble
domains. The high flexibility and structural heterogeneity of alpha-helical
complexes in membranes impede their crystallization and require development of
computational approaches as a viable alternative to obtain three-dimensional
(3D) structures and multistate organization of TM complexes. The current project
aims to develop and apply new computational methods to solve the problem of
modeling TM heterodimers of bitopic proteins, enabling proteome-wide studies of
their structures. The developed methodology, tools, and complementary databases
will advance ab initio protein structure prediction methods, which will benefit
a broad community of researchers, teachers, and students who work or study in
the fields of biophysics, structural and evolutionary biology, medicinal
chemistry, and bioinformatics. Through its broader impacts, this project offers
an opportunity to train undergraduate and graduate computer science students in
developing bioinformatics resources using new computer languages and web
technologies. The developed toolbox will be used in the curriculum for a
graduate-level medicinal chemistry course and web-based workshops. Further, the
project will support the biology education in an Oklahoma City public school
with a high percentage of underrepresented minority students. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The project will generate a novel computational infrastructure
composed of two databases and five web tools. Three methods and web tools will
be newly developed: (1) TMmatch for the identification and modeling of TM
heterodimers; (2) TMPfold for the detection and analysis of stable two-helical
folding units in 3D structures of membrane proteins; and (3) 1TMnet for the
visualization of protein interaction networks in membranes. These web tools will
be included in two improved databases together with the existing PPM and FMAP
auxiliary web servers for modeling and positioning of alpha-helices in
membranes. The expanded Membranome database, which collects bitopic proteins
from six organisms, will incorporate 3D structures of all TM dimers modeled by
TMmatch and protein networks identified by 1TMnet (https://membranome.org/ ).
The upgraded OPM database, which holds all membrane proteins with known 3D
structures positioned in membranes, will include structures of stable two-
helical folding units detected by TMPfold and TMmatch in integral membrane
proteins (https://opm.phar.umich.edu/). The proposed toolbox will allow for the
creation of a scientific workflow from proteome-wide modeling of bitopic protein
TM dimers to identification of their interaction networks associated with
various biological pathways in different cells and organisms. The comparison of
interaction maps of bitopic proteins from six selected species representing all
kingdoms of life will advance our knowledge of increased biocomplexity of
single-pass membrane proteins during evolution. The easy-to use public web tools
will be beneficial for academic and health-related research. The TMPfold web
tool will enable computational determination of stable alpha-helical folding
intermediates, thus paving the way to ab-initio modeling of structures of multi-
pass membrane proteins and analysis of their folding pathways. The TMmatch web
server will enable analysis of structural effects of disease-related mutations
in TM dimers and will help in the design and optimization of TM alpha-helical
complexes for therapeutic purposes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.