* 1855927
* The Mechanisms of Adaptive Shifts in Allocation among Growth, Reproduction, and Defense
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Liza Holeski, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 02/29/2024
* USD 885,775.00

One of the fundamental rules of life is that there are trade-offs associated
with the adaptation of organisms to different environmental conditions. These
trade-offs prevent individual biological species from dominating every habitat
and climatic condition. However, while these trade-offs are prevalent, the
understanding of what genetic and physiological mechanisms cause them is poor.
Identifying the mechanisms underlying trade-offs in plants will provide
knowledge of how evolution works and guidance for the improvement of crop
species. This research focuses on understanding why trade-offs occur for
adaptations of the yellow monkeyflower (Mimulus guttatus) to highly divergent
coastal and inland climatic conditions in California. The coastal habitats of
this region are inundated by a cool ocean fog during the summer months, which
allows plants to survive year-round, but also means that there are more
herbivores which eat them. In contrast, inland habitats are very hot and dry in
the summer. The ways in which monkeyflowers have adapted to these different
climates involves strong trade-offs, for which this research will establish the
underlying mechanisms. The research will involve the mentorship of graduate
students, postdocs, and underrepresented minority undergraduate students.
Further, this award will support an ongoing partnership between investigators
and the Michigan State University College of Education to create an inquiry-
based learning module, focused on the monkeyflower system, for low-income middle
school classrooms in Flint, MI. A website will be developed for distribution of
this education module to classrooms nationwide. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Whether to
allocate resources to reproduction, growth, and/or defense is a fundamental
dilemma faced by all plant species. This research will focus on the evolutionary
divergence in allocation to rapid reproduction, long-term growth, and herbivore
resistance between coastal and inland M. guttatus. Inland populations allocate
resources primarily to rapid growth and reproduction to escape from seasonal
drought while investing little in herbivore resistance. Coastal populations have
evolved to invest more in vegetative growth and herbivore resistance as a result
of higher herbivore pressure and a longer growing season. Aim 1 of the research
will evaluate how two previously identified loci (DIV1 and DIV2) involved in
adaptive divergence between coastal and inland populations contribute to
concentrations of precursor and bioactive forms of the Gibberellin (GA) growth
hormone and the defense hormone Jasmonic Acid (JA). The effects of the two loci
on induced and constitutive levels of defensive phenylpropanoid glycosides
(PPGs) will be evaluated. Aim 2 will elucidate the molecular mechanisms
underlying adaptive variation in allocation among rapid reproduction, long-term
vegetative growth, and herbivore resistance. Functional molecular studies of
gibberellin biosynthesis and signaling genes will be conducted to evaluate their
role in the evolution of trade-offs. Aim 3 will use hormone applications in the
field to evaluate the role of those hormones in adaptive shifts in resource
allocation across climatic conditions. Plants will be grown in manipulative
reciprocal transplant experiments to assess the roles of GA and JA pathways on
flowering time, biomass, and fitness in coastal and inland
habitats.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.