* 1855567
* RAPID: Impact of Hurricane Florence on well quality in communities surrounding coal ash impoundments in North Carolina
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/2018,09/30/2020
* Marc Edwards, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 09/30/2020
* USD 199,618.00

A state of emergency was declared in North Carolina after Hurricane Florence
caused storm surges, historic rainfall, and widespread flooding. The flooding
caused collapses at coal ash storage sites. Coal ash is a waste byproduct from
coal combustion and is one of the largest classes of industrial waste generated
in the United States. Researchers have observed elevated levels of toxic metals,
such as arsenic, hexavalent chromium, selenium, strontium, and vanadium, in the
rivers and private wells impacted by coal ash. Little is known about the impacts
of flooding on coal ash sites. There are more than 85,000 North Carolina well
users in counties where coal ash impoundments have been impacted by Hurricane
Florence, demonstrating a potentially significant risk of contamination. The
hypothesis of this study is that private wells surrounding flood-impacted coal
ash impoundments are at increased risk of heavy metal contamination. Through
this RAPID grant, the research team will conduct temporal and spatial sampling
to evaluate flood-associated well water hazards in communities potentially
affected by contamination from coal ash impoundments. In addition, surveys will
be distributed to obtain information to improve communication, education, and
empowerment of impacted well owners. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project
aims to: 1) characterize well water heavy metal and bacterial contamination in
counties with flood-impacted coal ash impoundments; 2) examine well users' risk
perceptions, behaviors, and resource needs related to flood preparation and
recovery; and 3) determine site-specific hazard proximities, hydrogeologic
factors, well construction characteristics, and well user behaviors that
increase the likelihood of contamination. Inorganic contaminants must be
evaluated to ensure residents have safe, potable drinking water. Fingerprinting
techniques have been developed to determine the sources of heavy metal
contamination in drinking water, both from well water infrastructure and coal
ash sources. However, these methods have not been widely utilized to
systematically track the source of heavy metal contamination in flooded private
wells. In addition, local North Carolina health departments are required to
maintain well construction records, which can be used to further understand well
construction factors that can influence contaminant transport during flooding.
Finally, surveys of well owners will provide valuable knowledge about well owner
preparedness and recovery behaviors. These information sources collectively
support customized emergency planning resources and recovery strategies for
communities near coal ash impoundments. This research project will provide
insights into the potential sources and contamination pathways of microbial and
toxic metal contamination in flood-impacted wells near coal ash sites and will
help elucidate well owner resource needs that will enable autonomous well water
protection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.