* 1855453
* RAPID: Acquisition of Critical Data for the Validation of Watershed Response Models in Eastern North Carolina
* GEO,EAR
* 12/15/2018,11/30/2019
* Stephen Moysey, East Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 11/30/2019
* USD 49,982.00

There have been many hurricanes over the past few years that have made landfall
or severely impacted the east/southeast coast of United States. Data from such
hurricanes that impacts the terrestrial water cycle such as flooding - standing
water on different land surface types is often poor. The project will collect
three different kinds of observations - citizens mapping the flood extend, use
of unmanned aerial vehicles to image flooded areas and the water quality samples
for surface and groundwater in these areas in eastern North Carolina. These data
will be collected over different land use types such as agriculture, urban,
suburban and barrier islands. These data will be used in later studies to
understand the behavior of flow and storage in the aftermath of record setting
precipitation following a hurricane and to relay this information to the
society.

Flood inundation models face a problem of lack of data for calibration and
validation. Models for flooding are distributed and yet traditional hydrology
often collects only lumped data - discharge at a few points in the stream
channel in the catchment and at the outlet. This is not sufficient to
characterize the spatial response of a watershed. By collection of flood
inundation data after Hurricane Florence of standing water using citizen
mapping, use of unmanned aerial vehicles and water quality samples, the PI and
his team will be able to generate a data set that can be used later for
answering important science questions on water shed hydrology during floods.
These questions include - how accurate are our flood hydrology models for a
watershed; what is the response time for landscapes to recover from floods and
does this vary among different land use type and lastly can we change the land
use management to minimize the impact of floods. These questions can be
adequately answered by the data collected in this RAPID project. The collection
of water quality data feeds to the last question as to the land management
strategies for minimizing impact of floods.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.