* 1855264
* EAR-PF: Channel network evolution in a tectonically active basin enlightened through innovative luminescence geochronology
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2021
* Elizabeth Chamberlain, Chamberlain             Elizabeth      L
* Fellowship Award
* Aisha Morris
* 12/31/2021
* USD 174,000.00

Dr. Elizabeth L. Chamberlain has been granted an NSF EAR Postdoctoral Fellowship
to carry out research and education plans at Columbia University, Vanderbilt
University, and Wageningen University. The project will make use of recent
innovations by Dr. Chamberlain regarding optically stimulated luminescence (OSL)
dating. OSL estimates the time of sediment deposition based on trapped charges
that accumulate in quartz grains when they are removed from sunlight. She will
apply OSL to the Ganges-Brahmaputra Delta, Bangladesh, to determine the
mechanisms and timescales of delta evolution. Specifically, this work will
explore the connection between river and seismic (earthquake) processes in a
large delta. Findings will describe sediment delivery to floodplains and coasts,
a key factor in sustaining deltas under accelerated rates of sea-level rise. In
addition, the research will provide new information about river-seismic
geohazards by investigating how often large earthquakes occur and whether
earthquakes are capable of forcing rivers to spontaneously change course. The
anticipated findings are relevant to coastal management within the densely
populated nation of Bangladesh and in other coastal regions worldwide such as
the Mississippi Delta, U.S. This work will also contribute to methodological
development of the OSL tool. The research will facilitate knowledge transfer
between work groups in the U.S., The Netherlands, and Bangladesh and will
support student education by engaging Bangladeshi M. Sci. students in field work
and a U.S. undergraduate in laboratory work. &lt;br/&gt;The Ganges-Brahmaputra
Delta offers a rare opportunity to explore coupled fluvial-tectonic processes,
given its extensive river channel network and position along several actively
deforming plate boundaries. In 2018, Dr. Chamberlain and colleagues identified a
cluster of paleo-seismite structures in the Late Holocene Ganges floodplain that
include large sand dikes and soft sediment deformation. Located on the edge of
an immense (&gt;1.5 km-wide) relict and underfilled channel scar, these features
suggest a link between large seismic events and major channel avulsions. Dr.
Chamberlain will use her recently published OSL protocol to date seismite,
paleochannel bed and fill, point bar, and adjacent floodplain deposits, thereby
testing two processes that may regulate the avulsion timescales of large rivers:
(1) enhanced avulsion frequency through forcing by large, high-magnitude seismic
events, and (2) suppressed avulsion frequency through aggradation of the delta
plain fed by small distributary channels. A component of this investigation will
explore the development of novel luminescence geochronology approaches to
determine the timing of sand-dike emplacement. Dr. Chamberlain's research will
contribute to both the theoretical and applied knowledge of delta dynamics, and
to the advancement of luminescence tools by providing a new method to date
structures previously not amenable to dating.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.