* 1855476
* CEDAR: Downward Progression of Temperature Anomalies during Sudden Stratospheric Warmings
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/2019,02/28/2022
* Brentha Thurairajah, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Alan Liu
* 02/28/2022
* USD 440,005.00

The polar atmosphere often exhibits unexpected and significant temperature
anomalies called Sudden Stratospheric Warmings (SSWs) that show a downward
progression. The progression of anomalies can start in the mesosphere and lower
thermosphere region near 80 km in altitude and go all the way down to
tropospheric heights of around 30 km. Because of their downward progression,
SSWs represent an important process for downward coupling between atmospheric
regions. They are believed to be a product of interaction between planetary
waves and the mean atmospheric flow (winds), but it has also been suggested that
atmospheric disturbances originating from lower altitudes (gravity waves) play
an important role in this interaction by creating the right set of conditions
for downward progression (pre-conditioning). The research work will exploit the
recently obtained results of data assimilation runs in combination with a number
of atmospheric models. The downward coupling processes in the upper and middle
atmosphere are important because of their potential impact on the stratospheric
ozone and other important constituents. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work will
involve (1) analysis of characteristics of the temperature anomalies and
atmospheric waves using data from satellite measurements and global atmospheric
model results, (2) numerical simulations of wave propagation and comparison of
the results with characteristics of the temperature anomalies, and (3)
investigation of whether pre-conditioning occurs through a change in the zero-
wind line height by running ensemble simulations. This work will improve the
understanding of the role that atmospheric waves play in downward coupling in
the polar upper atmosphere and can potentially improve the ability to model
climate and space weather disturbances.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.