* 1855585
* RESEARCH-PGR:  Regulation of tomato fruit flavor and nutrition quality
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2024
* James Giovannoni, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 04/30/2024
* USD 2,484,852.00

Tomato is the most valuable fruit or vegetable grown worldwide. This project
uses genetics and biochemistry to understand how the tomato synthesizes flavor
and nutritional chemicals. Flavor and nutrition are critical targets for
improvement of agricultural crops in our modern society. Unhealthy shifts in
diets can be countered by producing more flavorful, attractive and nutritious
foods. Globally, biofortified food crops can address micronutrient malnutrition
affecting millions of the poorest people. Better tasting, more nutritious,
longer shelf-life food crops could have far reaching effects on world food
production and sustainability. If fruits and vegetables taste better, people
will eat more of them. Tomato fruit ripening involves simultaneous expression of
more than 1000 genes. How the many metabolic pathways involved in different
aspects of ripening are regulated is largely unknown. This project uses systems
approaches to identify the regulators of each pathway, defining a regulatory
hierarchy of genetic control on the entire process. The knowledge gained will in
turn facilitate improvements in specific traits such as flavor and vitamin
content. In addition to interdisciplinary training of the next generation of
scientists, a citizen science project will leverage the public's keen interest
in tomatoes. Individuals will be enrolled in an amateur plant breeding program
to identify new varieties for the home garden. They will collect data on
performance of experimental lines relative to a standard check variety, Better
Boy, across North America. The citizen input will be the basis for which
varieties are released.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prior efforts have established the
tomato fruit as a paradigm for understanding the genetic control of complex,
multigenic traits. The unifying project objective is to identify regulators of
important fruit ripening, nutrient and flavor pathway genes to facilitate both
more complete understanding of fruit maturation and develop tools for crop
improvement. This project uses a systems approach involving genetics,
biochemistry, molecular biology, physiology, genomics, informatics and
metabolomics to define important components of the regulation of fruit quality-
related processes and pathways and functionally characterize identified genes.
Public genomics resources enabling additional tomato and translational research
for improvement of additional fruit crops will be developed. Specific research
objectives center on development of data sets that shed light on regulatory
interactions, analysis of resulting data with the goal of functional
characterization of a subset of high priority regulatory genes and public
release of data through existing databases (http://ted.bti.cornell.edu and
http://ted.bti.cornell.edu/epigenome/). All of the discovered genes will be
freely available to all for marker-assisted breeding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.