* 1855206
* EAR-PF: Shear Wave Splitting based on 3D Seismic Wave Simulations: Forward to Inverse Modeling of Upper Mantle and D" Anisotropy
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2021
* Neala Creasy, Creasy, Neala Marie
* Fellowship Award
* Aisha Morris
* 12/31/2021
* USD 174,000.00

Dr. Neala Creasy has been granted an NSF EAR postdoctoral fellowship to carry
out research and educational plans at Colorado School of Mines (CSM). She will
investigate how the Earth's mantle deforms under high pressures and temperatures
by making use of the seismic waves produced by earthquakes. Interpreting these
seismic waves and how they directly relate to these deformation and
mineralogical processes within the mantle is difficult, in part due to necessary
assumptions and fundamental limitations inherent to mineral physics experiments
at high pressures and temperatures. She will calculate synthetic waveforms for a
3D, realistic Earth to explore how seismic observations relate to mantle
deformation. While some prior research has explored the viability of some of the
assumptions used to simplify these observations, there are many additional
aspects that need to be fully explored to fully understand the complexity of the
Earth. Understanding how the Earth deforms via mantle convection is important
because this deformation controls the surface expression of plate tectonics, in
the form of volcanic activity and earthquakes. This research will help clarify
the general understanding of how to use seismic waves to their full potential in
understanding current processes in Earth's mantle. Her educational plan involves
acting as a research mentor for graduate and undergraduate students at CSM,
creating educational material (e.g., infographics, teaching materials) and a
Virtual Reality (VR) setup to excite young scientists to pursue basic science,
and continued outreach efforts in the local community through organizations
including IRIS (Incorporated Research Institutions of Seismology undergraduate
internship program) and the Denver Museum of Science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Constraining the pattern and properties of
seismic anisotropy in the Earth can help reveal relationships between mineral
physics, mantle convection, and seismology. Sources of anisotropy in the
lithosphere as frozen-in anisotropy, transition zone, and D" complicate shear
wave splitting measurements, resulting in shear wave splitting that can differ
from plate motion. If we better understand seismic anisotropy sourced in the
lithosphere, we could also better constrain D" anisotropy, which requires
correcting for the upper mantle to some extent. Ray theory is commonly used and
is appropriate within certain limits, but not all implications have been
explored. Ray theory is an infinite frequency approximation and its validity
depends on the period of waves, the scale of heterogeneities, the length of its
propagation path, and the superposition of multiple arrivals, making
interpreting seismic anisotropy observations more difficult. Numerical methods
and advances in high-performance computing offer new opportunities to take the
full physics of wave propagation into account using realistic 3D Earth
structures while conducting seismological observational studies. In this work,
Dr. Creasy will explore the assumptions made in shear wave splitting as well as
tease out discrepancies between different models and observations of anisotropy
within the Earth, by conducting numerical simulations via 3D global wave
propagation solver SPECFEM3D_GLOBE. This work will help improve the
understanding of how seismic anisotropy observations are related to models of
deformation in the Earth's mantle and the sources of anisotropy in the various
regions of the crust, upper mantle, and D". These insights will help illuminate
discrepancies between different seismic anisotropy observational techniques on
regional (e.g. North America and Australia) and global scales. This work will
also assist the development of using shear wave splitting in global full
waveform inversion addressing appropriate parametrization to describe body-wave
anisotropy in the mantle during the inversion process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.