* 1855314
* RET Site: Research Experience for Teachers in Manufacturing of Nano-Enabled Devices
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Roger Bonnecaze, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 08/31/2024
* USD 598,627.00

This RET Site at The University of Texas at Austin will engage cohorts of middle
school teachers recruited from schools with high percentages of underrepresented
student populations in research activities in engineering related to
nanomanufacturing. The importance of the RET professional development experience
focuses on the middle school teacher as the conduit to attract, recruit, and
educate highly skilled future leaders -their students- to pursue STEM careers.
Studies indicate it is critical to imbue student interest at the middle school
level. Enhancing their lesson planning with nanomanufacturing research, teachers
can provide an authentic engineering experience for their students, deciphering
for students engineering and providing an opportunity for students to identify
with engineers at the middle school level. Research shows that the self-
identifying factor plays a significant role for middle and high school students
(male and female) on their decisions to become engineers and stay in engineering
professions. The lab based research experiences will meet teachers' demands for
relevant, collaborative and substantive professional development that is
transferable to the classroom. The intention is to create classrooms that
provide all students an opportunity for hands-on, project based, and relevant
learning experiences that assists students to understand, appreciate and pursue
post-high school and college career STEM pathways. Teachers will be recruited in
cohorts so that there is a critical mass to affect change in the school math,
science, engineering, and technology culture and create an innovative ecosystem
in the classrooms. Teacher cohorts will meet during the academic year after the
summer programs to assess how their implementation is progressing and share
experiences, successes and challenges. This RET will use the equipment, space,
faculty, staff and graduate students of the NSF Nanosystems ERC NASCENT
(Nanomanufacturing Systems for Mobile Computing and Mobile Energy
Technologies).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the course of the three year grant,
this RET Site will engage 30 teachers from eight middle schools in the Austin,
TX area in a research-driven program with a focus on structured mentored
research and laboratory experiences. Senior faculty and graduate students will
mentor teachers in an aspect of nanomanufacturing systems and processes, which
include tool construction, materials integration, modeling and simulation, and
nano-enabled device specification and evaluation that involve the fields of
chemical, mechanical, electrical and materials science engineering for seven
weeks during the summer. The program also includes a nanoengineering and
research bootcamp (offered prior to the first week of research), instruction in
curriculum design, weekly seminars and informal events to create a community
among the teachers, faculty and graduate students involved. Faculty and graduate
students will support teachers' implementation of their lesson plans using
applications of math, science, and technology methodologies from their research
and laboratory experiences. The RETs will return to their campuses and implement
their lessons developed from their 7-week research experience. They will not
return to their classrooms alone, however. Extensive follow up and support for
teachers extends throughout the school year. Using the Central Texas regional
resources in the semi-conductor industry and NASCENT Engineering Research Center
resources, teachers will use a team approach to excite and educate their
students about this growing industry in the region, as well as across the
country. The real-world connection to nanomanufacturing will be brought to the
teachers' classrooms during the school year using NASCENT faculty, graduate
students, members of the NASCENT Center Industrial Advisory Board, and semi-
conductor engineers from Center partners including but not limited to SAMSUNG,
Tokyo Electron, 3M, and Applied Materials. There is a critical need for a
diverse and skilled workforce in the semi-conductor area and RETs in this site
will help fill that need at a local level with students interested and able to
take on that challenge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.