* 1855391
* TWC SBE: Medium: Collaborative: Building a Privacy-Preserving Social Networking Platform from a Technological and Sociological Perspective
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Wei Jiang, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 08/31/2021
* USD 324,005.00

Social networks provide many benefits, but also give rise to serious concerns
regarding privacy. Indeed, since privacy protections are not intrinsically
incorporated into the underlying technological framework, user data is still
accessible to the social network and is open to misuse. While there have been
efforts to incorporate privacy into social networks, existing solutions are not
sufficiently lightweight, transparent, and functional, and therefore have
achieved only limited adoption. This project develops a privacy-preserving
social network (Trusted-Space) where user data are protected from the social
network itself, other social network users, and advertisers. The project
synthesizes solutions from a technological and sociological perspective to
ensure that all of the required functionalities for both users and advertisers
to participate effectively in the social network are available. The project
develops compact data representations and usability driven functionalities that
are privacy-preserving. The project also evaluates people's expectations about
the implications of their own actions on their privacy and the future behavior
of the algorithms, towards creating a simple, transparent, and predictable
environment to facilitate widespread adoption. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since
social networks permeate modern life, the project will have significant impact
through enabling the incorporation of usable privacy technology into the social
network fabric. The project also cultivates the integration of research and
education, by providing opportunities for research to undergraduates and
graduates, while increasing the awareness of privacy issues among the general
public through outreach activities.