* 1855919
* CAREER: Overcoming limitations to approximating combinatorial optimization problems
* CSE,CCF
* 04/04/2018,04/30/2024
* Alexandra Kolla, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 04/30/2024
* USD 296,006.00

This proposal seeks to develop a comprehensive understanding of the limitations
of approximation algorithms for combinatorial optimization problems.
Combinatorial optimization problems are of great importance to various areas
such as operations research, machine learning, VLSI design, computational
biology and statistical physics. The task of finding algorithms for
combinatorial optimization problems arise in countless applications, from
billion-dollar operations to everyday computing tasks. Many optimization
problems are NP-hard and thus cannot be solved exactly in polynomial time unless
P=NP. However, the majority of such problems are key elements to practical
applications where often, if the optimal solution is hard to find, producing an
approximate solution su;ffices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research proposed will
study the limitations of approximation algorithms posed by the Unique Games
Conjecture and the limitations posed by the presence of unlikely worst-case
instances. The PI aims to design a methodology to partially or fully overcome
such limitations by addressing both of those factors. The proposal outlines a
challenging plan focusing on research in a broad cross-section of spectral graph
theory, convex optimization, multi-commodity flows, and harmonic analysis. The
contributions of the work described in this proposal will have great impact on
the theory of approximability as well as real world problems for which
efficient, exact algorithms will be provided for semi-random instances and will
naturally result in collaborations between researchers across many different
fields such as mathematics, theory of computer science, industrial engineering,
operations research and networking.