* 1855583
* RUI: Computational Study of Vibrational Motion in Hydrogen-Bonded Systems
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Martina Kaledin, Kennesaw State University Research and Service Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2023
* USD 232,892.00

The Chemical Structure Dynamics and Mechanism (CSDM-A) Program of the Chemistry
Division supports Professor Martina Kaledin and her students at Kennesaw State
University (KSU) to develop computational methods to study structure and
properties of hydrogen-bonded systems. Water (H2O) is an example of a hydrogen
bonded system. When hydrogen (H) atoms bond to oxygen (O) atoms, the H atom
becomes partly positively charged, and the O atom partly negatively charged. In
liquid water, the H2O molecules therefore tend to stick to each other because of
the positive-negative attraction between H and O on different H2O molecules.
Hydrogen bonding is actually a general feature of many molecules that contain
O-H, or N-H (N= nitrogen) bonds as part of their structure. Hydrogen bonding is
an important topic of research because it can cause the formation of large
networks of molecules and influence the rates and outcome of chemical reactions.
The effects of hydrogen bonding are not easy to predict, especially when many
atoms and molecules are involved. Professor Kaledin has developed advanced
computer models to simulate the behavior and properties of hydrogen bonded
systems. She and her students are using high-performance computer systems (IBM
HPC computer at KSU) are employed to predict the structure of hydrogen bonded
systems as well as their response to light energy. Experimental chemists use
what are called spectroscopic techniques to measure how light of different
wavelengths (ultraviolet, visible, infrared) are absorbed by molecular systems.
Prof. Kaledin is using computational approaches to predict experimental
"spectra," which in turn helps experimental scientists understand their
observations. The findings of this project are contributing to developing
molecular dynamics simulation models which advance our understanding of many
chemical systems, as well s complex biological systems. The researchers involved
in this project include both undergraduate and graduate students. They are
learning principles of supercomputing, molecular modeling, supercomputing,
interpretation of vibrational spectra, analyzing the energetics of chemical
reactions, and molecular visualization techniques. Prof. Kaledin is also
Integrating elements of this research project into her formal undergraduate
courses, with the aim to improve science education and STEM students
success.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Central to these tasks is to calculate and assign
vibrational spectra using driven molecular dynamics (DMD). In the DMD method, an
external sinusoidal electric field, representing a continuous wave (CW) laser
pulse, is used to scan the spectrum for resonances and obtain an absorption
profile. The strength of the external field determines the intensity of the
motion. The important feature of DMD is the ability to study the anharmonic
motion and mode coupling, and make assignments. At resonant frequencies, the
molecular motions induced by weak driven force correspond to the normal-mode
frequencies, while harder driving induces anharmonic motion. To identify
resonant frequencies, the average internal energy of the molecule is obtained
after a finite time of driving. DMD is also easily expandable to two-dimensional
spectroscopy, such as 2D-IR, an even more powerful tool for studying complex
dynamical structures. These techniques provide detailed dynamic information on
protonated water clusters and small molecules relevant to atmospheric chemistry,
reveal their stability and timescale of motion of individual groups of atoms.
The students involved in this project are being trained in molecular dynamics
simulations, ab initio and density functional theory calculation, and
interpretation of Raman and infrared spectra (including 2D IR). All of these
tools and skills are highly valuable for scientists entering the modern
workforce. In addition to advancing other areas of science through the
computational models developed in this project, the broader impacts of this work
is includes the promotion of strong interactions between the research community
and industry, and outreach to students from disadvantaged backgrounds or
underrepresented groups, for example through engagement with the Peach State
Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation
(LSAMP).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.