* 1855871
* Workshop to Promote Participation of HBCUs in Advanced Manufacturing Research Related to the Manufacturing USA Institutes; Alexandria, Virginia; June 19-21, 2019
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2021
* Willie May, Morgan State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 01/31/2021
* USD 119,981.00

This workshop will promote participation of Historically Black Colleges and
Universities (HBCUs) in the research programs of the 14 Institutes of the
Manufacturing USA, which are sponsored by the Department of Defense, the
Department of Energy, and the Department of Commerce, National Institute of
Standards and Technology. The objective of the workshop is to formulate a
strategy for promoting and sustaining robust research and educational
collaborations between the faculty and students of the HBCUs and the faculty
members and industry scientists and engineers participating in the Manufacturing
USA Institutes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 2.5-day workshop will bring together
senior personnel from the Institutes and the HBCUs to support NSF?s policy goal
of broadening the participation of all populations and ethnicities in science
and engineering research, innovation and education. The resulting faculty
collaborations in advanced manufacturing are expected to lead to increased
research and innovation projects and output, significantly increased research
experiences for both undergraduate and graduate students at the HBCUs, and the
matriculation of more minority students in graduate programs at top research
universities in advanced manufacturing and other science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) fields of study. The workshop will formulate
a strategy for: (1) catalyzing increased fundamental research, innovation,
technology development, and knowledge transfer in advanced manufacturing at
HBCUs, (2) improving HBCU faculty development in advanced manufacturing, 3)
increasing opportunities for HBCU researchers to submit collaborative proposals
with Manufacturing USA collaborators, 4) providing access to the state-of-the-
art manufacturing equipment and expertise available at the Institutes, and 5)
facilitating information and personnel exchanges between the HBCUs and the
Manufacturing USA Institutes, including seminars, conferences, and summer
research experiences for the students and faculty of the
HBCUs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.