* 1855309
* CAREER: Quantitative Approach to Large-population Stochastic Dynamic Games
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Sergey Nadtochiy, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 08/31/2023
* USD 366,384.00

Nadtochiy&lt;br/&gt;1651294&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; There exists a wide variety of
natural and social phenomena in which the observable outcome is a product of
interactions among a large number of participants (agents), who reach an
equilibrium that reflects their aims to optimize their individual objectives. If
the agents make their decisions dynamically, in an uncertain environment, the
outcome of such interactions can be conveniently described by a continuum-player
stochastic dynamic game. The investigator pursues several research directions,
unified by the idea of establishing the game-theoretic models, which on the one
hand capture the real-world phenomena with sufficient precision, and on the
other hand allow for tractable representations of the equilibria. Such models
can be used to establish quantitative results, i.e., to make predictions about
the future evolution of a system, or to optimize the rules of interaction in the
system. The study of such classes of games is motivated by various applications.
As particular cases, the investigator considers models arising in market
microstructure and systemic risk. The results of the project can be used for
predicting the potential instabilities in financial markets and for designing
effective regulatory policies for financial exchanges and banking systems. In
addition, the class of systems analyzed in this project includes other relevant
models in economics, neuroscience, and sociology, resulting in a large array of
potential applications that may benefit society. The educational component of
the project includes designing teaching materials, for both undergraduate and
graduate students, with stronger emphasis on the novel applications of
mathematics to problems of finance and economics. Graduate students are included
in the work of the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; While there are many abstract
mathematical results for constructing equilibria in dynamic stochastic games,
these results rely on assumptions that often are incompatible with realistic
models. The investigator considers several classes of large-population games
that naturally fail to satisfy the standard assumptions, either due to the
presence of stopping times in the agents' strategies, or because of the singular
type of interactions between the agents. In both cases, the standard fixed-point
results cannot be applied directly to construct an equilibrium, due to the lack
of required continuity or monotonicity properties. The investigator studies
several methods to overcome these difficulties, which lead to mathematical
problems interesting in their own right. This study contributes to the theory of
continuum-player games (including, but not limited to, mean field games),
optimal stochastic control, and the propagation of chaos. In particular, this
project addresses specific problems in the theory of backward stochastic
differential equations with oblique reflection, as well as the questions of
limiting behavior of particle systems with singular interaction through hitting
times. The results of this analysis provide new tools for equilibrium-based
modeling. Graduate students are included in the work of the project.