* 1855100
* PREEVENTS Track 2: Collaborative Research: Improving High-Impact Hail Event Forecasts by Linking Hail Environments and Modeled Hailstorm Processes
* GEO,RISE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Conrad Ziegler, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 07/31/2024
* USD 168,629.00

The United States suffers billions of dollars in insured losses each year from
damaging hail storms and the societal and economic costs of such storms have
been increasing. Over 10 million properties in the U.S. were damaged by hail in
2017 alone. Recent examples of catastrophic hailstorms include a $2.3 billion
loss hail event impacting Denver in 2017, a $1.4 billion loss hail event in San
Antonio in April 2016 that included 4.5+ inch hailstones, and a 2012 hailstorm
in Amarillo, TX that produced 2-m drifts of hail that washed out roads and
brought traffic to a standstill. Unfortunately, none of these events were
anticipated ahead of time. This proposal will identify what type of environments
produce such high impact hail events, and how the physical processes that
produce hail are affected by environmental processes. The improved understanding
of hail growth will be incorporated into a hail forecasting system within
national weather prediction models to improve hail forecasts, which is in line
with NSF's mission to advance national health, prosperity and welfare and to
secure the national defense. With improved short-term (&lt; 1 h) hail forecasts,
immediate threats could be avoided, such as recommending that attendees at
outdoor stadiums or events take shelter. Improved intermediate-term forecasts
(1-3 days) could result in recommended action that required more time-intensive
planning, such as moving aircraft under shelter, notifying insurance adjusters,
and working with county-level emergency managers to have contingency plans in
place for public outdoor events. Knowledge of the expected type of event, such
as giant hail or lots of small hail (or "blizzard" hail), in addition to merely
hail size, would allow forecasters to better prepare the public: for example, a
forecasted "blizzard" hail event might require a city to ready its plowing
equipment and advise the public to avoid low-lying areas that could potentially
flood. Additionally, knowledge of which environments are connected to which hail
events types is a necessary step for developing hail forecasts on longer time
scales, of subseasonal to seasonal scale and beyond. This proposal will also
support a graduate student receiving a Ph.D. degree, two graduate students
receiving M.S. degrees, and three undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to advance predictability and reduce the
increasingly significant impact of hail on society, this proposal will
accomplish the following four goals: &lt;br/&gt;1) Identify environmental
controls on hail production for different hail threat classes (e.g., giant hail
or &gt;10 cm or 4 in, large amounts of small hail) and identify regime, seasonal
and regional differences.&lt;br/&gt;2) Establish the physical relationship
between hail threat class occurrence and environmental conditions. Determine
what embryo source region characteristics increase the probability of favorable
hail growth trajectories for different classes of hail threats and how these
vary across realistic storm environments.&lt;br/&gt;3) Validate a
microphysically complex hail trajectory model in light of newly available time-
varying radar-retrieved wind and buoyancy fields and surface hail
observations.&lt;br/&gt;4) Integrate new knowledge about environmental controls,
three-dimensional hail trajectories, and embryo source regions into the CAM-
HAILCAST hail model to improve operational forecasts of hail
threats.&lt;br/&gt;Objective 1 will use an extensive hailstorm proximity
sounding database available from the Storm Prediction Center (SPC) to explore
environmental controls. Objective 2 will use idealized simulations to explore
sensitivity to both environmental conditions and microphysical processes.
Objective 3 will use a newly-developed radar-derived wind and microphysical
dataset to drive a hail trajectory model which will be validated with surface
hail observations. Finally, the improved hail forecasting model developed in
Objective 4 will be tested against an independent subset of hail threat events
from the SPC database. This proposed research will improve understanding of the
basic processes underlying hail growth on both environmental- and storm-scales
and how those vary across environments. It will determine which environments are
most favorable to different hail threat classes (such as giant hail or large
amounts of small hail) or hail sizes. It also moves beyond a purely statistical
endeavor to ensure the physical processes underlying the environmental controls
for each hail threat class are understood, including large updraft volumes,
favorable placement of embryo source regions, and appropriate embryo
sizes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.