* 1855996
* INFEWS/T1: Sustaining food, energy, and water security in agricultural landscapes of the Upper Mississippi River Basin
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2024
* Monica Turner, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 06/30/2024
* USD 2,499,683.00

As a breadbasket, biofuel producer, and water tower, the Upper Mississippi River
Basin (UMRB) is one of the most important and diverse watersheds in the U.S. and
is critical to national food-energy-water (FEW) security. The UMRB encompasses a
range of agro-climatic regions, decision makers, and political and social
structures, and exemplifies many environmental problems that characterize
agricultural landscapes because of competing demands for FEW. The research team
will use numerical modeling and integrated biophysical, hydrological and social-
ecological research to generate systems-level understanding of FEW dynamics in
the UMRB needed to foster a sustainability transition in national and global FEW
systems. FEW elements are strongly connected and the biophysical systems that
control FEW supply respond to local-to-global economies and policies. To address
this complexity, the project will examine and model indicators of FEW security
(i.e. food and biofuel production, water quality and quantity) at multiple
scales and under alternative future scenarios and policies to the year 2050.
This targeted modelling will advance understanding of how FEW systems respond to
multiple interacting drivers such as land and water management and climate that
vary over space and time. The project will identify institutional barriers that
inhibit societal adaptation of land and water management to achieve FEW
security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The integrated modeling of this project will
enhance FEW security in the UMRB and focuses on the overarching question: How do
FEW systems of the UMRB respond to complex social-biophysical interactions, and
what policies and practices will sustain FEW security and the environment,
reduce risk of abrupt change, and promote ecosystem resilience during the 21st
century? This integrated cross-systems project will explore the magnitude and
rate of long-term slow (e.g. climate) and abrupt (e. g. extreme weather events;
new policy) changes on agricultural landscapes that can be absorbed without
experiencing precipitous declines in FEW supplies. The project will evaluate
changes in seven FEW components: cellulosic biofuel from grasses, biofuel from
crops, water quality, water quantity, crop production, human food production,
and indicators of ecosystem biodiversity. A suite of complementary quantifiable
targets for improving FEW security in the UMRB will be assessed using the U.N.
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) as a framework. The research will quantify
1) current conditions and trends in FEW systems, 2) top-down effects of external
biophysical and socioeconomic drivers across the entire UMRB region, and 3)
impacts of bottom-up drivers and decisions at finer scales in four diverse
representative sub-regions of the UMRB. The work will identify how choices,
policies, and governance networks can amplify or dampen feedbacks that stabilize
or destabilize FEW systems. The work will develop and apply new theory about how
combinations of drivers interact in agricultural landscapes in order to identify
the state-space in which FEW security can be sustained as shocks (drought,
extreme heat, flooding, and policy changes) intersect with slowly changing
drivers. Biophysical and economic land use modeling will be used with mixed-
methods studies of governance to develop a participatory modeling approach to
advance knowledge about FEW security. The project will connect the research with
students, educators, stakeholders, policy actors, and the public through a
variety of efforts that will foster discussions of FEW security in classrooms,
boardrooms, and town halls. To promote significant and wide-ranging discussions
of FEW systems security and a sustainability transition, this project has
strategically teamed with extension professionals who are directly involved in
the North Central Water Network and the Framework for Nutrient Reduction
Strategy Collaboration. This will facilitate engagement with key actors,
enabling direct communication of findings to a broad community concerned with
FEW security in the entire UMRB.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.