* 1855591
* Topological Methods for Discrete Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Florian Frick, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 06/30/2023
* USD 179,997.00

We often encounter situations with inherent symmetries, such as attempting to
fairly divide a good among several parties: If our division is truly fair, we
could permute the pieces without changing the outcome. This viewpoint arises
also in more abstract settings, such as decomposing a data set in a balanced way
with linear equations to efficiently handle it, or evaluating a function in a
fixed set of points to compute its integral. Note that if we introduce
subjective preferences of the involved parties to our fair division problem, the
inherent symmetries disappear. Again this loss of symmetry is a natural
phenomenon for the class of the problems mentioned so far. This project develops
methods to approach such problems, even in the absence of symmetry. Notably, the
methods are topological, that is, continuous, whereas the problems have a
combinatorial, or discrete, flavor. Thus this research builds bridges between
different branches of mathematics, making problems in one branch amenable to the
tools of another.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will conduct research on a
selection of combinatorial problems that benefit from a geometric viewpoint.
Among the themes of research are intersection patterns of sets, both in a purely
combinatorial setting (such as hypergraph matchings and design theory) as well
as in geometric settings (such as intersections of convex sets and non-
embeddability of complexes into Euclidean space), and the study of structured
sets in abelian groups (such as sumsets, the structure of sets containing zero-
sums, and spherical designs). These are problems, where one is interested in
constructing an object or showing its non-existence, but global obstructions
emerge---local solutions do not glue together to form the desired object.
Geometry and topology provide a suitable framework to organize these non-local
phenomena and detect such obstructions in the large. This research focuses on
problems that admit geometric generalizations and aims to delimit rigid discrete
results from their more flexible geometric
counterparts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.