* 1855241
* RAPID: Microbial cycling of Iron and Sulfur in Spring Creek Reservoir, Iron Mountain Mine
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2019
* Dawn Sumner, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Philip Bennett
* 12/31/2019
* USD 73,255.00

In July 2018, the Carr Fire burned nearly 230,000 acres, including the area
surrounding the Iron Mountain Superfund Site where mine-impacted drainage is
diverted into the Spring Creek Reservoir. Microbes alter the water and sediment
chemistry in the reservoir and change the quality of the water flowing
downstream. This year, rain falling on the burn scar during the wet season is
expected to cause rapid erosion and deposit extra sediment into the lake. This
project will investigate how contaminated sediments are deposited in the lakes,
and how microbes transform sediment, pore water, and reservoir water. Project
personnel will examine inflowing sediments, microbial communities from the
sediment, as well as water quality in the reservoir following storm events in
the 2018/2019 season. Results will show how microbial activity changes sediment
chemistry and water quality in the Spring Creek Reservoir and provide insights
into similar burned over areas and mine-impacted soils. Mining activities in the
Western USA has resulted in thousands of miles of streams impacted by acid mine
discharge, and widespread contamination of soils by mine and smelter operations.
Discharge of contaminated water and sediment from the Iron Mountain mine has
historically impacted the upper Sacramento River, an important drinking water
source and salmon spawning stream. The results of this project will help mine
managers, local and regional environmental planners and reservoir managers
understand the movement and fate of remobilized sediments, and to plan for the
effects of wildfire on the vegetation and reclamation infrastructure that help
to stabilize contaminated soils.

The Iron Mountain Superfund Site contains the remnants of several abandoned
mines, and Spring Creek drains part of this area with the Spring Creek Debris
Dam and reservoir (SCR) capturing discharge before it enters the Keswick
Reservoir and Sacramento River. In July 2018, the Carr Fire burned most of the
Spring Creek watershed, and thus, sedimentation is expected to be high during
the 2018/19 rainy season. The influx of sediment provides an opportunity to
investigate how microbial communities colonize and transform sediment and pore
waters in an acid mine drainage-influenced lake. Prior research in the SCR
suggests that microbial communities reduce iron and sulfate in pore waters
during high reservoir levels, and that iron and sulfide oxidize when water
levels are low, producing acidity and mobilizing metals. The proposed research
will characterize sediment influx, how microbial communities develop within the
new sediment, and how microbial activity changes pore water chemistry. The
research team will sample and analyze the sediments and pore and surface water 8
times from November 2018 to 2019. Analyses will include mineralogy; iron,
sulfur, oxygen, and pH of the water; and molecular analyses of the microbial
communities. This research will provide fundamental insights into environmental
biogeochemistry in acid mine drainage-contaminated environments and provide
guidance for managing the water quality in the SCR.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.