* 1855653
* Collaborative Research: Flag Algebra Methods
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Bernard Lidicky, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 07/31/2022
* USD 125,000.00

Graph limits are a recent concept developed to study large graphs which can be
used to simulate large networks. They bring together concepts from analysis and
graph theory. Different languages were developed to provide statistics about the
number of small subgraphs in large graphs. In particular, this project utilizes
the machinery developed by Razborov called flag algebra. This machinery has been
very effective in resolving many long standing open conjectures. The
applications are usually computer assisted, which allows to construct proofs of
a size impossible before. The project involves graduate and undergraduate
students. The software developed during this project will be available to other
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main topic of the research in this project
is to extend the applications of flag algebra methods. These methods were
developed by Razborov to attack a number of long standing open problems. In
particular, the extension of Turan's Theorem to 3-uniform hypergraphs. In some
cases, the application of the methods is quite straightforward. However, in
applications with iterated extremal structure, the obtained result is usually
not exact and additional work is needed. In prior work, the investigators and
their collaborators developed methods for dealing with iterated constructions.
An example of this problem is the question to maximize the number of induced
5-cycles in a graph. In this project the investigators will further develop
these methods. Iterated structures appear in many contexts, for example in the
polynomial to exponential transition in Ramsey theory. Another direction of the
project is to extend the method to small graphs. In prior work, the
investigators have applied such ideas to Ramsey numbers and to Erdos' Pentagon
problem. The investigators will refine these methods and apply them in other
contexts. Graduate students will be included in the research projects and the
investigators will continue to support the annual graduate research workshop in
combinatorics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.