* 1855374
* RAPID: Revisiting the compounding storm surge and extreme precipitation events on coastal flooding during hurricane Florence using field data
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/2018,10/31/2023
* Ashok Mishra, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 10/31/2023
* USD 226,841.00

During September 2018, Hurricane Florence wreaked havoc in the Carolinas with
devastating heavy rainfall (20-40 inches), record sea-water storm surges, and
consequent coastal flooding with reported inundation depths of as high as 6
feet. The impacts included major damage to the surrounding region and a number
of hurricane-related deaths. The city of Wilmington, NC entirely was cut off by
historic flooding from the Cape Fear River. The dense population and development
along its coastline continues to leave South Carolina communities highly
vulnerable to coastal flooding from these seasonal hurricane events. The major
causes of hurricane-related flooding events are the coastal storm surge caused
by extreme winds and/or the occurrence of concentrated and extreme precipitation
within vulnerable, flood prone areas. During flooding events, perishable data,
such as high-water marks, are potential evidence of the highest water levels
during a flood and they provide valuable data for understanding extreme flood
events. In this study, valuable information will be obtained from such
perishable data through field visits. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall
objective of this research project is to visit the locations of coastal flooding
to investigate (a) the reliability of the weather forecast in terms of different
spatio-temporal scales for extreme rainfalls, and (b) the joint probability of
extreme rainfall and storm surge to gain insight into an increase in flood risk
under hurricane scenarios. This research projects aims to amass data with which
stakeholders can improve their current design standards for future flooding
preparedness. The PI also expects (c) to utilize observed and collected
perishable data in developing a statistical modeling framework both to generate
spatial risk maps and to identify critical vulnerabilities of important coastal
infrastructure regarding compound events. Such information is critical for
maintaining coastal infrastructure networks and for providing alerts during
extreme events. This research project will advance knowledge about the influence
of extreme rainfall and storm surge on coastal flooding as well as the potential
impact of such events on environmental sustainability. By documenting perishable
data, the research project provides an excellent opportunity to study the
compounding effect of two extreme weather events at multiple locations and to
estimate the return period for such events with respect to historical periods.
The research results will be used to develop strategies for improving awareness
about compound extreme events amongst stakeholders to minimize flooding
impacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.