* 1855390
* Collaborative Research: Towards a Fundamental Understanding of a Simple, Effective and Robust Approach for Mitigating Friction in Nanopositioning Stages
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/15/2019,02/28/2021
* Oumar Barry, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Chou
* 02/28/2021
* USD 174,322.00

Nanopositioning stages are mechanical devices used for precise positioning in a
wide range of nanotech processes, ranging from spectroscopy to micro additive
manufacturing. Hence, their precision, speed and cost are critical to precision
engineering applications in the automotive, aerospace and defense industries,
and therefore directly impact economic welfare and national security. Stages
that use mechanical (i.e., sliding or rolling) bearings are currently the only
commercially viable option for a growing number of large-displacement
nanopositioning applications. However, mechanical bearing stages suffer from
poor precision and low positioning speeds due to the adverse effects of
friction. This award supports a scientific investigation into a simple but
effective approach for mitigating the effects of pre-motion friction on
mechanical bearing stages by connecting the bearing to the stage using a
compliant joint. Knowledge created through this investigation will increase the
positioning speed and precision of mechanical bearing stages without
significantly increasing their cost, hence contributing to the commercial
viability of nanotech processes. Its broader impact plan includes: (i)
collaborations with Aerotech, Inc., a U.S.-based nanopositioning stage
manufacturer, to facilitate knowledge and technology transfer; (ii) educational
curriculum development at two universities and training of professional
engineers through tutorials offered by the American Society for Precision
Engineering; and (iii) outreach to underrepresented minority middle school
students, aimed at inspiring and equipping the next generation of highly-skilled
manufacturing engineers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is
to gain a fundamental understanding of the dynamics and compensation of
nonlinear pre-motion friction acting on a servo-controlled mass through a
friction isolator. Empirical studies have demonstrated significant improvements
in positioning precision and speed when a servo-controlled mass (e.g., a
nanopositioning stage) interacts with nonlinear pre-motion friction through a
friction isolator (i.e., a compliant joint). However, very little is known about
the dynamics of the friction isolator. The premise of this research is that,
under certain circumstances, harmful dynamic phenomena (e.g., limit cycles)
could occur when pre-motion friction acts on a servo-controlled mass through a
friction isolator. This premise will be tested scientifically, to discover the
harmful phenomena and circumstances that give rise to them, leading to insights
on how to avoid them. To achieve this goal, mathematical characterizations of
interactions between friction, friction isolator and servo parameters (e.g.,
mass, stiffness and damping) will be made using various tools, like the method
of multiple scales, from nonlinear dynamic analysis. This will be complemented
by rigorous numerical and physical experimentation on mechanical bearing
nanopositioning stages, to guide, validate or refine the mathematical
characterizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.