* 1855882
* INFEWS/T2: Solar Solutions for Food, Energy and Water Systems (S2FEWS)
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Margaret Gitau, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Brandi Schottel
* 08/31/2024
* USD 2,499,999.00

Over the next few decades, increase in population coupled with rising per capita
income and associated increase in consumption habits is expected to put
unprecedented stress on demands for Food, Energy and Water (FEW) in large
regions of the world, requiring FEW solutions implementable with minimal
environmental footprint. While sunlight is an energy source that can provide the
needed sustainable solutions, in most states and nations its large-scale use
would demand extensive land areas, including agricultural land, for installing
photovoltaic (PV) panels. Agricultural areas are promising due to their
widespread distribution and accessibility for operation and maintenance needs,
but PV panel structure shadows would also reduce yield of major crops. The
proposed innovative design and installation of PV panel structures on farms will
maintain greatly-needed full agricultural production, while introducing both a
new water management approach to reduce environmental harm due to leaching of
farmland fertilizers and the generation of electricity from farmland areas. The
project's research on harmonious use of solar energy for food, energy, and water
could accelerate solar energy investments and enable a more sustainable economy.
The integration of research with education in the project will train and co-
mentor students in multi-disciplinary skills essential for developing innovative
solutions to complex systems problems as they join the workplace, contributing
to U.S. manufacturing leadership. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, a novel
solar spectrum unbundling approach for food, energy, and water management is
proposed, along with an outline of a scientific and technical path to enable its
use. This transformative system will be highly efficient, using the visible part
of the solar spectrum primarily for crop photosynthesis, and longer-wavelength
infrared photons for electricity generation with solar cells. In this new
framework, PV structures guided by sensors will participate actively in
rainwater collection and water management on a farmland to reduce the
environmental footprint of nitrogen and phosphorus fertilizers. The PV
structures will be designed and modeled to manipulate light intensities needed
by the plants. Such PV structures will be installed at Purdue's farm; major
crops will be grown; and plant, soil and atmospheric data will be collected
using a range of sensors for further analysis. To develop a framework for farm
water management, PV panels will be designed to collect rainwater for more
effective system-level co-handling of water and fertilizers. Additionally,
materials will be synthesized, and then new solar cells will be fabricated,
which will maximize electricity generation from photons unused by plants. Key
economic analysis will also provide essential implementation guidance. The
systems analysis will be performed in the context of farming in the state of
Indiana, with emphasis on meeting local electricity and water purification needs
for farmland, as well as additional electricity to supply adjoining rural and
urban areas. By the end of the project, a small-scale working prototype at
Purdue's farm will demonstrate solutions for the key technical and scientific
components of the integrated FEW system. Such a successful demonstration will
then enable a coalition of farmers and manufacturers to build a farm-scale
version of the entire system for testing on a regional farm for national
dissemination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.