* 1855861
* Midwest Geometry Conference 2019-2021
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2019,10/31/2023
* David Auckly, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 10/31/2023
* USD 19,996.00

This award provides support for participants for the next three installments of
the Midwest Geometry Conference, which will be hosted by Iowa State University
in 2019, Wichita State University in 2020, and Kansas State University in 2021.
The Midwest Geometry Conference series began in 1991. Each conference is devoted
to several topics in the broad area of geometry, which is the mathematical study
of shapes and their relative properties. The main goal of this series is to
create a focused environment in which graduate students, recent Ph.D.'s, and
faculty in the Midwest can benefit from a lively exchange of ideas and from
contact with leading geometers and topologists outside the region. The
conference will have a mix of longer presentations by experts and shorter
presentations by graduate students, with plenty of time for discussion between
the talks. In addition, the organizers of the conference are deeply committed to
fostering a more inclusive community in mathematics and have made it a goal to
ensure the participation of women, underrepresented and minorities groups at all
levels (participants, speakers, and organizers). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In these
conferences, the term geometry is interpreted broadly and includes Riemannian
geometry, relativity theory, differential topology, gauge theory, geometric
partial differential equations, free boundary problems, phase transitions,
nonlocal minimal surfaces and related fields. The subject has many applications
in general relativity, image processing, computer science, biology and
climatology, for example. Because of the broad variety of topics, each
conference will focus on a different aspect and the organizers will spend time
at the conference to finalize plans for the next conference, as well as managing
the overall series. The structure of the rather large organizing committee
allows senior faculty with considerable experience planning conferences to help
junior faculty with less experience. The overall expectation is that the Midwest
Geometry Conference will be a welcoming setting in which to discuss ideas, share
advances in theory and applications, build a strong research network, and start
new collaborations and mentoring projects. The conference webpage is at
https://stinga.public.iastate.edu/MGC2019.html.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.