* 1855194
* I-Corps:  Trimbit Technologies Customer Discovery
* TIP,TI
* 11/01/2018,04/30/2023
* John Sartori, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 04/30/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project stems from the
potential of our technology to enable untapped energy efficiency, cost, size,
and security benefits in the IoT space. In the low-power embedded systems that
drive IoT applications, energy efficiency is the primary factor that determines
critical system characteristics such as size, weight, cost, reliability, and
lifetime. Likewise, security is critical for IoT systems, which are entrusted
with nearly all our data ? personal, financial, health-critical, and otherwise.
Because of their extreme energy constraints and ubiquitous scale of deployment,
these systems have traditionally favored low cost and low power over security,
exposing a huge attack surface for information security attacks. Several large-
scale exploits have already been reported. By providing automated and low-
overhead solutions for security and energy efficiency, our technology has the
potential to make a disruptive impact on the IoT space, which is predicted to
have a market size of $457 billion by 2020. Additionally, the solutions we
provide have the potential to improve information security for the population at
large and allow broader deployment of IoT systems that promise to improve
quality of life and understanding of the world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
I-Corps project is built around technologies that enable aggressive optimization
of microprocessors for energy savings, cost reduction, and security. The
technologies are based on novel, automated system analysis approaches that
identify unused parts of a design and leverage the information to improve system
efficiency. The technologies have demonstrated reductions of over an order of
magnitude in energy efficiency and area for ultra-low-power microprocessors
through a host of application-aware optimization and design techniques. The
technologies also allow software programmers to evaluate information flow
security for their software on the processor(s) where it will be deployed,
enabling software to be certified with security guarantees. Results from our
research and initial customer discovery indicate potential to impact the
semiconductor industry. Through our technology, design and operating costs for
application-specific processors can be significantly reduced, accelerating
production of such processors, allowing them to be more widely deployed, and
providing traction for new markets such as DIY printed processors. Also,
reducing energy for low-power processors that drive the internet of things (IoT)
can significantly impact lifetime, reliability, size, and cost of these devices
that continue to grow in dominance of the semiconductor market as the IoT
revolution continues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.