* 1855972
* Roles of Contact Ion-Pairs as Promoters or Catalysts in Organic Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Gerald Hammond, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 07/31/2023
* USD 485,000.00

The Chemical Synthesis Program of the NSF Chemistry Division supports the
research, education, and outreach programs of Professor Gerald B. Hammond of the
University of Louisville. This project is seeks new understanding of chemical
reactions that rely on the formation of ions (charged particles). In an ionic
reaction, ions can separate (dissociate) or they can form contact ion pairs
(where they are just barely separated). Some solvents easily support the
dissociation of ions (e.g., table salt in water). Other solvents do not allow
ions to dissociate (e.g., table salt in oil). This research seeks to understand
how the properties of the solvent affect the ion formation and separation and
subsequently, how ion separation impacts the formation of reaction products.
Experimental results are combined with various computational efforts to predict
the structures of the ions/ion pairs in solution. Dr. Hammond inspires Hispanic
students to enter chemistry and other science fields through his "Targeting
Excellence: Hispanic Latino Student Initiative" which brings prominent Hispanic
chemistry to the University to serve as role models. He is also establishing
links with faculty in chemistry departments from Latin American Universities to
attract high caliber research-active scientists and students in collaborative
projects. Professor Hammond works with the California State University, Fresno
to host undergraduate students for summer research and also collaborates with
Professor Bo Xu, of Donghua University, China. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With
funding from the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry Division, Dr.
Gerald B. Hammond, of the University of Louisville in Kentucky, is investigating
ionic reactions. In an ionic reaction, ions can be dissociated or they can form
contain ion pairs. This research examines how, in low dielectric constant and
low solvation power solvents, contact ion pairs interact with reactants and
catalysts in a chemical reaction. Ionic transformations cover a wide range of
reaction types, from simple nucleophilic substitutions to complex cationic
transition metal catalysis, but the understanding of counterion effects is
mainly circumscribed to individual reactions. Toward this goal, his
investigations generate affinity scales of counterions for various metal and
non-metal groups and implement a new contact ion pair-assisted nucleophilic
substitution process (SNip). This conceptually new nucleophilic substitution
pathway enables reactivity in those instances where conventional SN2 or SN1
reactions fail. Computational studies of the SNip process are conducted. Also,
under investigation is the design of ion pair promoters including chiral ion
pair promoters and better electrophiles to facilitate the SNip process. Dr.
Hammond is keenly engaged in outreach programs focused on underrepresented
student recruitment into the technical fields through summer research
internships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.