* 1855237
* RET Site: Reinvigorating Energy Teaching (RET) via Research with Engineers
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2019,01/31/2024
* Justin McFadden, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 01/31/2024
* USD 599,181.00

This project aims to leverage the National Science Foundation's (NSF)
Directorate for Engineering (ENG) supporting Research Experiences for Teachers
(RET) in Engineering and Computer Science program in order to establish a new
RET site and implement a synergistic, triangular partnership between higher
education, the public school system, and energy-related industry in the
Louisville, KY metro area. The partnership includes faculty from the Colleges of
Engineering and Education at the University of Louisville (UofL) host
institution and the Jefferson County Public School (JCPS) system district.
Select science teachers from JCPS will participate in a six-week summer
experience working with UofL engineers on energy-related research and education.
These teachers will utilize this experience to modify and augment existing
science curriculum for the following academic school year and beyond. Energy
represents a unifying theme across all scientific domains. Energy describes
physical interactions within essentially all scientific systems, and crosses all
disciplinary scientific boundaries. The high school teachers will strengthen
their perspectives on engineering research, particularly with respect to
variations in engineering design, a topic that is part of the high school
science standards in Kentucky. They will also have an immersion experience over
the 6 weeks of summer that will give them additional ideas and examples of real-
world uses and explorations in energy engineering - useful context for
incorporating into their existing high school courses. The engineering faculty
and graduate students will benefit from a deeper understanding of the context
and goals of high school science teaching - schools from which many of the
entering engineering students have matriculated. In a context of energy-related
environmental, political, and economical concerns of the modern world,
experiences to support a stronger energy-literate culture are helpful for all.
Subsequent improvements to high school student understandings of fundamental
energy concepts and engineering design principles are expected to have a
positive impact on student interest in STEM-related careers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is to take place over a 3-year period, with 10
JCPS high school science teachers each year participating in the summer energy
engineering research labs, and using those experiences to inform their teaching
of high school students. The learning experience(s) of the teachers take place
in a research-intensive, laboratory-based setting and includes JCPS teachers,
practicing engineers from UofL, and representatives from local energy-related
industry during a 6-week summer session. Also during the summer session, under
the guidance of UofL project personnel, teachers will develop curricular modules
informed by their RET experience that will afterwards be incorporated into their
classroom practice during the following academic year. Instruction for this RET
experience will be focused predominantly on energy science and research, and
high school engineering education. Additionally, key aspects of the Next
Generation Science Standards (NGSS) and engineering design (including the
criticality of teamwork and communication) will be featured throughout the
program and applied to energy-related activities in an effort to support teacher
understanding of energy science. Undertakings during the summer session will be
a mix of individual- and cohort-based, and will include research experiences,
pedagogical planning, industry presentations and tours, and curriculum
development. Teacher support from project personnel will be continuous
throughout the academic year(s), and methods have been developed (including
website(s), conference presentations and workshops, and social media) to ensure
sound dissemination of project deliverables to both the general public and the
remainder of the JCPS body.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded
by the Directorate for Engineering (ENG), Division of Engineering Education and
Centers (EEC) and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.