* 1855905
* Excellence in Research: Unveiling the Potent Photo-activated Antiviral Functions of Carbon Dots and Derived Hybrid Dots
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2019,05/31/2024
* Liju Yang, North Carolina Central University
* Standard Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 05/31/2024
* USD 499,992.00

Non-technical Summary: &lt;br/&gt;Carbon dots (CDots) are nanoparticles of
diameter &lt;10 nm. The core in a CDot is made of carbon, and the coating on the
surface is composed of nontoxic organic or biological molecules. CDots have
recently been demonstrated to have highly effective antibacterial function under
visible/natural light, which is associated with their unique optical properties
and photoinduced redox characteristics. Building upon the known antibacterial
function of CDots, this project expands the research and development of CDots to
target viruses. Viruses have different structures, and replicate in a different
way from bacteria, so specifically designed and modified CDots and hybrid dots
with the core composed of carbon and other materials are synthesized and tested
to identify those that are most effective to target viruses. The successful
execution of this project could lead to the development of effective antiviral
agents with potential applications for preventing viral transmission and
infection, addressing some of the critical issues in public health and safety.
The project also provides excellent opportunities for the research development
of faculty, the training of underrepresented minority students, and the
recruitment of students into the pipeline to STEM programs at North Carolina
Central University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary: &lt;br/&gt;This
project is to develop carbon dots (CDots) and novel carbon-based hybrid dots to
target viruses. The hybrid dots, with TiO2 doping or dye photosensitizer
encapsulation in core carbon nanoparticles, are designed to significantly
improve the optical properties and enhance photodynamic effects, thus exploiting
the synergistic effect of the two constituents within the hybrid dots for more
effective antiviral activities. With the use of two structurally different model
viruses, murine norovirus (MNV) and vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV), the
project has three research aims: 1) Evaluation of the antiviral activities of
selected CDots platforms against representative viruses, towards the
understanding of property-function correlations by using various viral binding
assays and infectivity assays. 2) Exploration of selected hybrid dots (C/TiO2
and C/dye photosensitizer hybrid dots) for more effective antiviral activities
against MNV and VSV, including a systematic evaluation on the correlation
between major CDots properties such as dot surface charge, dot size, and optical
properties and their antiviral effectiveness. 3) Mechanistic exploration of
CDots and hybrid dots' antiviral actions, focusing on the interactions between
the dots and viruses, reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation, viral particle
integrity, and damages in viral proteins and viral genomic integrity by using
various chemical/biochemical analytic tools and high-resolution microscopy
methods. The successful execution of this project leads to the development of
effective antiviral agents with potential applications for preventing viral
transmission and infection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.