* 1855090
* PREEVENTS Track 2: Cascadia Tsunami Warning with Data Assimilation and Optimal Sensor Distribution
* GEO,RISE
* 06/15/2019,05/31/2024
* Anne Sheehan, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 05/31/2024
* USD 360,647.00

The Cascadia Subduction Zone poses a significant earthquake and tsunami hazard
to the densely populated coastal regions of the US Pacific Northwest. The goals
of this project are to improve the capability for tsunami warning in this region
by several lines of research. The first is to use the method of data
assimilation, which takes tsunami wave observations as they arrive at ocean
observing points and uses them to forecast the tsunami at the coast. The second
is to test the use of ship position data in tsunami warnings. Tsunami waves are
small in the open ocean but can cause detectable changes in ship height and
heading. These ship data could provide useful information to improve tsunami
forecasts. The last aspect of the project is to determine the best spacing of
seafloor observing sites for tsunami warnings offshore the US Pacific Northwest.
Installing seafloor observing sites is costly, and this study will use
mathematical methods to determine the best places for seafloor sensors
considering different scenarios. Anticipated results from this project will help
inform efforts to design future observation networks offshore Cascadia and other
subduction zones for providing earthquake and tsunami early warning
capability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The motivation for this project is to improve
the speed and accuracy of tsunami warnings and to best design detection arrays
for tsunami warning. This project will explore the use of data assimilation and
optimal sensor distribution for Cascadia tsunami warning. Multiple ocean-based
observational data will be utilized including seafloor pressure recordings from
the Cascadia Initiative experiment, National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration Deep Ocean Assessment and Reporting of Tsunamis (DART) seafloor
pressure data, coastal tide gauge data, and sea surface height data from ship-
borne Global Navigation Satellite Systems. The emphasis of this work will be on
(1) development of data assimilation methods for tsunami warnings by including
rapid seismogeodetic source solutions, ship height data, and tsunami-band
Green?s functions in addition to dense arrays of seafloor pressure data, (2)
examination of the utility of GNSS-derived ship height data for local tsunami
warning, and (3) determination of optimal distribution of tsunami sensors in the
offshore Cascadia Subduction Zone. Data assimilation is a method that has been
used in weather forecasting for years, and uses real-time observations to
develop a forecast. Data assimilation is a rapidly developing line of research
and has only recently been applied to tsunami studies. In addition to utilizing
data assimilation to better forecast tsunamis, this work will explore the
optimal spacing of sensors to provide timely and accurate tsunami warnings to
the coastal regions. Instead of deploying many stations, which may be
prohibitively expensive, an optimal observation network design can be explored
through numerical simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.