* 1855394
* Advanced Wearable Cardiovascular Monitoring Platform
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/15/2019,03/31/2024
* Negar Ebadi, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 03/31/2024
* USD 381,795.00

The goal of this research is to develop a wearable heart health monitoring
system that is robust to motion artifacts. Currently, most wearable heart
monitors detect the electrical activity of the heart, namely the
electrocardiogram signal. However, the mechanical activities of the heart can
also reveal valuable information about the health status of an individual.
Commercial motion sensors, i.e. accelerometers and gyroscopes, can detect these
activities by recording the vibrations induced by the heartbeat on the chest
wall. However, the recorded vibrations often become contaminated by motion noise
arising from sources other than the heart, such as the movement of the subjects.
This research proposes a novel combination of hardware design and algorithm
development to solve this problem as well as to provide more advanced heart
health status metrics compared to current state-of-the-art wearable sensors. An
array of motion sensors will be embedded in a wearable strap and placed around
the chest wall. The algorithm takes advantage of the extra information provided
by the sensor array to eliminate the motion noise in the recordings. Other types
of sensors (such as electrical and optical sensors) will also be embedded in the
system to augment the evaluation of heart wellness and provide detection of
heart failure. Such a system will be invaluable for the home-based detection and
management of cardiac diseases. The proposed research will be combined with
various educational and outreach efforts. Specifically, the PI will engage high
school students through the Liberty Science Center's "Partners in Science"
program and continue to recruit undergraduate students, especially from female
and minority groups, through the Summer Scholars Research Program at Stevens.
The PI will also participate in providing data to Physiobank, which is the
largest biophysical database online, available for the free use of the
biomedical research community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research
is to develop a wearable, multi-modal cardiovascular monitoring system with high
robustness. There has been significant effort recently on the development of
non-invasive wearable systems, in particular devices that monitor cardiac
electrophysiology. However, in addition to the electrical aspects, a perspective
on the mechanical activities of the heart and blood vessels also needs to be
gained for a comprehensive evaluation of cardiovascular health. Progress in the
area of wearable cardio-mechanical sensing is currently hindered by the
challenge of overcoming motion artifacts. This research proposes a holistic
hardware/software solution to this problem by implementing an array of inertial
measurement units which are placed around the chest wall and record both the
linear and rotational components of heart-induced chest vibrations. A model-
based signal processing algorithm which takes advantage of the redundant
information provided by the sensor array will then be applied to remove motion
noise components from cardio-mechanical recordings in an embedded platform. The
second thrust of this research is to augment the proposed cardio-mechanical
sensing system with the more standard modalities of ECG and photoplethysmography
(PPG). Sensor fusion algorithms will be used on the multi-modal signals to
extract further cardiovascular features as well as increase the accuracy of the
monitoring process. Finally, abnormality detection and classification algorithms
will analyze the derived features to evaluate the wellness of the cardiovascular
system and to detect heart failure. This research advances the state of cardio-
mechanical sensing in terms of robustness and motion tolerance. Additionally,
the proposed combined analysis of linear and rotational heartbeat-induced chest
wall movements will provide a deeper insight into the theorem of cardio-
mechanical sensing. Finally, the proposed noise cancellation approach provides
an embedded framework for the extraction of weak biophysical signals from strong
background noises and can be applied to other biophysical sensing modalities in
similar application scenarios.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.