* 1855654
* IRES Track III: Collaborative Research: Coupling Participatory and Hydrological Research for Adapting to Extreme Hydrometeorological Events in Agricultural Communities, El Salvador
* O/D,OISE
* 05/15/2019,12/31/2023
* Jerad Bales, Consortium of Universities for the Advancement of Hydrologic Sci
* Standard Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 12/31/2023
* USD 117,232.00

In this project, graduate students from US universities obtain international
research experience while working on a scientific problem with real-world
implications. Changes in climate cause communities to adapt to enhance
resiliency and foster practices that are more appropriate for new conditions. In
regions where dry seasons are increasingly longer, shorter rainy seasons
experience more severe storms. Rural and agricultural communities are especially
vulnerable to new seasonal conditions and their resources for adaptation are
limited. The Dry Corridor of Central America (spanning parts of El Salvador,
Guatemala, Honduras, and Nicaragua) is an important region for agriculture and
needs adaptation strategies. The project location is ideal because of its many-
decades history of changing climate. Regions of the western United States are
also becoming more arid and experience more extreme rainfall events. Effective
adaptation and resiliency strategies incorporate combinations of technological
and societal changes. The collaborative model in this study consists of experts
in hydrology and watershed studies, ethnography and participatory research,
agriculture, and community outreach. Researchers and professionals from Michigan
Technological University, the Consortium of Universities for the Advancement of
Hydrologic Science, Inc. (CUAHSI), and Lutheran World Relief (LWR), a US-based
international relief organization that is starting a multiyear project to
strengthen communities for disaster mitigation?are filling the needed expertise
to achieve the project objectives. The project team and student participants are
incorporating hydrometeorological data into forecasting tools to provide data-
driven recommendations for rural agricultural communities so they are more
resilient to water scarcity and flooding. Students learn new collaborative
research methods in an international context to enhance their capabilities for
working in socially and culturally diverse settings to address complex problems
in land-use management in a changing climate and challenging landscapes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students work with mentors/experts in social and
hydrological sciences research and education in agricultural communities in the
Dry Corridor of El Salvador. The project participants work with local farmers
and agricultural stakeholders to gain experience in adapting to climate change.
The interdisciplinary scientists and development professionals work together in
participatory research in communities experiencing water scarcity and extreme
rainfall events. Students collect hydrometeorological and community data to use
in computational tools to understand and forecast the hydrological system in
steep-sloped, semi-arid area subject to changing land-use. The increased
hydrological understanding along with participatory, community-based research
better informs decision-makers about more appropriate agricultural and water
management practices in response to observed changes in the regional climate.
The research team measures the effectiveness of these strategies on crop yields,
water usage, and impacts of precipitation-related hazards. The research aims to
inform farmers and other local stakeholders about hydrological factors that
influence crop yields in areas with highly variable weather and climate. The
research will influence decisions regarding crop selection, planting practices,
and irrigation. Each year a new diverse cohort of ten US graduate students with
different, but complementary, disciplinary backgrounds work together on issues
related to these hazards. The students participate in an 8-week international
educational and research experience, working with experts in hydrological
modeling, participatory research, agriculture, and hydrological and
meteorological monitoring. Professional development activities for the student
participants further the broader impacts of this work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.