* 1855395
* Online, Outside, and in the Community: Making the Case for Science Education Relevance in Native American Communities
* EDU,EES
* 03/01/2019,02/28/2023
* Raymond Burns, Leech Lake Tribal College
* Standard Grant
* Regina Sievert
* 02/28/2023
* USD 493,161.00

The goal of the Tribal Colleges and Universities Program (TCUP) is to support
Native-serving institutions of higher education in building their science,
technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) instructional and research
capacities. In alignment with these goals, the Leech Lake Tribal College (LLTC)
project named "Online, Outside, and in the Community: Making the Case for
Science Education Relevance in Native American Communities" provides a coherent
suite of activities that enhance the college's STEM degree program. While the
degree was developed to equip current and future generations of American Indian
students with the skills necessary to enter a competitive and rapidly evolving
STEM workforce, community surveys indicate a disconnect between these careers
and the perceived importance and accessibility of STEM education within the
community. To address this disconnect, the LLTC project builds the college's
capacity to provide relevant, high quality STEM instruction and improved
accessibility to STEM education within the Leech Lake communities. The project's
activities focus on four main areas: outreach, expanding distance education
offerings, improving access to technology, and student recruitment and
retention. The multiple components are designed to improve STEM outcomes for
Native students including increasing Native representation in the STEM
workforce, thereby decreasing economic disparities within the Leech Lake
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With their ongoing commitment to produce
graduates prepared to answer the local and regional workforce demands, LLTC is
extending beyond its traditional local student base to provide accessible STEM
education through community service-oriented outreach and distance education
development. The project utilizes an array of complementary activities including
1) the provision of wifi hotspots around the reservation community, computer
skills training, and a computer loan program to increase Internet access for
students; 2) the development of additional online STEM courses; 3) the
modification of developmental math courses using Backward Design; 4) a series of
culturally relevant STEM outreach activities in area high schools; 5)
professional development training for their faculty on distance education
instructional techniques; 6) the formation of a cohort structure for STEM
students; and 7) the development of a formal recruitment strategy aimed at local
secondary students. The strengthening of LLTC's educational capacity will result
in long-term benefits for the both the college and the community including
greater STEM enrollment, increased community engagement with LLTC STEM, higher
numbers of Native graduates entering the local STEM workforce, and improved
economic stability for Native people and their
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.