* 1855147
* RET Site: High School Teacher Experience in Engineering Design and Manufacturing
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Weihang Zhu, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 04/30/2024
* USD 615,490.00

The goal of the RET site in the College of Technology at University of Houston
(UH), a Hispanic Serving Institution, is to provide opportunities for high
school STEM teachers to engage in innovative engineering design and
manufacturing research, as well as develop advanced high school STEM curriculum
modules. The 83rd Texas Legislature established the new Foundation High School
Program, House Bill 5, as the default high school graduation program for all
students entering high school beginning in 2014-2015. House Bill 5 requires
enhanced STEM contents in high school curriculum as part of the graduate
requirement. However, many high school teachers have not received sufficient
training to prepare the new STEM modules. Texas Region IV covers the Houston
Metropolitan area. It serves 48 school districts with 1.2 million students (23%
of all Texas students) and 97,000 teachers. The RET site will be a timely
opportunity to recruit high school teachers to gain experience in design and
manufacturing and develop course modules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The RET site will
form a strong partnership between UH, Education Service Center for Region IV
(ESC4), school districts, and local industries on advanced high school
engineering education. The RET site program consists of professional development
activities in a six weeks summer program on campus and extensive follow-up plans
in the following academic year. The site will 1) recruit a total of 36 (12 per
year) high school teachers with diverse backgrounds for three years to engage in
advanced engineering design and manufacturing research; 2) develop and implement
an innovative curriculum by translating cutting-edge research in advanced design
and manufacturing from UH into high school classrooms, and meeting Texas
Essential Knowledge and Skills (TEKS) standards and NGSS standards; and 3)
provide interdisciplinary and hands-on experience to stimulate the interest of
teachers and students in STEM. In Houston Independent School District (HISD),
the minority population is 85.86%, and 74.93% of students are economically
disadvantaged. This RET Site will place emphasis on recruitment from
underrepresented groups including women, minorities, and persons with
disabilities. Academic-year follow-up includes course module discussion and
feedback, school visits, and conferences. The research experience by the
participants will be disseminated to fellow teachers through conferences,
teachengineering.org, RET website, and other channels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.