* 1855154
* EAR-PF: Millennial scale environmental changes in Pleistocene Florida can inform the causes and effects of trophic downgrading after megaherbivore extinction
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2023
* Angelina Perrotti, Perrotti                Angelina
* Continuing Grant
* Aisha Morris
* 05/31/2023
* USD 245,000.00

Dr. Angelina Perrotti has been granted a NSF EAR Postdoctoral fellowship to
carry out research and education plans at Brown University and the University of
Wisconsin. This project seeks to reveal linkages among climate, vegetation,
fire, herbivory, and humans during the last glacial period and subsequent
deglaciation at Lake Tulane, Florida. Through geochemical, charcoal, and pollen
analyses, this research will closely link past vegetation changes with changes
in herbivory, climate, and fire, which has direct implications for current
efforts to restore ecosystem biodiversity and function through reintroduction of
controlled grazing and fire regimes. This project has multiple broader impacts
in the areas of new and transformational learning experiences and outreach,
including the development of teaching modules for university-level archaeology
courses and engagement with local communities through public library lectures
and science festivals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The extinction of megaherbivores
such as mammoths and mastodons at the end of the last glacial period may have
resulted in a cascade of ecosystem effects. To link past records of vegetation
change with megaherbivore activity and extinction, Perrotti will revisit Lake
Tulane, a classic site with a well-established record of vegetation and
hydrological changes over the last 60,000 years. New ecological proxies, such as
dung-inhabiting fungal spores and fecal and temperature biomarkers will enable
new investigations of the linkages among climate change, megaherbivore dynamics,
and vegetation turnover. This research will 1) Assess and compare the signals
recorded by different indicators of megaherbivore population abundances (i.e.
fungal spores and fecal biomarkers); 2) Establish a geochemical biomarker
temperature record for Florida and provide the first quantified estimates of
Florida warming during the last deglaciation; 3) Investigate the effects of
glacial and deglacial climate variability on megaherbivore communities in
Florida; 4) Integrate multiple proxies to analyze the interacting influences of
climate, megaherbivore extinctions, fire, and human arrival on
vegetation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.