* 1855588
* RAPID: Critical Assessment of Drainage Infrastructure Performance in a Sustained Flooding Event: The Case of Hurricane Florence
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/2018,10/31/2020
* Kalyan Piratla, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 10/31/2020
* USD 65,458.00

Hurricane Florence demonstrated the vulnerability of coastal and near coastal
regions in the Carolinas to sustained flooding, which resulted in the loss of
lives and severe property damage. While the capacity and condition of drainage
infrastructures play a crucial role in minimizing the impacts of such flooding
events, these systems might experience damage due to extreme flooding that will
worsen the flooding impacts and diminish the remaining useful life of the
drainage infrastructures. This RAPID project will assess the impact of Florence-
related sustained flooding on the structural and hydraulic serviceability of the
stormwater infrastructure. The project participants will collect time-sensitive
peak discharge and asset (including soil) performance data including failures
and other significant incidents during or immediately after Hurricane Florence.
Data collected in this phase should suffice for future modeling of the drainage
infrastructure performance and validation. The time-sensitive data needs to be
collected in the field as soon as possible before it is tampered with or lost.
Time-sensitive geo-spatial data includes flooding elevations and peak
discharges, condition assessment of stormwater pipelines and other drainage
infrastructure assets, asset failures and their mechanisms, and cascading
failures through infrastructure interdependencies.

The collected data will lead to enhanced understanding of the impact of a
sustained flooding event on drainage infrastructures. The collected condition
data along with hazard characterization will be made available to the research
community for developing and validating models focused on drainage
infrastructure deterioration due to flooding events. Given the growing
vulnerability of coastal and near-coastal regions across the United States to
flooding, this research project provides an excellent opportunity to advance
scientific understanding and gather critical empirical data that can be broadly
impactful. The outcomes of this research will directly assist the Hurricane
Florence affected regions with improved knowledge of their drainage
infrastructure condition and recommendations for its safe and efficient
management during future flooding events.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.