* 1855334
* Polymer Physics Across Scales: Bridging Atomistic and Coarse-Grained Polymer Models
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Andrew Spakowitz, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 07/31/2023
* USD 384,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project is aimed to
develop theoretical and computational approaches to modeling soft polymeric
materials across scales of length from the individual molecules to the scales of
bulk materials. Polymeric materials are ubiquitous in our daily lives, and they
play a significant role in virtually every technological area. The current
predictive framework for the behavior of soft polymeric materials can be divided
into two different philosophical approaches. The first is based on detailed
models down to the level of atoms; these are frequently computationally
intractable for exhaustive discovery of polymeric materials. The second, more
computationally tractable approach, is based on low resolution representations
of polymers from which general predictions of physical behavior can be made, but
at the expense of molecular-level detail. This research project is aimed to
build a roadmap for bridging between these disparate perspectives that leverages
the strength of each approach while avoiding their individual shortcomings. The
goal is to enable the study of a wide range of properties of polymeric materials
that were previously impossible to capture. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
project also provides a platform for training theorists and computational
scientists who will be able to tackle a diverse range of fundamental and applied
problems in soft materials. The research and educational goals of this project
are complemented by broader outreach through the development of a dynamic
program called LABScI. Laboratory Activities for Broadened Scientific
Instruction. This program develops and implements laboratory science and
engineering teaching modules for the education of high school students that are
being treated for childhood cancer and other illnesses. This program is piloted
at the Hospital School at the Lucile Packard Children's Hospital with engagement
from undergraduate and graduate students at Stanford to develop the program.
Ongoing efforts aim to broadly disseminate this program nationally as a general
laboratory science curriculum for hospital-school education. Towards this goal,
this project will develop videos and online teaching aids that further enable
the implementation of the labs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project is aimed to develop
theoretical and computational approaches to modeling soft polymeric materials
across scales of length from the individual molecules to the scales of bulk
materials. Current understanding of polymeric materials is largely based on
coarse-grained models, but the development of high-performance computational
simulations offers new levels of granular detail that would be invaluable for
materials development. Bridging these scales is a hallmark problem in soft-
materials physics. The PI aims to systematically incorporate varying levels of
detail to capture the multi-scale behavior in polymeric materials. The
foundational work in this research program will offer new and critical insight
into the mesoscopic behavior of polymeric materials, which is a crucial length
scale for many material phenomena for technological applications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to tackle key problems in soft materials
self-assembly and thermodynamic behavior that require bridging these disparate
perspectives through identifying an intermediate-scale physical model that is
amenable to theoretical analysis while containing sufficient granular detail to
compare with a detailed model. Semiflexible polymers are defined to have a level
of detail that bridge these two perspectives, and fundamental work in describing
the statistical behavior of such materials acts as critical input in this
theoretical effort. This research program addresses the physical behavior of
semiflexible polymer solutions and materials by (1) building a software package
to predict the thermodynamic behavior of semiflexible polymers, (2) predicting
the impact of semiflexibility and fluctuations in copolymer materials exhibiting
structural and liquid-crystalline order, and (3) determining the impact of
polymer and solvent ordering in the phase behavior of polyelectrolyte materials.
These key areas of exploration provide deliverable tools and results that
interface directly with existing theoretical, computational, and experimental
approaches in soft materials. This effort may also shed new light on how
granular molecular interactions influence the mesoscopic behavior in soft
polymeric materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project also provides a
platform for training theorists and computational scientists who will be able to
tackle a diverse range of fundamental and applied problems in soft materials.
The research and educational goals of this project are complemented by broader
outreach through the development of a dynamic program called LABScI. Laboratory
Activities for Broadened Scientific Instruction. This program develops and
implements laboratory science and engineering teaching modules for the education
of high school students that are being treated for childhood cancer and other
illnesses. This program is piloted at the Hospital School at the Lucile Packard
Children's Hospital with engagement from undergraduate and graduate students at
Stanford to develop the program. Ongoing efforts aim to broadly disseminate this
program nationally as a general laboratory science curriculum for hospital-
school education. Towards this goal, this project will develop videos and online
teaching aids that further enable the implementation of the
labs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.