* 1855925
* IGE: Creative Interdisciplinary Research in Graduate Education (CIRGE)
* EDU,DGE
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Paul Gondek, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Denecke
* 03/31/2024
* USD 499,174.00

Creativity is at the heart of innovation, and yet STEM graduate courses are
rarely devoted to explicitly teaching creative practices and problem-solving
strategies. Instead, graduate students often struggle to develop creative
thinking skills on their own. Graduate training also typically takes place
within academic silos that limit students' exposure to other disciplinary
approaches and cross-disciplinary problem solving. This National Science
Foundation Innovations in Graduate Education (IGE) award to Drexel University
will test the purposeful infusion of creative thinking and problem solving into
the STEM graduate curriculum within an interdisciplinary space. The project will
test whether such an approach can enhance creativity and collaborative problem-
solving skills beyond the boundaries of the classroom and beyond an individual
discipline. The goal is to train students in best practices for team-based
research by providing a versatile skill set to address team processes and
interpersonal issues and foster synergy towards arriving at creative solutions
that exceed those achieved by a collection of
individuals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two graduate courses will be developed in
creativity to explicitly expose students to creative practices and problem-
solving strategies within an interdisciplinary team space. The two courses will
allow students to discover recent advances in creativity research and practice.
During the courses, students will apply these principles by devising team-based
solutions to STEM-related societal problems and by creatively improving student
thesis research. The project has an implementation component to ensure smooth
integration across university disciplines and a research component that
evaluates the effectiveness of the courses in enhancing creativity, problem-
solving and team practices. The research component will examine student, peer,
and faculty stakeholders using a mixed-methods, longitudinal approach to
generate formative and summative assessments. The goal is to arrive at an
evidence-based set of learning experiences for enhanced creative practices and
improved problem solving. Dissemination of these results may provide a platform
for other institutions to adapt.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Innovations in
Graduate Education (IGE) program is focused on research in graduate education.
The goals of IGE are to pilot, test and validate innovative approaches to
graduate education and to generate the knowledge required to move these
approaches into the broader community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.