* 1855406
* Full-Waveform Inversion of Seismic Input Motions in a Truncated Domain
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/15/2019,09/30/2020
* Chanseok Jeong, Catholic University of America
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 09/30/2020
* USD 143,499.00

Under this award a new full-waveform inversion method will be developed for the
identification of the seismic input motion on the truncation surface of a
computational domain, using existing sparse seismic records. This new method
will allow engineers to reconstruct the spatial and temporal distribution of the
seismic input motion, without the need to resort to the reconstruction of the
seismic event at the hypocenter, as is typically the case. Then, by using the
reconstructed seismic motion, it will be possible to study the effect of an
earthquake on the built environment, including subsurface systems (soil,
foundations, and underground structures). Therefore, the method will serve as a
tool to assess holistically the impact of earthquakes on the built environment
during seismic events. The proposed research will present the mathematical and
computational modeling of the new seismic-input identification method, as well
as numerical results showing the accuracy, scalability, and efficiency of the
method. The computer code, input data, and tutorials, necessary for using the
new seismic-input identification method, will be disseminated through the
DesignSafe Cyberinfrastructure. These materials will help informed users to
easily follow the research and extend it. Participating graduate students will
gain broad knowledge and experience on wave propagation analyses and inverse
problems. Moreover, hands-on projects will be used to motivate high school
students, from underrepresented groups, to pursue STEM careers during the
planned outreach program ``How do waves work?: watch, feel, and analyze
waves??.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To date, there has been no robust numerical method
that can identify complex, incoherent seismic input motions in a solid,
truncated by a wave-absorbing boundary. Existing methods are limited to either
simplified deconvolution techniques or large-scale seismic-source inversion
approaches that can identify the seismic source parameters (however simple or
complicated the adopted seismic source model may be) at the hypocenter. However,
there are many complexities, inaccuracies, and uncertainties associated with the
large-scale inversion approach that render it impractical for near-surface
simulations. It is the aim of this research to bypass the complexities
associated with the large-scale seismic source inversion by targeting the
seismic-motion reconstruction near the surface. Specifically, this research will
focus on the reconstruction of effective seismic input motion at the Domain
Reduction Method (DRM) boundary, using a partial differential equation-
constrained optimization method. The semi-infinite extent of the computational
domain will be truncated by using Perfectly-Matched-Layers, and state and
adjoint wave equations will be solved using the finite element method. The new
seismic-input identification method will be the most accurate and efficient
method for inferring seismic input motions in soil-structure systems. This
method can accommodate arbitrary soil heterogeneity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.