* 1855352
* R/V Rachel Carson Ship Operations-University of Washington (FY19)
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Robert Kamphaus, University of Washington
* Cooperative Agreement
* Rose Dufour
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,552,955.00

This proposal is submitted to request funding for the Research Vessel Rachel
Carson operated by the University of Washington to conduct oceanographic
research missions supported by the National Science Foundation. The Marine
Operations Department of the School of Oceanography of the University of
Washington takes great pride in providing essential marine science research and
educational facilities to NSF-funded investigators. The University of Washington
remains committed to managing these facilities in a safe, cost-effective, and
environmentally responsible manner. The ship is the newest ship to join the U.S.
Academic Research Fleet. The R/V Rachel Carson will operate under the UNOLS RVSS
safety standards as a UNOLS Operating institution.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Oceanographic vessels, operated by the UNOLS academic
institutions and funded by NSF, and other agencies, have been the traditional
multi-use facilities required to expand human knowledge of the ocean
environment. These ships working from the ocean's surface complemented by human-
occupied, robotic and - more recently -- autonomous undersea vehicles and
sensors, along with aircraft and satellites, continue to provide vital tools in
our understanding of the role of the oceans in determining our climate and in
studying and accessing the living and non-living resources of the world's seas
and sea-beds.&lt;br/&gt;Proper stewardship over ocean resources and their wise
use, and decision making for future ocean- and coastal- related issues are
inconceivable without an interested and engaged citizenry.&lt;br/&gt;In addition
to technology, our national ocean endeavor requires technical support in the
form of expert human resources, with sound science, mathematics and technical
education: a critical mass of individuals who will collect and analyze
tomorrow's data, and design the tools, models and applications we will require.
Provision of these sea-going research and educational facilities enables marine
scientists and students from the University of Washington and other institutions
nationwide to study natural phenomena - and to instruct the future scientists
and stewards of our marine ecosystems - on board state-of-the-art oceanographic
research vessels complete with laboratories, sensors, analytical equipment,
communications to shore-side investigators and educators, and full life support
for extended missions. Essential to UW's mission is the provision of educational
opportunities-both to students of the marine sciences, and, through educational
outreach programs such as REVEL, "Teacher at Sea," to K through 12th grade
students, nationwide. Periodically, The University holds open houses and
outreach events to provide a learning experience for local students including
tours through the ship facilities and hands-on demonstrations of marine science
research guided by faculty, students and ships' crewmembers. In 2011, the School
of Oceanography hosted the International Research Ship Operators conference at
UW. The School of Oceanography hosted the UNOLS Research Vessel Operators
Committee annual meeting at UW. During the conference, participants enjoyed the
opportunity to tour and ride onboard for a "lunch" cruise from the Seattle
waterfront, through the Ballard Locks, to the Oceanography Dock. The University
of Washington, with the support of the National Science Foundation and with
coordination by the University-National Oceanographic Laboratory System, remains
dedicated to, and focused upon, furthering mankind's understanding of the world
ocean, the living and non-living resources therein, and their interactions with
the approximately fifty percent of our citizens who live within fifty miles of
the shoreline.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.