* 1855005
* IRES Track II: A Unique Opportunity for Graduate Training in Tropical Biodiversity Science
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* Cara Rockwell, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 07/31/2023
* USD 242,337.00

This project will address the current shortage of organismal biodiversity
researchers. The proposed Advanced Studies Institute will provide three weeks of
field training in tropical biodiversity for eight US-based graduate students
from underrepresented groups, in each of three years. These students will be
integrated into an existing successful field training program supported by the
French Excellence Center for the Study of Biodiversity in Amazonia (LabEx CEBA),
with state-of-the-art infrastructure in Kourou, French Guiana. Students will
work with researchers from Florida International University (FIU) and LabEx
CEBA, taking advantage of extensive permanent field research sites and
laboratories available in French Guiana. The faculty mentors will supervise
student research projects with current cutting-edge research in the field,
focusing on three diverse understudied groups - trees, arthropods and fungi.
Students will also contribute to outreach led by the FIU Tropics program, to
strengthen K-12 research in schools, museums and botanic gardens in the Miami
metropolitan area. The project will thus foster the integration of these 24
scientists into both global and local research and education
networks.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Accelerating global changes highlight the urgent
need to document and understand tropical organisms. As a response to the
shortage of well-trained organismal biologists, this project aims to prepare the
next generation of researchers in terrestrial tropical biodiversity science. The
project addresses four complementary themes that respond to challenges in
tropical biodiversity research. First, a fundamental understanding of the
taxonomy of major groups of organisms is largely ignored in tropical
biodiversity training. We will include the methodological sampling and
cataloguing of three diverse understudied groups: trees, arthropods and fungi.
Second, an emerging frontier in biodiversity studies involves the integration of
species functional strategies that influence their distributions, demographies,
and responses to environmental changes. Using the same taxonomic groups,
students will learn the most accepted methods measuring functional traits in the
field and in the lab. Third, most students in biodiversity science conduct
statistical analyses and modeling exercises without incorporating the
uncertainty underpinning their taxonomic hypotheses, or the ecological
parameters used to describe species distributions and interactions. Students
will learn the latest methods to describe biodiversity that integrate taxonomy
and functional ecology, strengthen their capacity to develop and understand
climatic models, and use this information to predict the future threats.
Finally, it is rare but essential for biodiversity scientists to integrate a
social component that acknowledges anthropogenic influences on tropical
biodiversity. Accordingly, students will explore the themes of multiple use
forest management and regenerative agriculture in local communities, so as to
understand the consequences of management decisions not only for tropical
biodiversity but also for livelihood strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.