* 1855556
* Ketone Alkylation Using Simple Olefins: A Sustainable Chemistry Approach
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2022
* Guangbin Dong, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 05/31/2022
* USD 485,000.00

Supported by the Chemical Synthesis (SYN) Program in the Division of Chemistry,
Professor Guangbin Dong of the University of Chicago is leading a team of
researchers to invent new ways to make carbon-carbon bonds. Carbon-carbon bonds
are an essential part of almost all organic chemicals. These important bonds
form the backbone of most medicines and plastics (polymers) and thus are
produced on massive scales. Dr. Dong?s research focuses on forming carbon-carbon
bonds from simple, inexpensive and non-toxic stating materials without also
producing by-products which must be separated and/or discarded. This approach
follows the principles of ?Green Chemistry? in that the new synthetic routes to
commodity and specialty chemicals are more environmentally friendly. The
research grant also supports the education of students at many levels. Professor
Dong is actively engaged in the "ChiS&amp;E" program to provide early chemistry
education to Chicago public middle-school students. He is also involved in the
Collegiate Scholars Program to teach high school students and the Leadership
Alliance Summer Research Early Identification Program (SR-EIP) to offer
laboratory research experiences to undergraduate students. These outreach
activities encourage a diverse group students to explore careers in science and
engineering while learning and actively contributing to
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to develop byproduct-
free ketone-olefin coupling reactions via transition metal (TM)-catalyzed
carbon-hydrogen (C-H) bond activation. These approaches could serve as more
environmentally-friendly approaches to access alkylated ketones. The research
plan employs bifunctional templates to enable enamine/TM or imine/TM cooperative
catalysis. The team's objectives are first, to develop a direct branched-
selective alpha-alkylation of ketones with simple olefins via enamine/TM
cooperative catalysis and second, to develop a direct alkylation of ketones with
simple olefins via imine/TM cooperative catalysis. Carbonyl functionalization
plays a central role in organic synthesis. Enolate alkylation and conjugate
(alkyl) addition represent two common and important approaches for introducing
alkyl groups at carbonyl positions.. Notably, these reactions are not
economically- or environmentally-friendly processes mainly due to the use of
stoichiometric halogen-based alkylating agents and/or stoichiometric
organometallic species. Here, Professor Dong and his team employ a TM-catalyzed
enamine or imine-mediated C-H functionalization strategy to achieve ketone
alkylation using simple unactivated olefins as the alkylating agents. This
approach is considered more sustainable than current methods because
stoichiometric by-products are not generated and the reaction conditions are
generally pH- and redox-neutral, thereby tolerating a broad range of functional
groups. From a practical viewpoint, olefins are typically a cheaper and more
readily available feedstock than the corresponding alkyl halides or
organometallic species. Byproduct-free ketone alkylation methods using regular
olefins as the alkylating agents are developed through the new bifunctional
catalysts. Professor Dong and his team are engaged in several outreach
activities, including introducing grade school students to chemical concepts.
Integrating educational activities of students from diverse age groups and
backgrounds into the existing research program has been a primary goal of the
research group.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.