* 1855956
* Collaborative Research:  Flexibility and robustness of attack and evasion: reverse-engineering the mechanisms of behavioral control
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Stephan Munch, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 06/30/2024
* USD 311,201.00

How animals generate effective behavior in new situations is one of the
longstanding mysteries of behavioral science. For example, every time a tennis
player returns a serve, conditions are different from those the player has
experienced in the past: the ball is travelling at a slightly different speed,
or at a different angle, or with a different rotation. Yet, the nervous system
is able to generate a response that is effective under these novel conditions.
How is this possible? This project will address this question by combining new
mathematical methods with a novel experimental system that uses real-time
computer vision to track animals as they solve sequential decision tasks. As
part of the broader impacts of the study, the investigators will partner with an
undergraduate education program intended to introduce research opportunities to
traditionally underrepresented STEM students. Interdisciplinary teams of
students will be mentored in developing and executing small research projects
related to the theme of the larger project with the goal providing a gateway for
both basic science majors, and also engineering and mathematics majors into
cutting-edge, interdisciplinary science. In addition, the investigators will
incorporate this research when mentoring participants in the University of
Florida's longstanding Whitney Lab REU program (31 years). The results of this
work will shed light on how animals generate such a diverse range of behaviors
to survive in novel situations, and will lead to new questions and approaches
that can be used to understand the function of the vertebrate nervous system and
the origins of behavioral control in some of the most important tasks animals
undertake.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Unlike binary choice tasks, which have long
served as the model for animal decision-making, more complex sensory-motor
behaviors such as avoiding predators or capturing prey often involve sequences
of decisions made in response to dynamic streams of sensory stimuli. A key
requirement of such behaviors is that they be robust. For example, the exact
chain of decisions required to escape a predator will differ from one setting to
another, yet an animal must generate a sequence of responses uniquely suited to
the situation at hand. This highlights a perennial question about animal
behavior: how can behaviors that are learned or evolved in one context
generalize to the enormous set of possible situations an animal might encounter?
This project attacks this question using a combination of mathematical modeling
and high-resolution, closed loop experiments using the prey attack and predator
evasion behaviors of rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss) as a model for studying
how animals generate flexible, robust behavioral sequences. In particular, the
investigators will test the emerging hypothesis that these robust, higher-level
behavioral responses are achieved through a mechanism called behavioral gain
control. Research will explore how behavioral gain control is involved in
initiating behavioral sequences at the right time, balancing multiple competing
objectives, coordinating control along multiple behavioral dimensions (e.g.,
acceleration, turning), and maintaining performance across changing
environmental conditions. This work has the potential to shed new light on how
complex behaviors are generated in the context of ecologically and
evolutionarily relevant tasks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.