* 1855408
* Collaborative Research: Maintenance Planning for Complex Systems in  Dynamic Environments
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Yisha Xiang, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 08/31/2022
* USD 252,236.00

Equipment failures in capital-intensive industries, such as oil and gas
exploration, aerospace, and power generation, may threaten human lives and have
significant environmental and economic impact. Many of these equipment failures
can be traced to poor equipment maintenance. One criticism of existing
maintenance planning is that the existing predictive failure models do not
accurately reflect degradation resulting from multiple causes in dynamic
environments. This project addresses the need for better planning models and
analysis to enhance equipment reliability in capital-intensive industries. The
PIs have established collaborations with industrial partners to ensure the
relevance of their research. Educational opportunities for students, including
outreach to underrepresented minorities, is also supported by the award.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will support research on a general and
systematic methodology for effective reliability modeling and maintenance
planning for critical complex systems in capital-intensive industries. To
successfully accomplish the goal, four specific objectives will be achieved: (1)
developing a broad class of general stochastic models that can integrally handle
the complexities of degradation processes under dynamic environments; (2)
constructing general stochastic-modulated multi-dimensional stochastic processes
to model the multiple dependent degradation processes under dynamic
environments; (3) creating a general mixture degradation framework to capture
heterogeneities at both population and unit-levels; and (4) developing a unified
maintenance decision-making framework that jointly integrates long-term
maintenance planning and short-term dynamic decisions. Successful development of
these models will lead to fundamentally new perspectives on the application of
reliability and maintenance optimization for complex engineered systems.