* 1855201
* RET SITE: Simulation and Visualization Technologies for Innovative Industrial Solutions
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Chenn Zhou, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 08/31/2023
* USD 604,681.00

A Research Experiences for Teachers (RET) Site will be established at Purdue
University Northwest (PNW)'s Center for Innovation through Visualization and
Simulation (CIVS). It will address critical issues of workforce development and
skills gap in industry, which have direct impact on the nation's prosperity. The
site will provide high school and community college STEM teachers with research
experiences and development opportunities to enhance their STEM understanding
and teaching effectiveness using virtual learning tools to increase their
students' STEM interest, understanding, and activities. Through the research
activities, teachers will participate in ongoing, modern systems engineering and
smart manufacturing research using cutting-edge simulation and visualization
technologies in collaboration with CIVS research staff, PNW engineering faculty,
and industry collaborators. The research will address real world industry issues
to increase energy efficiency, optimize production, predict mechanical failures,
and improve product quality and safety in industrial workplace settings.
Recruitment efforts will target underrepresented minority school districts and
teachers, and historically STEM-underserved populations, to bolster growth and
diversity in future STEM educational options, career paths, and research
infrastructure. From their exciting research experiences, participants will
create and implement virtual learning modules into their own classrooms during
the academic year. Through these modules, which link the research experiences to
STEM education standards and promote investigational and analytical skills,
students will be empowered and encouraged to pursue advanced STEM education and
career goals. The proposed site will also impact a regional workforce and
economy strongly tied to the steel industry, with Indiana producing 25% of the
nation's steel. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Each summer for 6 weeks, Purdue Northwest
will host 12 teachers from Northwest Indiana high schools and community colleges
that reflect both the diversity of their student populations and the
manufacturing/ industry base of their communities. Program objectives are to (1)
provide these teachers with authentic research experiences using advanced
simulation and visualization technologies for innovative industrial solutions
and model-based manufacturing, (2) translate teacher's research experiences and
new knowledge into curricular modules, using existing real-world virtual
industrial processes, that will be implemented in their STEM classes during the
academic year, and (3) build a community of educators and engineers who will
continue to mentor and advance STEM learning to students throughout the academic
year. Five research projects that address real-world engineering/technology
issues in the steel industry, and focus on advancements in model- and sensor-
based manufacturing are offered. Participants will be mentored by teams
consisting of engineering faculty, graduate students, and industry engineers,
within a project-based learning system. The projects, professional development
and research dissemination opportunities, and continuous program assessment and
improvement protocols, all build on and leverage the considerable resources of
Purdue Northwest's CIVS research center and Steel Manufacturing Simulation and
Visualization Consortium (SMSVC), which have become marquee names in steel
manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.