* 1855877
* Applications of Oxoammonium Salts to Green Organic Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Paul Floreancig, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 08/31/2022
* USD 486,154.00

Supported by the Chemical Synthesis Program in the NSF Division of Chemistry,
Professor Paul Floreancig at the University of Pittsburgh uses electrochemistry
to the synthesize complex organic compounds. Electrochemical reactions use
electrical currents in place of traditional chemicals. Chemical reagents often
produce undesired by-products because they produce too much or too little energy
to make (or break) specific chemical bonds; Because electrical currents can be
precisely controlled at a given potential (voltage), electrochemical reactions
can be tuned to provide just the right amount of energy needed for a desired
transformation. In this way, electrochemical reactions promise to reduce
chemical waste when compared to traditional chemical reactions. This research
produces new environmentally benign synthetic methods using electrochemical
techniques. The research team works with collaborators to combine organic
reaction development with theory and electrochemical techniques. The new method
development illustrate the power of employing oxidation reactions in increasing
molecular complexity. The research team has a strong commitment to pursuing
green chemistry and lessons learned through this research are used as examples
in undergraduate classes directed toward environmentally benign organic
synthesis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses electrochemical oxidations to
advance the oxidative carbon-hydrogen bond cleavage processes that have been
developed in the Floreancig group. The study replaces quinone oxidants, which
were originally used as stoichiometric reagents, with oxoammonium ions. The
oxoammonium ions are more readily regenerated through anodic oxidation than
their quinone counterparts and offer additional advantages, such as easier
reactivity tuning and the potential for developing asymmetric variants for
enantioselective synthesis. The first objective is to optimize the
electrochemical regeneration of oxoammonium ions in oxidative cyclization
reactions to allow for low catalyst loading by exploring the impact of oxidant
strength, electrode material, and substrate oxidation potential. The second
objective is to gain insight into the mechanistic nuances of oxidative carbon-
hydrogen bond cleavage by oxoammonium ions through a combined experimental and
theoretical approach that provides information on the importance of charge
transfer and geometry of the transition states. The third objective is to
develop new transformations that are possible with oxoammonium ions but not
quinones, including cycloaddition reactions and kinetic resolutions. By
disseminating the results through publication and seminars, the Floreancig group
provides the scientific community with powerful new transformations, valuable
mechanistic insights, and blueprints for interfacing electrochemistry with
oxidative functionalization reactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.