* 1855719
* GOALI: An Industrial-Academic Collaboration for Sustainable Catalysis with Earth Abundant Metals
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Paul Chirik, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 06/30/2023
* USD 750,000.00

The Catalysis Program of the Chemistry Division of the National Science
Foundation supports the research of Professor Paul Chirik at Princeton
University. This research project is conducted in collaboration with Drs.
Rebecca Ruck and Danielle Schultz and at Merck &amp; Co. Inc. The research team
is designing new catalysts - complexes that speed up desirable chemical
reactions, often used for making pharmaceutical drugs, agricultural products,
and other specialty and commodity chemicals. This team is designing and
developing new catalysts using "earth-abundant elements" such as iron and
cobalt. These elements are cheaper and more abundant than silver, gold,
platinum, and other metals that are often used in industrial catalysis. The
challenge in this work is that many commercial processes are optimized for
platinum metals. To design replacements for these expensive and rare metals, the
team is studying the detailed steps in the chemical reactions. The research team
is taking advantage of high throughput robotics and "ligand libraries" to test
large numbers of new catalysts rapidly and safely. Due to the strong
collaboration with industry, this project results in excellent work experience
for the next generation of scientists. Coworkers on this project include those
from historically underrepresented groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Catalysis with
first row transition metals, particularly iron and cobalt, as alternatives to
precious metals is attractive. In addition to the potential cost and
environmental benefits, these metals have often been shown to exhibit superior
performance in terms of activity, selectivity, solvent profile as well as their
unique abilities to produce new transformations. This research, conducted in
collaboration with the chemical company Merck, focuses on understanding the
mechanisms of first row transition metals in catalysis relevant to drug
synthesis. Specific reactions of interest include methods for the
stereoselective preparation of versatile polyboron compounds, asymmetric chain-
running reactions to set remote stereocenters, and alcohol activation
reactivity. Collaboration is key to this effort as fully integrated high
throughout experiments, analytic methods, and target selection are facilitated
by the industrial group, whereas fundamental organometallic chemistry,
spectroscopy, and electronic structure determinations are done at Princeton. The
broader impacts of the research takes advantage of the unique training
environment created from the academic-industrial partnership to solve societal
sustainability challenges. Educational efforts include elementary age children,
non-scientist majors and advanced undergraduates and graduates studying
catalysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.