* 1855982
* INFEWS/T1: Decision-Driven Advances in Integrated Assessment Modeling of the Food-Energy-Water Nexus
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2024
* Dave White, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 06/30/2024
* USD 2,476,828.00

Scientific understanding of the interdependencies between food, energy, and
water systems (FEWS) is of growing importance, as global change creates new
risks as well as potential benefits from the integrated FEWS nexus. Many
important decisions that influence FEWS nexus issues are made by regional
decision makers. However, regional FEWS planning is also shaped by national and
global dynamics, including socioeconomic and technological changes,
international trade dynamics, climate change, and national efforts to address
societal priorities such as economic growth and sustainable development goals
(SDGs). The ability of nations to achieve these broader societal goals is, in
turn, strongly influenced by regional decisions. This project develops a new,
integrated analytical approach that considers the interconnections among food,
energy, and water systems to improve regional FEWS planning. The research
ensures consistency of regional planning scenarios with national and global
trends, while also considering institutional barriers to integrated planning.
This project focuses on integrated FEWS planning in river basins in Argentina
and Uruguay. These locations are ideal testbeds for developing this new approach
due to their strong regional-to-global connectivity through agricultural trade,
diversity in institutional structures, and mix of far-reaching policies, from
SDGs to climate adaptation. This research will directly benefit U.S. national
interests, as sustainable development in Latin America promotes stability in
international markets for agricultural and energy goods. Three primary science
questions guide the research: (1) What analytical methods can be applied at
regional scale to not only couple among FEW systems but also to broader national
and global dynamics in a manner that is computationally efficient, data
efficient, and decision-relevant? (2) What institutional barriers limit the
adoption of FEW systems planning at a regional scale and how can analytical
tools be designed and integrated into institutional processes to overcome those
barriers? (3) How can uncertainties affecting regional the FEW systems decision-
making processes be most effectively characterized and visualized to improve the
robustness of FEW systems planning? Generalizable insights and analytical
toolkits developed in answering these questions will promote more robust and
sustainable economic growth internationally and in the United States, and will
be transferable to other locations, including the United States.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this research is to design and use models to
break down institutional barriers and facilitate joint institutional decision
making across the food, energy, and water sectors. The project will contribute
three science advances that facilitate adoption of the integrated regional
planning approaches required to coordinate development activities across scales
and sectors. (1) The project will contribute a modeling platform that can
effectively couple sub-regional FEW systems together at the regional level and
connect them to national and global socioeconomic and climatic forces in an
internally consistent, computationally efficient, and decision-relevant manner
to allow for comprehensive scenario exploration and uncertainty analysis. (2)
The project will identify the institutional barriers to infusing nexus thinking
in regional FEW systems planning by applying innovative institutional mapping
and stakeholder engagement techniques to co-develop decision-relevant modeling
advances. (3) The project will enhance the decision relevance of regional FEW
systems modeling and planning scenarios by characterizing key uncertainties and
aiding stakeholders in identifying and visualizing planning strategies that are
robust to a wide array of future uncertainties. The institutional mapping in (2)
will inform the nexus model construction in (1), and the efficient nexus model
from (1) will be used to identify key dynamics and challenges to robustness in
(3), which will be communicated via efficient visual analytics to in-country
stakeholders in (2). Uruguay and Argentina will serve as learning laboratories
to empirically explore these three advances because, despite their shared FEW
systems challenges, the two countries differ with respect to key institutional,
economic, climatic, and policy factors. These differences will allow alternative
hypotheses to be tested regarding how best to design and use models to break
down institutional barriers and facilitate joint institutional decision making
in real-world contexts, as well as to demonstrate the transferability and
generalizability of methodological advances.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.