* 1855473
* Photomask Defect Inspection and Metrology for Semiconductor Lithography Technology
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* ChaBum Lee, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Chou
* 06/30/2023
* USD 298,842.00

Semiconductors are the indispensable components of a wide range of products,
such as smartphones and electrical appliances, and this award contributes to the
creation of new knowledge in photomask inspection and metrology for the
semiconductor industry. The availability of the interferometry inspection
technology helps enhance the lithography manufacturing resolution, promote
miniaturization and increase the performance and reduce the cost of electronic
devices. In semiconductor manufacturing processes, photomasks with holes and
transparencies that allow light to shine through in a defined pattern are an
enabling technology for lithography. Photomask defects, such as unwanted
patterns, contaminations and substrate flaws, become increasingly important
sources of inaccuracies in the lithography processes and patterning. This award
supports fundamental research to develop new measurement principles in photomask
inspection, metrology, design and manufacturing. The project's inspection
technique and simulation methods enable the determination of photomask quality.
The method identifies photomask defects, creates defect models and compensates
for lithography manufacturing errors. As a result, this research provides
photomask manufacturers with significant time and cost savings by automating the
photomask defect analysis process, which benefits the photomask, lithography
machine tool and semiconductor manufacturing industries and, thus, the U.S.
economy. This project provides interdisciplinary research experience for
students, broadens participation of underrepresented groups in research through
a precision metrology internship program, and influences engineering education
through a course in Mechanical Measurements and Precision Machine Tools.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As the photomask industry progresses towards smaller and
smaller technology nodes, the need for more aggressive inspection becomes
critical. Photomask inspection involves checking the correctness of the
fabricated photomasks used for semiconductor device fabrication. The projected
images of the defective photomask appear as irregularities, such as, line widths
that are narrower or wider than designed, line-edge roughness of the patterns
and distortions that may significantly alter the mechanical and electrical
properties of what is being fabricated. This problem becomes more pronounced
since photomask complexity rises with the complexity of new semiconductor chips.
This research fills a critical knowledge gap in inspection technology and
fundamental identification of photomask defects by using knife-edge diffraction
interferometry (KEDI) and artificial neural network models. Through insights
obtained from rigorous simulation tools and experimental results, the research
team determines that the printability of lithography photomask defects can be
quantitatively characterized prior to lithography operation and the simulation
model can be extended to compensate for image distortions that occur during sub-
wavelength lithography using printed structures smaller than the wavelength of
light.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.