* 1855841
* IGE: Building practical, evidence-based teaching capacity in tomorrow's doctorates
* EDU,DGE
* 05/15/2019,04/30/2024
* Richard Gardner, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Denecke
* 04/30/2024
* USD 331,009.00

Future faculty can expect that they will instruct students from many diverse
populations. While access to college science education has democratized, the
methods used to teach these diverse cohorts of students are not always aligned
with evidence-based best practices. This project implements and evaluates a
training approach for future faculty that leverages best practices in inclusive
science teaching within a multi-stage practical experience. This National
Science Foundation Innovations in Graduate Education (IGE) award to the
University of Washington will make use of the best features of top professional
development models to innovatively prepare future professors for the unique
challenges of teaching college STEM courses. The undergraduate students that the
participating graduate students will teach will join the workforce having more
than basic memorized knowledge: they will also understand scientific practice,
know how to apply scientific thinking and generate scientific questions, and be
prepared to partake in a more diverse and effective scientific community.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project balances cutting-edge teacher development
within the constraints of modern graduate work to develop dual expertise in
science and teaching. Practice of active teaching skills will help trainees
develop classroom tools and teaching approaches that put engaging work in the
hands of their students. Rapid feedback from expert instructors, outside
consultants, test classrooms, and their own video analysis will further their
development as teachers capable of effectively employing methods far beyond
simple passive lecturing. While developing a syllabus around their own cutting-
edge research, trainees will be guided through challenges in a teaching course
centered on diversity and equity for all students. When ready, trainees will
teach their own mentored courses to college seniors as a starting point for
careers that include ambitious and equitable teaching of science. These courses
will introduce undergraduates directly to current research in their field of
study as taught by the scientists actively doing the work. Success of the
training for each graduate instructor will be investigated and communicated
through interviews with students, student project work, and professional
evaluation by expert instructors in the field. Collectively, these results will
inform the overall evaluation of the training approach.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Innovations in Graduate Education (IGE) program is
focused on research in graduate education. The goals of IGE are to pilot, test
and validate innovative approaches to graduate education and to generate the
knowledge required to move these approaches into the broader
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.