* 1855470
* Exploring Electronic Response Properties of Molecules and Extended Systems using Theoretical Methods
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Jochen Autschbach, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2023
* USD 430,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms
(CSDM-A) and Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods (CTMC) Programs
of the Chemistry Division, Professor Jochen Autschbach of the University at
Buffalo, State University of New York and his research team develop and apply
quantum theory-based methods in order to learn how light (also known as
electromagnetic radiation) can be used to determine the structure of molecules
and the internal motions of their atoms and electrons. The Autschbach group is
focusing specifically on nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy and Raman
spectroscopy. NMR spectroscopy is a cousin of the magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) technology used in medical diagnostics, and utilizes strong magnetic
fields and radio-frequency light to reveal the structure of molecules. In Raman
spectroscopy, light (often of visible or ultraviolet wavelengths) is scattered
off molecules, and slight changes in the wavelength of the scattered light can
provide clues to the vibrational motions of molecules and their overall
structure. With the help of sophisticated calculations and computer simulations,
the outcome of experimental measurements of these molecular properties are
predicted and analyzed. This research advances our understanding of the
relationships between molecular structure and measured properties of molecules,
as well as our general understanding of the interaction of electromagnetic
radiation and matter. Theoretical methods and software developed during this
investigation are made available to the larger community of scientists. In
addition, this research project provides in-depth training of graduate and
undergraduate students, as well as opportunities for summer internships of high-
school students. The student experience is enhanced by the collaborative nature
of the project: While the research in the PI's laboratory is theoretical and
computational in nature, it is carried out in the context of collaborations with
experimental researchers from a variety of fields including materials science
and catalysis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The molecular properties in question are
observed in spectroscopic or optical measurements and of high practical
importance to learn about the structures and functions of molecules. The
theoretical support provided by the PI is crucial in order to establish and
refine the underlying structure-property relationships. Specifically, the
properties of interest determine the nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) and the
optical activity of molecules. The theoretical efforts of the project focus
specifically on solid-state NMR parameters, NMR relaxation phenomena, and the
structural and electronic origins of natural electronic and vibrational optical
activity. In addition, the influence of the chemical and physical environment on
these molecular properties is explored. NMR relaxation contains a wealth of
information about the dynamics and characteristic correlation times of a
chemical system. The PI studies the relaxation with ab-initio (from first
principles) molecular dynamics simulations, which makes it possible to
investigate systems containing elements from all across the periodic table. The
optical activity-related part of the project focuses on resonance-effects in
Raman vibrational optical activity, that is, when the Raman laser wavelength
coincides with an electronic excitation wavelength, and on circularly polarized
luminescence. Calculations of solid-state NMR parameters are undertaken to learn
how they may reveal the unknown structures of chemical
catalysts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.