* 1855820
* IRES Track III: International Research Experience and Professional Development in Built Environment Sustainability
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2024
* Yimin Zhu, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 04/30/2024
* USD 500,000.00

In this project, Louisiana State University (LSU) works with the American
Society of Thermal and Fluids Engineers (ASTFE) and Hong Kong Polytechnic
University (HKPU) to establish the US-Hong Kong Center of Leadership Development
in Built Environment Sustainability. This center jointly conducts international
research and professional training activities for US graduate students. Built
environment sustainability as a global challenge affects the well-being of
hundreds of millions of people, their communities, and the future of their
lives. Hong Kong's unique sustainable urban development challenges and solutions
can offer US students exceptional international research experiences on this
topic. This project prepares US graduate students to deal with this global
challenge and develops a diverse, globally competitive science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) workforce. Drs. Yimin Zhu, Tracey Rizzuto,
and Tyree Mitchell at LSU, Dr. Yong Tao at ASTFE, and Dr. Geoffrey Shen at HKPU
are key members of the project. The Center utilizes the US universities'
strengths in research and leadership training, the ASTFE?s vast professional
networks, and an NSF-funded research network (i.e., RCN-SEES-SHBE) to develop
the Center's infrastructure. Faculty at the Research Institute of Sustainable
Urban Development (RISUD) at HKPU form an initial pool of multidisciplinary
experts in architecture, engineering, construction, computer science, and social
sciences to provide mentorship for US students in Hong Kong. The broad network
established by the collaboration among ASTFE, professional societies, and
academic communities enables the PIs to recruit graduate students from
underrepresented groups throughout the nation. This project serves as a
prototype for providing international research experiences for graduate students
in an immersive environment beyond the typical academic circles.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center pilots three annual programs involving a total
of 19 US graduate students. Each annual program lasts for nine months including
a pre-visit virtual training camp, an eight-week visit to Hong Kong by US
students, and an eight-week post-visit program. The pre-visit virtual training
camp provides self-paced online learning programs on leadership development and
built environment sustainability, information of program logistics, and virtual
teaming opportunities for US and Hong Kong students and mentors. The eight-week
visit to Hong Kong engages the students with an innovation lab and culturally
immersed research and professional development activities in Hong Kong. The
post-visit program highlights US students and mentors hosting Hong Kong peers in
the US, continued collaboration between US students and Hong Kong peers. An
annual event is held at the end of the nine-month program. Throughout the
program, US students with their Hong Kong peers conduct research in areas of
built environment sustainability. The program also organizes student-led
activities such as developing student chapters and activities, poster sessions,
and webinars for students to practice leadership skills and develop professional
networks. It is an objective of the project for the PIs to explore a model
focusing on scalability and reciprocity to ensure the best chance of maximizing
benefits for all stakeholders, increase the partnership among academia,
industries, and professional societies domestically and internationally, and
sustain the project beyond its proposed duration. In Years 2 and 3, the PIs seek
to include additional universities in Hong Kong that are interested in
participating with their own funding. The Center plans to work with other
professional societies to explore the extension of this model to other
disciplines. In addition to publishing research results, the project team
utilizes ASTFE's media and outreach programs, a website of the Center, and
social media to publicize student activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.