* 1855159
* RET Site: Research Experiences in Cybersecurity for Nevada Teachers (RECNT)
* CSE,CNS
* 02/15/2019,06/30/2023
* Shamik Sengupta, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Allyson Kennedy
* 06/30/2023
* USD 599,307.00

This funding renews a Research Experience for Teachers (RET) Site at the
University of Nevada, Reno (UNR). The primary objective of this RET Site is to
explore unique ways to engage middle and high school teachers in summer research
experiences that emphasize cybersecurity. Cybersecurity is an area of national
importance that impacts the lives of all citizens. The teachers will spend six
weeks in the summer participating in research experiences and developing
classroom modules and materials which will be implemented in their classrooms
during the academic year. The project involves a partnership between the
university, the school districts in the surrounding Nevada counties, and local
industries. The project will develop a community of teachers who are passionate
about cybersecurity and who can translate this excitement to their students
through engaging, high-quality inquiry learning experiences. This RET Site is
co-funded by the Secure and Trustworthy Cyberspace (SaTC) program.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is anchored by a research area that is
compelling and exciting for teachers and K-12 students and by a faculty team
that has demonstrated expertise in both research and education. The goals of the
project are to: recruit a cohort of middle and high school teachers interested
in introducing cybersecurity and computer science topics into their classrooms;
engage the recruited teachers in research experiences with applications in
various modern day systems and security; develop instructional modules that can
be incorporated into a variety of classes; promote and disseminate the results
to a large group of middle and high school teachers; and sustain long term
partnerships between the RET Site teacher participants, the UNR mentor team and
the university to bring the excitement of computing, problem solving and
research to students and encourage them to pursue science, technology,
engineering and math (STEM)-related careers. The site features projects that are
teacher accessible as well as connected to current research and
practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.