* 1855197
* I-Corps: Non-destructive separation technologies for Li-ion battery recycling
* TIP,TI
* 11/01/2018,04/30/2019
* Lei Pan, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 04/30/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is that it
benefits automotive OEM, battery recycling, consumer electronics, energy
storage, and battery manufacturing industry. The proposed innovation will enable
a reduction in the cost of new Li-ion batteries by 25%. The proposed innovation
minimizes the use of raw materials from mining, enables the long-term material
availability, stabilizes the supply chain, and reduces the life-cycle cost.
Additionally, recycling Li-ion batteries using the proposed innovation generates
zero secondary wastes and thus minimizes environmental footprint. From the
I-Corps curriculum training, if a clear go decision is made, this project will
lead to an establishment of a new company that creates jobs, opens new business
opportunities, and benefits both the environment and society. The success of
this I-Corps project will accelerate technology commercialization and attract
third-party funding.

This I-Corps project explores market needs of this non-destructive separation
technology for waste Li-ion batteries. The team proposes to conduct at least 100
face-to-face interviews with potential customers to obtain first-hand evidence
to validate business model, determines the supply chain of Li-ion battery
manufacturing industry and recycling industry, and define customer segments and
corresponding value propositions. The proposed technology separates and recovers
valuable materials while preserving their original functional integrity. The
upcycled active battery materials can be reused in new Li-ion batteries. The
proposed solution is much more energy efficient and cost effective compared to
the existing processes, for which both processes involve a conversion of active
cathode materials to metal alloys or metal ions in solution. The proposed
innovation works for any types of Li-ion batteries. The proposed innovation does
not generate secondary wastes. This project will train one graduate student as
an entrepreneur. The EL will gain hands-on experience of conducting customer
discovery and developing a business model canvas.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.