* 1855223
* EAR-PF: Numerical Modeling Perspectives on Zircon Petrochronology
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2020
* Nathan Andersen, Andersen, Nathan Lee
* Continuing Grant
* Aisha Morris
* 03/31/2020
* USD 87,000.00

Dr. Nathan Andersen has been granted an NSF EAR Postdoctoral Fellowship to work
at the University of Oregon to better understand magma evolution by modeling
zircon dates in igneous rocks. The accumulation of magma reservoirs in the
continental crust is a fundamental process that is responsible for the growth of
the crust, the segregation of economically valuable ore deposits, and the
generation of volcanic eruptions. Dating and compositional measurements of the
mineral zircon are commonly employed to reconstruct the history of magma
reservoir growth in the geologic record. Numerical models of magma emplacement
and thermo-chemical evolution have promoted an increasingly sophisticated
understanding of the processes by which magma is accumulated and stored.
However, uniting the zircon and modeling perspectives is subject to the
fundamental difficulty of relating chemical analyses made at the crystal-scale
of nano and/or micro meters to processes at the magma reservoir scale of meters
to tens of kilometers. Thus, these methods are poorly integrated. The objective
of this project is to develop a numerical modeling framework that couples the
growth rate of zircon crystals to the physical, chemical and thermal evolution
of the host magma. This modeling approach will also serve as a basis for videos
and animations illustrating magma reservoir processes that will be used to
communicate the results of this research to the general public and for the
production of publicly available materials for K-12 and undergraduate earth
science education. The ubiquity of zircon in the crust and its physical and
chemical robustness make it an indispensable tracer of magma reservoir longevity
and chemical evolution. Yet, these characteristics also contribute to ambiguous
geologic interpretations of the geologic record. While advances in the analysis
of zircon over the last two decades have resulted in dramatic improvements in
analytical precision and spatial resolution, these new capabilities have
revealed previously unappreciated complexities in the zircon record that drive
contemporary petrologic controversies. This project will integrate a magma
dynamics model --including multi-phase flow, phase equilibrium, and heat flow --
with a model of Zr-diffusion-limited zircon growth that also incorporates a
range of trace element partitioning behavior and the development of enriched
boundary layers. This framework will address three principal and interrelated
questions surrounding the interpretation of zircon data: i) How does the trade-
off between the spatial resolution and analytical precision of the zircon date
affect its interpretation? Particularly, do dates produced for whole crystals
lead to the same conclusions as those produced by in situ techniques? How well
do either capture the evolution of the host magma system?; ii) What criteria are
most effective at distinguishing inherited zircons from those crystallized in
situ?; iii) How do -micrometer to sub-micrometer - scale variations in zircon
chemistry relate to the host melt evolution? Initial models will comprise a
single magma reservoir in the crust. Guided by the results of these simulations,
greater complexity will be implemented through the tracking of individual zircon
crystals that move within the magma reservoir, the development of interconnected
reservoirs that comprise a trans-crustal magma system, and calibrated
simulations designed to reproduce well-studied natural systems. This approach
will yield new insights into the timescales and conditions of magma storage, the
relationship between voluminous ignimbrites and plutons, and the scaling of
volcanic eruptions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.