* 1855381
* Development of New Techniques: Sustaining and sharpening amino acid geochronology
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Darrell Kaufman, Northern Arizona University
* Continuing Grant
* David Lambert
* 06/30/2023
* USD 358,076.00

Determining the ages of geological materials (geochronology) is fundamental to
understanding Earth's history. Amino acid racemization (AAR) geochronology is a
dating method applicable to a wide range of fossils types, depositional
environments, and time scales. It enables research in a broad range of
geoscience topics such as archeology, historical ecology, paleontology, tectonic
geomorphology, paleoceanography, glacial geology, and others. This award will
support scientific infrastructure by sustaining the laboratory for AAR
geochronology at Northern Arizona University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will sharpen one of the most outstanding untapped applications of AAR
geochronology: as a dating method for marine sediment cores using foraminifera.
Various procedures will be tested to reduce analytical variability, a major
source of error for AAR geochronology when applied to foraminifera. Several
widely occurring foraminifera taxa will be subjected to chemical pre-treatments
to isolate a fraction of amino acids that is less prone to post-depositional
environmental influences. Once optimized, the treatment will be applied to
samples from a network of stratigraphic reference horizons from well-dated deep-
sea cores. The data will be used to evaluate the reproducibility of AAR
geochronology among the sites and to calibrate the rate of racemization for
several reference species. Samples from other sites will be used to quantify the
possible influence of different geothermal gradients on the extent of
racemization in foraminifera. Recently developed data-analytical approaches will
be employed to model the time-dependent rate of racemization and to characterize
age uncertainties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.