* 1855441
* CRII: SHF: HPC Solutions to Big NGS Data Compression
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2018,01/31/2020
* Fahad Saeed, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 01/31/2020
* USD 7,708.00

Sequencing of genomes for numerous species including humans has become
increasingly affordable due to next generation high-throughput genome sequencing
(NGS) technologies. This opens up perspectives for diagnosis and treatment of
genetic diseases and is increasingly effective in conducting system biology
studies. However, there remain many computational challenges that need to be
addressed before these technologies find their way into every day health and
human care. One such daunting challenge is the volume of sequencing data which
can reach peta-byte level for comprehensive system-biology studies. Genomic data
compression is needed to reduce the storage size, to increase the speed and
reduce the cost of I/O bandwidth required for transmission of such data.
However, existing genomic compression solutions yield poor performance for Big
Genomic Data. Further, the existing state of the art tools require the user to
decompress the data before it can be used for further analysis. This project is
focused on compression of genomic information and developing a framework which
will allow analysis of compressed form of the data. The project develops HPC
solutions for fast compression of Big NGS Data sets using ubiquitous
architectures such as GPUs and multicore processors. HPC techniques are utilized
to compute essential functions such as alignment and mapping using the
compressed form of the NGS data. More efficient encoding of the NGS data for
better network utilization is also being investigated.