* 1855464
* Problems and Methods in Extremal Combinatorics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Noga Alon, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 06/30/2023
* USD 330,000.00

Extremal Combinatorics investigates the maximum or minimum possible sizes of
combinatorial objects satisfying prescribed sets of required properties.
Questions of this type are often motivated by applications in other areas
including theoretical computer science, geometry and information theory. This is
one of the most active areas in modern Combinatorics and has developed
spectacularly over the last decades. In this project the PI intends to
investigate several fundamental problems in the area, including ones that are
motivated by algorithmic applications. A representative example is the problem
of finding the smallest possible size of a graph that contains every member of a
given family as an induced subgraph. This is closely related to the ability to
store members of the family in an economical way in distributed systems. It is
expected that work on the problems addressed in the proposal will lead to new
methods and new applications. It is also expected that the project will
contribute to advancing mathematics through education by mentoring graduate
students working on these topics and by giving lectures on these and related
subjects to experts and to graduate and undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of the project is to study several
important problems in Extremal Combinatorics, including ones motivated by
algorithmic applications. The first topic addressed deals with universal graphs
which are graphs that contain every member of a given family as an induced
subgraph. The investigation of the smallest possible number of vertices of
universal graphs for prescribed interesting families is motivated by the study
of adjacency labeling schemes and received a considerable amount of attention.
Within this area, the main goals are to obtain tight estimates for the smallest
possible sizes of universal graphs or hypergraphs for the family of all graphs
or hypergraphs with a given number of vertices, the family of all Cayley graphs
of a given group, and several families of intersection graphs of simple
geometric objects. The second topic proposed concerns traces of hypergraphs and
the related notions of their VC-dimension and Littlestone dimension. The PI
hopes to prove new bounds for the general extremal problem of estimating the
maximum number of projections on a set of vertices of a given size that can be
guaranteed in any hpergraph with a given number of vertices and edges. In the
study of these problems and related ones the PI plans to apply and develop a
range of methods combining combinatorial, probabilistic, algebraic and geometric
tools with ideas from Coding Theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.