* 1855047
* PREEVENTS Track 2: Collaborative Research:  A Dynamic Unified Framework for Hurricane Storm Surge Analysis and Prediction Spanning across the Coastal Floodplain and Ocean
* GEO,RISE
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2024
* Joannes Westerink, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Sean Kennan
* 07/31/2024
* USD 456,557.00

Storm-driven coastal flooding is influenced by many physical processes including
riverine discharges, regional rainfall, wind, atmospheric pressure, wave-induced
set up, wave runup, tides, and fluctuating baseline ocean water levels.
Operational storm surge models such as those used by NOAA's Ocean Prediction
Center (Extratropical Surge and Tide Operational Forecast System) incorporate a
variety of these processes including riverine discharges, atmospheric winds and
pressure, waves, and tides. However, coastal surge models do not typically
incorporate the impact of rainfall across the coastal floodplain nor
fluctuations in background water levels due to the oceanic density structure.
Nonetheless, the floodplain hydrology and ocean baseline water levels provide
vital controls in riverine and estuarine environments (e.g., the dramatic effect
seen in the Houston metropolitan region during Hurricane Harvey in 2017 and in
North Carolina during Hurricane Florence in 2018). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent
events have shown that a unified approach that incorporates all the relevant
physical processes is critical for accurate predictive simulations of coastal
flooding due to extreme events. This project will tackle this challenge by
melding hydrology, hydraulics, and waves into a dynamic unified computational
framework that uses unstructured meshes spanning from the deep ocean to upland
areas and across the coastal floodplain. Improved capacity for flood risk
managers, the insurance industry, and city planners to evaluate flood risk
across the entire coastal floodplain. Improved models will lead to better
guidance on development and construction practices, will help make cities more
resilient and will reduce risk for coastal populations and infrastructure. In
addition, this work will improve coastal flood forecasting enabling federal,
state, and local disaster managers, to optimize issuing warnings for evacuation
and emergency planning. The collaboration between the ocean circulation, coastal
hydrodynamics, and hydrology modeling communities fostered by this project will
help support ambitious projects such as NOAA's National Water Center's National
Integrated Water Model, which is at the preliminary stages of integration of
hydrology and coastal hydrodynamics. Training of students at the intersection of
hydrology, coastal hydrodynamics, physical oceanography, and computational
mathematics, to help develop and apply ever-more complex and advanced models in
academia, government and industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed unified
framework will improve the predicted water level gradient and flows throughout
the coastal floodplain by integrally considering the rainfall-driven hydrology
within the coastal floodplain as well as improving the background open ocean
water level. Well-developed but coarse global ocean models will be
heterogeneously coupled to high-resolution 2D shallow water equation models in
order to account for large-scale baroclinic ocean processes that impact coastal
water levels. Interface strategies and conditions between heterogeneous physics
will be developed that allow the interfaces to move in time and space for the
range of physics from dry to surface runoff to pressurized flow. Applying the
right physics and associated mathematical models as the storms evolve will
result in more robust and accurate models, as well as much more efficient
models. This will dynamically account for the hydrologic - hydrodynamic
interaction of water across the floodplain. Dynamic load balancing will account
for widely varying computational (CPU) costs for each set of physics and the
dynamic migration of the physics will be implemented within the heterogeneous
parallel computing environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.