* 1855066
* Ethylene Cross-Kingdom Signaling In Beneficial Plant-Microbe Associations
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Brad Binder, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Courtney Jahn
* 07/31/2024
* USD 683,172.00

With an increasing human population, future food security largely depends on
sustainable agricultural practices that ensure elevated crop productivity with
minimal environmental impact. Optimizing the microbial community that associates
with plants is a possible strategy that is being pursued. Ethylene gas is
produced by plants and functions as a plant hormone where it is known to affect
many processes. Preliminary findings demonstrate that ethylene receptors are
present in bacteria as well as plants. Many of these bacteria associate with
plants and with none being pathogenic, it follows that ethylene produced by
plants may function to regulate beneficial plant-microbe interactions. Results
from this research on the role of ethylene in plant-microbe interactions will
provide information needed to improve associations between plants and beneficial
microbes to enhance food production and security. The research will also
increase educational infrastructure by broadening opportunities for
undergraduate and graduate students at the UT-Knoxville to engage in modern
biological research. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project will test the hypothesis
that ethylene produced by plants mediates the establishment of some beneficial
bacteria in the rhizosphere via regulating biofilm formation and attachment of
the bacteria to the plants. Preliminary data demonstrate that the genomes of
several non-pathogenic and non-symbiotic, but potentially beneficial,
proteobacteria encode homologs to plant ethylene receptors, with the
Azospirillum brasilense homolog binding ethylene in vitro. Further evidence
suggests that ethylene sensing by the bacteria modulates biofilm formation. The
molecular mechanism of ethylene signaling and associated responses in bacteria
will be characterized using a combination of genetic and biochemical approaches
in genetically amenable bacterial models. The role of ethylene signaling in
modulating root surface colonization by beneficial bacteria will be studied
using plant colonization assays combined with genetic or chemical manipulation
of ethylene signaling in model and crop plants. The possibility that ethylene
signaling between plant and beneficial bacteria functions to modulate plant
immune responses will also be tested. Results from the proposed research will
generate novel models for plant-bacteria signaling that could yield innovative
strategies to engineer beneficial plant-microbe associations in the
rhizosphere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.