* 1855342
* Molecular Information and Crystal Control in Solid State Photochemistry. Radical Pair Dynamics, Synthetic Applications and Triplet Quantum Chains
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2022
* Miguel Garcia-Garibay, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Richard Johnson
* 03/31/2022
* USD 560,000.00

One of the most interesting and promising frontiers in the chemical sciences
involves the use of crystalline solids exposed to light for the purpose of
carrying out special chemical transformations. Reactions in crystals differ from
processes in liquids and in gases because molecules in the crystalline state are
held rigidly and orderly, such that they all have the same fate when a reaction
occurs. With support from the Chemical Structure, Dynamics &amp; Mechanisms B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Miguel A. Garcia-Garibay of the
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry at The University of California, Los
Angeles, uses crystals to explore two types of unusual but promising chemical
reactions. One reaction examines the effect of magnetic fields. Magnetic fields
play a role in the navigation systems of migrating birds and have the potential
to control some types of chemical systems. The second reaction, known as a
quantum chain reaction, is process where a single light particle, or photon,
leads to many chemical events (an amplification process). Quantum chain
reactions in crystals are enabled by strong interactions between neighboring
molecules. This interaction transforms photons into moveable "excitons",
facilitated by chemical reactions that retain and unleash large amounts of
energy. A third objective of this grant is to demonstrate the advantages of
reactions in crystals for the conversion of simple chemicals into high value
substances. This multifaceted project provides an excellent multi-disciplinary
training ground for students in quantum information systems (QIS). It helps
develop the intellectual and human infrastructure needed to support our
country's academic and industrial enterprises related to quantum computing,
quantum biology, and sensing. The connection between biological systems and
molecules in crystals provides Professor Garcia-Garibay with an opportunity to
develop a freshman-level course on the role of light in the origins of life.
This course develops multimedia teaching and demonstration aids that are shared
with the general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the last few years the
Garcia-Garibay group has established the structural requirements needed to
engineer reactions in crystalline solids. This project addresses three aspects
of chemical dynamics that have not been accessible by studying reactions in
liquid solutions or in the gas phase. First, by taking advantage of crystalline
ketones which have radical stabilizing substituents at the two alpha-carbons,
the researchers are able to generate triplet radical pairs under conditions not
available previously. With strongly interacting spins, these radical pairs have
a relatively large Singlet-Triplet energy gap. When combined with the use of
nanocrystalline suspensions as a medium to carry out laser flash photolysis
(pump-probe) experiments, this project provides a unique opportunity to measure
the dynamics of intersystem crossing in the solid state. Structural
modifications of the starting ketone measured by single crystal X-ray
diffraction and solid state nuclear magnetic resonance provide opportunities to
analyze the kinetics of the triplet excited states and sequential radical pair
intermediates. The interplay of spin dynamics and chemical dynamics is probed by
measuring the kinetics of intersystem crossing as a function of external
magnetic fields and magnetic isotope effects. Other aspects of solid state
photochemical reactivity that are encompassed by this project include the total
synthesis of the natural product Chimonanthin using solid state
photodecarbonylation as the key step. The triplet exciton-enabled quantum chain
reaction of crystalline Dewar benzenes is also explored. This chain process is
expected to give a large number of product molecules per photon absorbed.
Altogether, the research activities in this project improve the fundamental
understanding of reaction mechanisms and chemical reactivity in rigid materials
and provide students with an opportunity to receive a highly interdisciplinary
training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.