* 1855891
* The Physics of Elementary Mathematics
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2023
* Mi Yeon Lee, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Ellis
* 05/31/2023
* USD 299,990.00

This project aims to serve the national interest in high quality STEM education
by improving elementary preservice teachers' understanding of mathematics while
preparing them to teach STEM concepts in context. This project is unique in that
physics will be used to focus algebraic reasoning in a mathematics content
course based on elementary and middle school curriculum, an area that has
received little attention in previous research. Because elementary preservice
teachers typically do not receive any instruction in physics, they often
struggle with algebraic concepts and the applications of those concepts in
meaningful real-world contexts. This project has the potential to address these
weaknesses by providing integrated physics/mathematics training for mathematics
education instructors who prepare elementary preservice teachers to teach in
grades K-8. In addition, the project will prepare over 200 teachers per year
using physics laboratory activities and technological tools in their
undergraduate coursework. As a result, the project's impact could extend to
thousands of elementary school students in classes taught by these teachers who
learned how physics can be used to contextualize mathematics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has three primary goals: (i) develop and test
curricular materials and instructional methods that connect experimental physics
activities to elementary and middle school algebraic reasoning content; (ii)
confer with, train, and support mathematics education instructors over a three-
year period to develop their knowledge and expertise in the classroom use of the
developed instructional materials and methods; and (iii) improve elementary
preservice teachers' understanding of algebraic concepts and applications in
real-world contexts by guiding them in mathematics-focused physics activities
employing technological tools in courses that utilize the newly developed
instructional materials. The project's evaluation will include qualitative and
quantitative feedback to guide the iterative process of creating and designing
activities and assessments to support both the mathematics education instructors
and their elementary preservice teachers. Data will specifically focus on
content knowledge, because the goal of the course is primarily to improve
elementary preservice teachers' mathematical content knowledge. Data will be
gathered through surveys, pre- and post-tests and panel discussions involving
both the mathematics education instructors and the elementary preservice
teachers. A mixed methods approach will be used to examine the link between the
implementation activities and project outcomes. This is an Engaged Student
Learning project, supported by the NSF Improving Undergraduate STEM Education
Program (IUSE): Education and Human Resources (EHR). The IUSE Program supports
projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all undergraduate
students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the IUSE : EHR program
supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices
and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.