* 1855504
* Random Perturbations of Excited Deterministic Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* David Herzog, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2023
* USD 175,397.00

For over a century, randomness has been a core modeling tool used to describe
phenomena such as, but not limited to, the value of stock prices over time, the
motion of particles subject to thermal fluctuations (e.g. pollen grains or
lipids suspended in water) and the time evolution of competing populations in
biology. Additionally, randomness is a key component in many algorithms used to
process and understand big data. Crucial to analyzing such models and algorithms
is understanding precisely how the randomness and nonlinear effects, i.e. the
excitation, combine to relax the system to equilibrium. The research supported
by this award will seek to quantify rates of convergence to equilibrium in a
number of models in statistical physics, turbulence and molecular dynamics,
especially in those systems used in random sampling algorithms. The project
includes collaborations with high school, undergraduate and graduate students,
the results of which will be disseminated through publications and through
presentations at domestic and international conferences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports several projects at the interface of
stochastic analysis and dynamics. The first part of this research focuses on
extracting explicit rates of convergence to equilibrium for stochastic
differential equations (SDEs) used in random sampling algorithms. Of particular
importance is understanding the precise nature of convergence in high dimensions
in the presence of singular coefficients in the equations. Such singularities
arise naturally in the context of molecular dynamics (e.g. Lennard-Jones,
Coloumb potential functions) as they are used to describe repulsive effects as
particles approach one another. Although natural from a modeling and statistical
standpoint, the singularities lead to challenges in both analyzing the dynamics
itself as well as in analyzing the corresponding numerical simulation due to
energy spikes generated by the singular interactions. The second part focuses on
studying large-time properties of various statistical models in turbulence. In
each of these models, there is also a source of energy often leading to
interesting effects in equilibrium such as, for example, heavy-tailed invariant
measures. Understanding how randomness, nonlinearities, dissipation as well as
the excitation balance out to produce these interesting effects is of central
importance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.