* 1855565
* CRII: CSR: Towards Pinpointing the Root Causes of Failures in Flash-based Storage Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 08/11/2018,04/30/2020
* Mai Zheng, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 04/30/2020
* USD 59,494.00

Storage systems that hold financial transactions, scientific computation
results, a family's photos, and more, are undergoing dramatic changes. Triggered
by the advances in flash memory technology, almost every layer of storage
systems is being optimized aggressively to make full use of flash. This trend
increases the complexity of the systems and increases the chance of obscure
failures. Failures in flash-based storage systems are challenging to diagnose
even for data center professionals, and can lead to severe downtime or even data
loss. Moreover, the difficulty of failure diagnosis will increase in the
foreseeable future with the rapid growth of flash and other non-volatile memory
technologies. Thus, a framework for diagnosing the whole system and pinpointing
the root causes of failures is urgently needed.

The goal of this research project is to enable precise, end-to-end diagnosis of
failures in flash-based storage systems. One key observation is that more and
more kernel components are being optimized aggressively for flash, so a
diagnosis framework is needed that minimizes the dependence on the kernel. On
the other hand, although many components are changing, some fundamental
abstractions such as files and logical blocks, and interfaces such as system
calls and command sets, are relatively stable. A diagnosis framework can focus
on the invariants to analyze the behavior of the rapidly evolving systems. Based
on these observations, this research project investigates a novel failure
diagnosis framework that separates failure domains based on the interfaces and
automatically correlates the fundamental operations across layers. More
specifically, the framework consists of two synergistic components: (1) an on-
drive device agent to record and reproduce the host-device interactions without
any dependence on the host, and (2) an end-to-end analyzer to provide in-depth
diagnosis support along the whole data path from the application to the device.

This research project will advance the dependability of storage systems for
various important data in modern society. The improvements to data storage will
in turn benefit the society from many other aspects, including examples such as
reducing maintenance costs and human efforts and avoiding financial loss due to
service downtime or data corruption. This research project will also contribute
to the curriculum of operating systems and other related courses, and will
engage undergraduate and graduate students in systems research. In addition, the
project will be integrated into the Alliance for Minority Participation Program
and the Young Women in Computing Program to engage students from traditionally
underrepresented groups, serving our national, regional, and local interest in
increasing diversity in computing research.