* 1855255
* Advancing the Introductory Biology Experience
* EHR,DUE
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2021
* Gordon Uno, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 06/30/2021
* USD 49,588.00

With support from the NSF Improving Undergraduate STEM Education Program:
Education and Human Resources (IUSE: EHR), this project aims to serve the
national interest of supporting improved teaching and learning in Introductory
Biology courses. This project intends to support a 3-day conference to bring
together key decision-makers, stakeholders, and undergraduate introductory
biology instructors. It aims to foster collaborative relationships and take
actions necessary to advance the introductory biology experience for all
undergraduate students. Results from a recent survey found that even among
National Association of Biology Teachers (NABT) membership, adoption of policies
and practices that promote three-dimensional learning are severely lacking. In
addition, precollege students taking introductory biology (e.g. Advanced
Placement) courses are more likely to be exposed to contemporary pedagogies than
current undergraduates, suggesting a disconnect between college-readiness and
college reality. The proposed conference seeks to identify ways to mitigate
these issues and advance the introductory biology curriculum by focusing on a
shared vision of the undergraduate introductory biology experience. This
conference will purposefully include instructors from all settings,
institutions, relevant organizations, and other stakeholders to create
collaborations that will serve multiple purposes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
conference is intended to generate Research-Practice Partnerships to strengthen
the introductory biology experience for all students by fostering new
partnerships, leveraging resources, and creating shared experiences among
practitioners, researchers, and other stakeholders. The project will incorporate
specific strategies that have been demonstrated to promote learning, self-
confidence, and interest in the sciences, especially among those students who
are underrepresented in the sciences. These include High-Impact Practices
(Association of American Colleges and Universities) as well as the integration
of content and skills and interventions to deal with misconceptions. The project
leadership team represents collaboration from the University of Nebraska-
Lincoln, the University of Oklahoma, the NABT, and Northwestern Connecticut
Community College. In addition, the project includes representatives of several
additional stakeholder efforts in biology education, such as the Partnership for
Undergraduate Life Science Education (PULSE) and the Science Education for New
Civic Engagements and Responsibilities (SENCER). The NABT Introductory Biology
Task Force, a group with roots in the Introductory Biology Project RCN-UBE,
serves as the conference organizing committee. It includes stakeholders from
additional institutions of higher education, a school district, and the
Educational Testing Service. The conference will place participants into working
groups based on pre-conference survey data. The groups will be given guidance
for creating action plans with the overall goal of increasing successful
implementation of standards that improve science practice skills in introductory
biology. The project aims to engage 60 participants in the three-day conference
hosted at the Howard Hughes Medical Institute Conference Center. It is expected
that this work will result in a more unified vision for the Introductory Biology
curriculum of the future, a strategic plan for implementing and designing this
curriculum in any classroom and the formation of networks and collaborations
among instructors, researchers, and other stakeholders. Ultimately, this project
intends to implement a project that articulates a shared vision of biology
education for the future, to outline a research-based model of Introductory
Biology experiences focusing on how best to prepare biology students to meet
that future, and to build a permanent communication network that connects and
increases the number of individuals, projects, and organizations actively
engaged in the reform of the Introductory Biology course. The NSF IUSE: EHR
Program supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness
of STEM education for all students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.