* 1855509
* Random Matrices, Statistical Applications, and Spin Glass Dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2022
* Horng-Tzer Yau, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2022
* USD 270,000.00

The main objective of this award is to investigate the foundation and
application of random matrix statistics. In the age of large data, classical
probability theory does not offer sufficient tools for current applications in
large data. One of the most basic objects in data analysis is large random
matrices representing data and noise. The statistics of eigenvalues and
eigenvectors of these matrices essentially determine the real information
contained in the data matrices. In this work, we aim to develop tools in
understanding the eigenvalue and eigenvector statistics of the large class of
random matrices. Besides data matrices, the research also investigates the
spectral properties of the associated matrices of large random graphs. In order
to enhance the exchange of ideas among different groups of researchers, we have
been running seminars jointly with the Statistics and Computer Science
departments at the Center of Mathematical Sciences and Applications at Harvard
University. We also co-organize the Charles River Lectures in Probability
(jointly with MIT and Microsoft Research), the Current Development in
Mathematics conference (jointly with MIT), and the CMSA's annual conference on
Big Data. These programs will bring researchers from probability theory,
statistics, combinatorics, mathematical physics, and computer science to work
together. We are actively formulating mathematical questions that are
interesting to statisticians and computer scientists. It is clear that the
analysis of large random matrices is of great interest to these scientists and
we expect fruitful results from these collaborations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research aims to extend random matrix statistics to large classes of matrix
models, including band matrices, adjacency matrices of sparse random graphs, and
heavy-tailed random matrices. Our goal is to understand to what extent random
matrix statistics, in particular the statistics of the Gaussian orthogonal
ensemble, can be shown to hold independent of the matrix law. Our work is driven
by the grand vision of E. Wigner, asserting that random matrix statistics are
universal laws for systems of high complexity. More precisely, we choose the
following five projects: 1. Delocalization and universality of band matrices. 2.
Quantum unique ergodicity and data analysis. 3. Edge statistics of sparse random
graphs. 4. Levy matrices and heavy-tailed random matrices. 5. Spin glass
dynamics on hypercubes. The first project aims to extend the current random
matrix theory to non mean-field models since most basic physics laws are short-
ranged and thus far from the mean field type. Project 1 concerning non mean-
field band matrices is in our view one of the most important questions regarding
&lt;br/&gt;Wigner's original vision. Projects 2 and 3 concern edge statistics of
both eigenvalues and eigenvectors of the adjacency matrices of random sparse
graphs. Due to a Gaussian to Tracy-Widom transition in the edge statistics for
the Erdos-Renyi graphs, we expect this project to clarify the role of sparsity
in random graphs. In addition, our understanding of eigenvector statistics will
have applications in restricted minimum singular value problems and signal
recovery algorithms. Project 4 aims to classify the phase diagrams of heavy-
tailed random matrices according to their spectral statistics. The last project
aims to develop methods to prove spectral gaps and logarithmic Sobolev
inequality for the Glauber dynamics of spin glasses on
hypercubes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.