* 1855491
* Multiscale Modeling and Experimental Study of Defect Formation during Aluminum Alloy Solidification
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2020
* Mohsen Asle Zaeem, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 08/31/2020
* USD 186,640.00

Solidification (liquid to solid transition) occurring during the casting of
metallic alloys plays an important role in determining the structures of the
resulting materials at the nanometer scale, as well as their mechanical
properties. During solidification in a casting process, the liquid metal surface
reacts with the environment, resulting in generation of metallic oxides, which
are called oxide bifilms. These bifilms can lead to different types of defects
in materials, especially in aluminum alloys because of their high rate of
oxidation. Oxide bifilms play a major role in reducing the quality and
reliability of aluminum castings and can account for as much as 80% of the total
effective problems in castings. This award supports fundamental research to
study oxide bifilm formation and evolution during solidification of aluminum
alloys. The outcomes of this research will enable practical recommendations for
controlling and reducing defects in aluminum casting. This research has
applications in the automobile, aerospace, and other industries that demand
lightweight, high strength and fatigue-resistant metallic alloys. This project
will also contribute to the manufacture of lighter and more energy-efficient
vehicles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Oxide bifilms are now believed to be the main
cause of micro-cracks, microporosity, and other ailments that greatly weaken the
mechanical properties of cast parts. While there is experimental evidence that
is consistent with this hypothesis, the role of bifilms in producing defects and
the mechanisms of defect creation are mostly conjecture, because no direct
observation has been possible, the mechanical properties of bifilms are unknown,
and the physics of bifilm evolution and interaction with crystalline dendrites
during solidification is not understood. The research team will perform
atomistic simulations to determine the high temperature mechanical properties of
oxide bifilms. These results will be transferred to a new multi-phase-field
model to simulate, for the first time, the interactions between bifilms and
solidifying dendrites and to track the evolution and deformation of bifilms
during solidification. Macro-scale thermal-fluid analysis will be performed to
determine fluid flow and thermal boundary conditions for the micro-scale regions
of the phase-field model. Casting and characterization experiments will be
performed to validate the model predictions.