* 1855641
* Inspiration, Frustration, and Fascination: An Excursion into Low-Oxidation State Main Group Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 05/15/2019,04/30/2024
* Yuzhong Wang, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* John Gilje
* 04/30/2024
* USD 540,000.00

A catalyst is a substance that speeds or otherwise facilitates a chemical
reaction. Catalysts are critical to the chemical and pharmaceutical industries,
where they are used to reduce energy requirements of chemical processes and to
guide the details of precise chemical transformations. Many of the most active
catalysts are based on expensive, rare metals. An important area of current
research is to find cheap, abundant replacements for the current metal
catalysts. Dr. Gregory H. Robinson, Chemistry Department, the University of
Georgia, is supported by the Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry
Division to make and study highly reactive chemical compounds containing
abundant elements including silicon and aluminum. The approach uses radical
chemistry. Most chemical compounds contain an even number of electrons, while
radicals contain an odd number. This gives the radical compounds the ability to
stabilize metals with unusual electrical charges; Specifically, it permits
silicon, aluminum, or other abundant elements to mimic the behavior of the rare,
expensive metals that are currently used in catalysts. Chemistry students
engaged in this work acquire valuable skills to permit them to enter the
technologically sophisticated workforce. Professor Robinson is committed to
presenting chemistry (and science in general) to a broad range of students. His
presentations include visits to troubled high schools to talk to the students
about careers in chemistry/science. He is a unique role model for individuals
from underrepresented groups and has mentored a number of students who have gone
on to positions in academia and industry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
utilizes N-heterocyclic carbenes (NHCs) and anionic dithiolene radical ligands
to form and stabilize unusual main group species. Group 13 element containing
dithiolene radicals are obtained from the reactions of lithium dithiolene
radicals with XER2 (X=halide, E = group 13 element, R). These combined with NHCs
give radicals where the unpaired electron is primarily associated with the main
group atom. NHCs together with the dithiolene radical ligands are used to form
species containing E-O or E=O bonds (E = main group element, O = oxygen).
Reactions of NHC stabilized chlorosilanes and phosphines give S-heterocyclic
silylenes and phospheniums, which is then extended to species containing E-E
bonds. These compounds are characterized by the usual chemical and physical
methods. This project allows the study of the largely unexplored synthetic and
structural chemistry of low-oxidation state, earth-abundant chemical elements at
the carbene-dithiolene radical interface. The project also contains an
outreach/mentoring component that targets a range of students from
underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.