* 1855688
* Large Scale Asymptotics of Random Spatial Processes: Scaling Exponents, Limit Shapes, and Phase Transitions
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2023
* Shirshendu Ganguly, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2023
* USD 189,811.00

Many natural processes such as growth of bacteria, fluid spreading in a porous
medium, directed polymers in random media, propagation of flame fronts and so
on, are believed to exhibit various universal properties if observed at certain
characteristic spatial and time scales. Much of the research in probability and
statistical physics involves investigating random structures equipped with
spatial geometry, expected to model some natural phenomena as above and others.
The research program outlined in the project aims to study a wide range of
problems around various aspects of such random spatial models including
correlation structure, scaling limits, phase transitions as certain natural
parameters are varied, convergence to equilibrium as well as behavior in the
large deviation regimes. While the main focus is on developing novel ideas in
probability theory, a key goal is to merge perspectives and develop new bridges
between various areas of mathematics, statistical physics and theoretical
computer science. The program also has a significant education component
including curriculum development at undergraduate and graduate levels, and
mentoring graduate students and postdocs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project broadly discusses three topics. The first theme includes models of
random growth exhibiting a global smoothing mechanism in presence of local
roughening forces believed to exhibit certain universal behavior predicted in a
seminal paper by Kardar, Parisi and Zhang (KPZ). The PI will study models of
planar last and first passage percolation, which puts random weights on the
vertices of a planar lattice and considers paths between vertices which accrue
maximum or minimum energies respectively, and are believed to be canonical
examples in the KPZ universality class. There has been an explosion of activity,
mostly around a handful of examples of such models, which are integrable,
admitting certain remarkable bijections to algebraic objects such as random
matrices, Young diagrams and so on. The PI will pursue a geometric perspective
and develop probabilistic tools to study spatial and temporal correlation
behavior for such models as well as how the geometry of optimal paths change in
large deviation regimes. The second theme concerns models of self organized
criticality where systems under their natural evolution converge to a critical
state without external tuning of parameters. Continuing previous work, the PI
will investigate long standing conjectures about phase transitions on infinite
lattices and quantitative estimates for finite versions, for the stochastic
sandpile model and activated random walk, two paradigm examples of self-
organized criticality. The study of evolving self-similar interfaces of related
multi-type Laplacian growth models where growth rate is governed by harmonic
measure of random walk is also proposed. The final topic is about the study of
exponents related to rate of escape, spectral behavior and convergence to
equilibrium for random walks and finite Markov chains. Examples considered
include models of particles diffusing under gravity in a random evolving
potential with connections to fluid mechanics, random walks on random fractal
graphs as well as a class of non-monotone spin systems modeling the 'cage
effect' in glassy dynamics, with connections to random walk on matrices and
oriented percolation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.