* 1855845
* Collaborative Research: Epidermal gland evolution and the origins of structural and chemical signaling diversity
* BIO,IOS
* 12/01/2019,11/30/2023
* Adam Leache, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Miriam Ashley-Ross
* 11/30/2023
* USD 488,827.00

Animal communication systems have evolved an extraordinarily varied set of
morphological and physiological structures and signals in order to control
essential behavioral interactions, such as individual recognition, establishment
of social hierarchies, territoriality, and intersexual selection. Visual,
acoustic, and chemical signaling modes allow for complex repertoires of
behavioral displays, yet little is known of how communication systems originated
and evolved in most species in the animal tree of life, including reptiles. This
project aims to fill this important gap by investigating the origin and
evolution of novel communication mechanisms (epidermal glands) in lizards and
how such systems are shaped by ecological and environmental parameters. Results
from this research will provide a framework for predicting how human-induced
environmental changes could impact chemical signaling. This project converges
with NSF priorities for both science and society by expanding natural history
collections and genetic resources in the U.S., building large data sets for
comparative studies, developing new teaching materials focused on chemical
communication, and directly contributing to scientific education and public
outreach with the development of a new public exhibit at the Burke Museum of
Natural History and Culture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Among lizards and snakes,
chemical signaling has been increasingly acknowledged as a critical, yet
underappreciated, component of communication. This project will use integrative
methods and tools, including advanced imaging, biochemistry, phylogenetics, and
gene expression across diverse lizard groups from North America, South America,
and Africa to investigate the evolution of novel epidermal glands that are
crucial in mediating behavioral interactions on several groups of lizards. This
project will test several hypotheses with the diverse datatypes collected over
the course of the research, including (1) chemical differences between species
correlate with environmental parameters and structural complexity of the
habitats and microhabitats; (2), major transitions in the presence or absence of
epidermal glands and chemical signals across the lizard tree of life track
shifts in habitat/microhabitat (such as changes in temperature, humidity, and
solar radiation preferences); (3) independent origins of epidermal glands across
the lizard tree of life share a common genetic origin, providing strong evidence
that such structures share deep and common ancestry. By using lizard epidermal
glands as our study system, this project will provide insight into the evolution
of novelty and those structures that play important roles in communication and
behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.