* 1855435
* 2019 Chemistry Education Research and Practice: Using Education Research to Foster Meaningful Chemistry Learning
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2020
* Vicente Talanquer, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Tom Higgins
* 03/31/2020
* USD 15,000.00

This project will broaden the participation of a diverse set of chemistry
education researchers and practitioners in the 2019 Gordon Research Conference
on Chemistry Education Research and Practice (2019 GRC-CERP). The theme of this
event will be "Using Education Research to Foster Meaningful Chemistry
Learning." Participants will engage in analysis and discussion of how to
integrate educational research findings into the design, implementation, and
evaluation of foundational curricula, learning environments, instructional
methods, and assessments that produce meaningful learning of core scientific
ideas, development of valued skills, or significant changes in attitudes and
beliefs of diverse students. Conference attendees will include researchers and
practitioners from different areas, such as biology, chemistry, geosciences,
math, and physics education; and diverse institutions, from research-intensive
universities to primary undergraduate institutions (PUI), who will address
practical and theoretical issues in the integration of chemistry education
research and practice. The funds to support attendance will ensure a diverse set
of attendees that represent all institutional types and environments, as well as
early-career teachers and researchers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
support the participation of up to 30 early-career education researchers and
practitioners, post-docs, and grad students in the 2019 GRC-CERP. Priority for
support will be given to individuals who are members of an underrepresented
group in the chemistry education community, are affiliated with a PUI or
community college, or who are attending a GRC for the first time. These
participants will gain insights into curriculum design, instructional
strategies, and assessment methods that better support student learning in
different class environments and when working with diverse populations.
Participants will have multiple opportunities to build collaborations that
transcend the event, which should promote and sustain the type of wide systemic
educational reform that the NSF-IUSE program seeks to advance. Data gathered
through project evaluation on the professional development of participants will
inform program activities for future GRC-CERP conferences and improve
recruitment of participants from underrepresented communities. It will also
contribute to what is known about how belonging to a community of practice
supports professional change and the adoption of evidence-based teaching
strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.