* 1855942
* Classical MD with Mobile Protons, with Applications to Membrane Proteins
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Themis Lazaridis, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 05/31/2024
* USD 900,000.00

The goal of this project is to enable proton movement between appropriate
chemical groups in classical molecular dynamics computer simulations -
methodology which allows calculation of proteins structures. This proton
movement is important in a multitude of biochemical processes, such as pH
titration of proteins, enzyme catalysis, proton channels, proton pumps,
transporters, and the synthesis of ATP, the 'energy currency' of cells. Proton
movement involves breaking and formation of covalent bonds, and classical
simulations are normally not equipped to provide for this. This research will be
carried out by undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral students at an
institution with remarkable student diversity (53% of the students belong to
underrepresented groups). The methods developed in this project will be made
available to the research community through popular computer packages such as
CHARMM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project includes both method development and
investigation of biological questions. The basis will be a recently developed
hybrid Molecular Dynamics/Monte Carlo algorithm that allows proton movement
between hydrogen-bonded partners at modest computational cost. This algorithm
will be further developed, improved, and tested to ensure proper kinetics and
thermodynamics in any environment and to extend its applicability to biological
systems. It will draw from a number of state-of-the art methodologies for
dealing with long time scales, adding its own contributions that are specific to
proton transfer. It is expected to facilitate the better understanding of key
biological processes that involve proton movement. The first biological systems
to be studied include the M2 proton channel of the influenza virus and the Hv1
human proton channel.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.