* 1855833
* New Synthetic Opportunities with N-Alkenylnitrones and N,O-Dialkenylhydroxylamines
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Laura Anderson, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 06/30/2023
* USD 450,000.00

With this Award, the Chemical Synthesis Program of the NSF Division of Chemistry
is supporting the research of Professor Laura L. Anderson at the University of
Illinois at Chicago (UIC) to develop new ways to construct molecules to help
meet society's demands for new drugs and new materials. Professor Anderson works
with graduate and undergraduate students designing ways to use a reactive
molecule called a nitrone as the lynchpin between cheap, readily-accessible
reagents and complicated value-added compounds. These nitrone lynchpins are
tuned towards new chemical bond construction. Robust routes are being determined
to easily generate key intermediates. This approach provides access to new
examples of desirable compounds for pharmaceutical and agricultural
applications. The broader impact of this work results from both the compounds
generated from the new reactions, as well as the new strategies and fundamental
reactivity patterns that are identified. Educational aspects of the project are
aimed towards training aspiring chemists at the graduate and undergraduate
level, as well as high school students that participate in the project over the
summer. UIC is a minority serving institution and additional societal benefits
of this program include the recruitment and participation of under-represented
students at all levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Anderson and her students
design convergent synthetic routes to conjugated nitrone intermediates and
divergent stereocontrolled applications of these intermediates for the synthesis
of novel heterocycles. The overarching goal of this program is to couple two
simple starting materials to access novel reactive intermediates and then to
tune the reactivity of these intermediates to prepare an array of value-added
products in a small number of steps. Reactivity goals for the conjugated nitrone
intermediates include determining how to control the stereoselectivity of an
electrocyclization reaction for the asymmetric synthesis of azetidines and
designing ways to direct a cascade process towards the synthesis of spirocyclic
pyrrolines. The aim of improving access to conjugated nitrone intermediates
involves identifying and fixing road blocks in the Chan-Lam reactions of oximes.
These activities provide impact on a broader scale due to the fundamental
reactivity patterns and synthetic strategies that are identified, as well as the
expansion of chemical space that is achieved through access to new heterocyclic
compounds. Educational goals are achieved by training a group of graduate,
undergraduate, and high school students to think analytically, hone their
problem-solving skills, and have hands-on experience with a STEM discipline. The
involvement of underrepresented groups further serves to better the future of
chemistry through advancing diversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.