* 1855308
* RET Site: Berkeley Research Experiences for Teachers plus Data Science (BERET+D)
* ENG,EEC
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2024
* George Johnson, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 01/31/2024
* USD 599,991.00

This RET site at the University of California Berkeley entitled, "RET Site:
Berkeley Research Experiences for Teachers plus Data Science (BERET+D)", will
focus on research aimed at introducing pre-service and in-service math and
science teachers to the use of data science in understanding, analyzing and
visualizing engineering and science data, including distributed data sets from
science centers across campus. A key element of the BERET+D program is support
for teachers to acquire the necessary pedagogical content knowledge to engage
their own K-12 students in data science. In-service and pre-service teacher
teams will conduct research in a variety of engineering labs and science centers
at UC Berkeley. Teacher teams will also participate in a sequence of summer and
academic-year professional development activities that support them in
translating their research into curriculum. BERET+D will pair pre-service
teachers enrolled in the UC Berkeley CalTeach program with experienced in-
service teachers serving predominantly underrepresented students in partnering
public school districts. These teacher teams will develop essential research,
analysis and visualization skills by engaging in data science research. Based on
their common research experience, the teacher teams will develop curricula that
connect current research to K-12 science and mathematics education and inspire
students to see STEM as an exciting career with real-life applications. The
teachers are guided in their research efforts by lab-based mentors who will gain
instructional experience by serving as research advisers during the summer and
as teaching partners in the K-12 classroom during the academic year. In
addition, leadership opportunities will be provided to participating teachers by
supporting them to co-facilitate academic year professional development
workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BERET+D will contribute to engineering and
scientific research, and K-12 education by supporting teachers to conduct
research in the field, learn effective strategies for integrating data science
into their classroom instruction, and develop, use and disseminate standards-
based curricula. BERET+D will guide teachers to gain an understanding of the
processes of conducting research, especially involving large data sets, by
engaging in in-depth, authentic research and scaffolded reflections on these
experiences in professional development activities. BERET+D will prepare
participants to incorporate their research experiences into their classrooms and
engage their K-12 students in both understanding and dealing with significant
data sets. CalTeach will use RET program data as part of its ongoing efforts in
research on teacher education and professional development, evaluating how the
unique partnership (between pre-service teachers, in-service teachers, and
graduate students) functions in doing authentic engineering research and co-
implementing related curriculum in the classroom.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.