* 1855799
* IRES: Track III: Weaving Global Engagement and Diversity into Engineering Workforce with World-Class International Research Experiences (W3)
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2019,05/31/2024
* Samuel Ariaratnam, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 05/31/2024
* USD 1,000,000.00

Globalization has been eroding the US edge in civil engineering knowledge and
research, which is fundamental to the development of the US economy and the
welfare of its society. In reality, the advancement of knowledge across civil
engineering disciplines (e.g. environmental, materials, water resources,
transportation, structures, geotechnical, construction, computing, or
telematics) requires not only an interdisciplinary approach but also the
generation of globally-engaged and high-quality civil engineering researchers.
In response to these challenges, this collaborative award between ASU and the
American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE) promises to generate large-scale and
long-lasting global engagement for a diverse cohort of US graduate civil
engineering students through semester-long and world-class research experiences.
The design of these research experiences aims at building permanent research
collaborations by nurturing a strong personal connection of the students with
the international research partner(s) along with knowledge of the cultural and
physical contexts in which research occurs. In this project, the US students
have access to unique sources of data, facilities, ideas, and networks of
acquaintance, and thus will become better prepared to succeed in a competitive
research context characterized by pressing global and sustainable issues. By
contributing to the generation of a globally-engaged civil engineering workforce
with world-class skills, this project contributes to the competitiveness of the
US STEM workforce, colleges and universities, and public and private sector
industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With a 3-year duration, this award enables
semester-long and world-class research experiences for a diverse cohort of 75
U.S. civil engineering graduate students at premier research universities
located in Australia, China, Colombia, Canada, South Africa, India, and Israel.
A significant presence of women and underrepresented minority students creates a
diverse student cohort. Specific calls for application are disseminated through
channels that can directly reach and engage minorities and disadvantaged
students. Each student will remain a fellow for two years from notification of
admittance with the aim to secure long-term networks of collaboration and build
professional development. A robust professional development focus reinforces the
research component in this award. For example, students develop expertise in
leadership and ethics through ASU and ASCE's education resources. Students also
engage with domestic professional conferences and regional/local meetings while
in the US and through equivalent professional societies and industry
organizations during their international experience. Additionally, a strong
assessment plan will generate empirical data and results that promise to advance
the understanding of aspects such as engagement, research, and cultural
competence in international research experiences. Finally, this award will
promote and disseminate its highlights and outcomes through a combination of
academic and non-academic outlets in order to close the gap between academia,
industry, and society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.