* 1855126
* PREEVENTS Track 2: Collaborative Research: Development and testing of volcanic eruption models and forecasts through multidisciplinary data synthesis at Alaska volcanoes
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Jessica Larsen, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 08/31/2024
* USD 2,563,860.00

Explosive volcanic eruptions pose an increasing hazard to a growing, globally
connected population. Alaska has roughly fifty-four historically active
volcanoes with multiple explosive eruptions per year that threaten local
populations, infrastructure, and air traffic. For example, the 1989-1990
eruption of Redoubt volcano caused failure of all four engines of a commercial
jet, resulting in more than two vertical miles of airplane free-fall.
Fortunately in that instance the aircraft made a safe landing, but accurate
forecasting of volcanic eruptions remains challenging many years later. Accurate
volcanic eruption forecasting is hampered by the complex and dynamic nature of
volcanoes. Recent studies, however, have shown that combining multidisciplinary
observations of past unrest can yield accurate forecasts of eruptions from well-
monitored volcanoes. In this project the re-analysis and combination of
multidisciplinary observations of past volcanic unrest for eight Alaska
volcanoes will help to develop a suite of eruption forecast models. These models
will be provided to the Alaska Volcano Observatory (AVO) for operational use to
improve AVO's eruption forecasting capabilities and mitigate eruption hazards.
Additionally, by developing and sharing education modules and courses with
teachers from communities near active volcanoes, the populations most directly
impacted by volcanic eruptions will be better
prepared.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will capitalize on the wealth of AVO
data, the multidisciplinary expertise of volcano observatory scientists, and the
analytical power provided by a team of graduate students, postdoctoral fellows
and researchers. Our target Alaska volcanoes encompass a range of eruptive
behaviors and signs of unrest. Through data reanalysis and multidisciplinary
synthesis we will advance our understanding of these dynamic systems and
identify commonalities in unrest signatures. Our project will build valuable
eruption models for each target volcano, including one complex physics-based
model and eight multicomponent ensemble models. These models will be used as
input parameters into a probabilistic eruption forecasting framework that will
incorporate geologically-derived eruption histories, geophysical and geochemical
monitoring data, and expert elicitation to forecast the possible eruption
outcomes and threats. This project will advance our understanding of the
fundamental processes that lead to volcanic unrest or eruption and improve our
capabilities to forecast eruptions and mitigate associated hazards. These
results will be applicable to a range of volcanoes
worldwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.