* 1855886
* IGE: STEM Graduate training in Data Science: solution-oriented, student-led, team-based, computationally-enriched (SOLSTICE) training
* EDU,DGE
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2023
* Remco Chang, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Dorian Davis
* 03/31/2023
* USD 499,649.00

There has been a rapid increase in both the amount and type of data collected in
many fields of science, technology and engineering; this requires new approaches
to train graduate students to meet these needs. The new data revolution calls
for a new data-savvy workforce capable of using data effectively to answer
important scientific and practical questions and to communicate the results to a
broad audience. These data scientists should have strong technical and
leadership skills and the ability to work in teams comprising different and
complementary expertise. To meet this training need, the National Science
Foundation Innovations of Graduate Education (IGE) award to Tufts University
will test an innovative approach to project-based learning, teaching graduate
students in data-intensive fields using real datasets to solve real-world
problems. This solution-oriented, student-led, team-based, computationally-
enriched (SOLSTICE) training environment will offer multidisciplinary team role-
play and experience in data analytics and scientific communication. This project
will evaluate the effectiveness of the SOLSTICE approach in providing an
adaptable method for instructors in a range of fields that use large datasets at
diverse institution types. As the SOLSTICE approach is refined, it will pave the
way for students to enter the workforce with strong technical skills in data
analytics and be effective members of research teams. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will answer two overarching research questions: (1) To what extent does
the SOLSTICE approach provide opportunities for students to achieve 21st-century
data intensive knowledge, skills, and attitudes? and (2) Are there variations in
students' achievement over time, across different courses that use the SOLSTICE
approach, and across different STEM disciplines? The approach consists of three
components: (1) 3D Role Play, in which each student plays the role of Team Lead,
Collaborator, and Reviewer in three different interdisciplinary teams aiming to
develop, execute and communicate a research project based on authentic secondary
data analyses; (2) Feedback on Feedback, which provides students with experience
in giving and receiving effective critiques to their peers to strengthen inter-
team communication; and (3) Data Analysis Roadmap, which offers knowledge-
building guides and examples of key elements for efficient data analysis plans
and other documents needed for effective communication of results. The approach
will be tested and evaluated in six data-intensive courses in the Friedman
School of Nutrition and in the School of Engineering, with approximately 270
participants monitored before, during, and for at least six months after
participation in a SOLSTICE-based course. Educational resources will be
developed based on successful components to guide replications of the training
process, to train faculty in the SOLSTICE approach, and to disseminate it to
other STEM fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Innovations in Graduate Education
(IGE) program is focused on research in graduate education. The goals of IGE are
to pilot, test and validate innovative approaches to graduate education and to
generate the knowledge required to move these approaches into the broader
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.