* 1855323
* EAR-PF:  Investigating the role of the lithosphere-asthenosphere boundary through a 3D anisotropic velocity model of the Juan de Fuca plate
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2019,02/28/2022
* William Hawley, Hawley, William Bythewood
* Fellowship Award
* Aisha Morris
* 02/28/2022
* USD 208,600.00

Dr. William Hawley has been granted an NSF EAR postdoctoral fellowship to carry
out research and educational plans at the Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory of
Columbia University. Plate tectonics is, in large measure, how we understand the
long-term evolution of the planet Earth, and could play a role in making Earth
habitable for life. Despite its fundamental importance, a precise physical
description of what drives the motion of the plates remains unclear. A key
component of understanding the driving forces is the region at the base of the
plates, where they come into contact with the convecting mantle underneath. The
PI will use seismic data from the ocean floor off the coast of the Pacific
Northwest to help to characterize the structure of this critical zone beneath
the plates. By inferring how seismic waves pass through the mantle, and
comparing that structure with the motions of the plates on the surface, Dr.
Hawley will shed light on the physics and chemistry of these interacting parts
of the Earth, and will help refine our description of plate tectonics. The
education plan involves outreach to schools and community organizations in and
around New York City, mentoring graduate students at the Lamont-Doherty Earth
Observatory, and organizing a reading group on issues related to plate
tectonics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data from two of the largest ocean bottom
seismometer arrays, the Cascadia Initiative and the Blanco Transform Experiment,
will be used to develop a 3D anisotropic velocity model of the oceanic mantle
off the Pacific Northwest of North America. This project will combine the
sensitivity of S-to-P receiver functions to strong gradients in seismic velocity
and the sensitivity of Rayleigh waves to absolute seismic velocity to create a
shear-wave velocity model. This isotropic velocity model will be the starting
point to an investigation of the azimuthal dependence of Rayleigh wave phase
velocities, resulting in a 3D model of anisotropy in the mantle. Dr. Hawley will
then infer mantle flow from this anisotropic field, and compare that flow with
plate kinematics on the surface, to ultimately refine the scale dependence of
plate size on lithosphere-asthenosphere coupling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.