* 1855950
* The Role of Catalyst Microstructure in Gas Diffusion Electrosynthesis of C2+ Products
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2022
* Matthew Kanan, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 06/30/2022
* USD 450,000.00

Professor Matthew Kanan of Stanford University is supported by the Chemical
Catalysis (CAT) Program of the Division of Chemistry to investigate the
relationship between the structure of copper catalysts and their catalytic
properties for the electrochemical conversion of carbon monoxide (CO). The
project involves the use of electrochemical cells employing gas diffusion
electrodes (GDEs), which maximize the transport of gases to and from the
catalyst material and hence enable high product synthesis rates. The ultimate
goal is to convert carbon dioxide (CO2) to fuels and useful chemicals. The
technology to convert CO2 to CO is already available, but the subsequent
conversion of CO into more useful chemicals and fuels via electrolysis is not
well established. The project focuses on means to enhance the performance of the
copper catalyst material on the cathode, the electrode where CO is combined with
electrons and protons to form products such as hydrocarbons, alcohols, or
carboxylic acids. The viability of using copper catalysts for scalable
production of the desired product hinges on the ability to tailor its structure
to maximize activity, selectivity, and durability. The rapid growth and falling
costs of renewable electricity have increased the attraction of using
electricity to power the synthesis of fuels and chemicals from carbon dioxide
and water. The study of how microstructure affects performance in
electrochemical CO conversion may unveil strategies for exploiting
microstructure in other catalytic processes that are important to energy
conversion and industrial chemical synthesis. To complement the research
activities, the group engages in scientific outreach to local high school
students by using electrochemical conversion demonstrations and lab modules to
illustrate core chemical concepts and inspire students to pursue scientific
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Numerous structure - activity models have been
proposed for Cu-catalyzed carbon dioxide and carbon monoxide reduction based on
solution-phase studies at low current density. However, practical
electrosynthesis will require operating at much higher current density using a
GDE. It is unclear if the structure - activity relationships that have been
elucidated in solution-phase electrolyses are applicable to Cu materials
operating in GDEs at high current densities. Moreover, microstructural features
that may influence the intrinsic catalytic properties of Cu materials are
convoluted with the complex, heterogeneous architecture of the catalyst layer of
GDEs, which typically is composed of catalyst particles, carbon particles,
fluorinated polymers, and ionomers. The research in this project seeks to
establish a methodology for elucidating microstructural effects on Cu catalysts
operating in GDEs and disentangle these effects from morphological and mass
transport phenomena that depend on the architecture of the GDE catalyst layer.
New synthetic methods are developed to target well-defined Cu nanoparticles with
controllable grain boundary density and geometry. The grain structures are
mapped using transmission Kikuchi diffraction and other electron diffraction and
x-ray diffraction techniques. Next, the catalytic activity of microstructurally
variant samples is comprehensively evaluated in GDEs using custom
electrochemical cells. These studies seek to identify correlations between grain
boundaries and the activity or selectivity for specific C2+ products and assess
how these correlations depend on current density/overpotential, electrolyte, and
other parameters. In parallel, spray-coating procedures are developed to vary
the thickness, porosity, and wettability of the catalyst layer of a GDE. These
procedures are used to optimize the architecture of the GDE for high current
density at minimal overvoltage and assess the relative importance of
architecture vs catalyst microstructure in this
regime.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.