* 1855328
* Expanding Reductive Chemistry and Oxidation State Diversity within the Synthetic Chemistry of the Rare-Earth Metals
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* William Evans, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* John Gilje
* 07/31/2022
* USD 729,657.00

Professor William J. Evans at the University of California, Irvine, is supported
by the Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry Division at NSF. This
research addresses chemical reactions of rare-earth elements. Rare-earth
elements have been designated critical national resources due to their many
technological applications. They are important in magnetism and quantum
computing - technologies that have broad potential applications. The project
also pursues applications including the development of the smallest, most
efficient, magnets, called single-molecule magnets. In addition, students are
trained in the use and applications of strategic resources. A component of the
project also involves an outreach program to middle and high schools to expose
students to rare earths elements, their applications, and the value of
scientific research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The chemistry of praseodymium(II),
gadolinium(II), terbium(II), holmium(II), erbium(II), and lutetium(II), is being
explored to evaluate the special chemical reactions that can arise from their
unexpected 4fn5d1 electron configurations. These electron configurations differ
from traditional +2 oxidation states of the lanthanide metals (4fn+1
configurations) and could form the basis for new fundamental types of redox
chemistry. The chemistry of the new rare earth ion, yttrium(II) (4d1
configuration) is also being studied for comparison. New series of complexes of
these +2 ions are synthesized and their reactivity and magnetic and
spectroscopic properties are investigated. As these compounds are photoactive
diradicals, they present intriguing new options in synthesis, magnetism, and
small molecule activation. Among other applications, the development of quantum
bits, or qubits, is being pursued.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.