* 1855411
* Conference Proposal: Early-Career Researcher Travel Support for 26th CIRP Life Cycle Engineering Conference May 7-9, 2019
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/2018,10/31/2019
* Fu Zhao, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 10/31/2019
* USD 49,610.00

In this Life Cycle Engineering Conference (LCE), researchers, educators, and
policy makers will meet and explore engineering and technical solutions to
address sustainable development challenges. The Environmental and Ecological
Engineering (EEE) Department at Purdue University will host this conference in
May 2019. The theme of LCE 2019 is "Advancing Industrial Sustainability". The
conference will have significant participation from students, postdocs, and
junior faculty members. It is critical to engage young researchers in developing
creative and disruptive solutions for industrial sustainability. Funding will
support travel of early career researchers, especially those from
underrepresented groups, from across the United States to attend LCE 2019.

Solutions to the complex industrial sustainability challenges can only be
developed via inter- and transdisciplinary approaches. With participation of
natural scientists, engineers, social scientists, industry representatives, and
policy makers, it is anticipated that LCE 2019 will provide an excellent forum
for participants to share their findings and opinions which in turn contributes
to enhance the holistic understanding of these challenges. LCE 2019 will also
serve as a dynamic venue to promote the generation and cross pollination of
ideas and for stakeholders to define the critical next steps and research agenda
in the area of life cycle engineering. It is anticipated that LCE 2019 will
address key knowledge gaps and broaden participation of the industrial
sustainability community. Although the U.S. industrial sustainability community
has grown very fast in the past decade, the research communities in EU and Japan
are still larger with leaders in many areas. LCE 2019 strives to showcase
cutting-edge research done in the U.S., especially those of young researchers,
to world renowned experts. It is expected that a diverse group of over 250
participants will share their work through both paper and poster presentations,
as well as formal and informal discussions. With the NSF travel support, it will
be possible to bring up to 65 early career researchers from U.S. institutes to
the conference and priority will be given to researchers from underrepresented
groups. All the conference papers will be published in Procedia CIRP (Elsevier).
The conference will include sessions on teaching/learning where educators and
students can discuss visions, approaches, and challenges.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.