* 1855403
* I-Corps Teams:  Emagine Solutions Technology
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,07/31/2021
* Anita Bell, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is that
ultrasound is a life-saving technology. Fifty percent of the world does not have
access to ultrasound, a lifesaving tool, and yet there are more cell phones than
toilets in the world, and mobile devices are multiplying faster than people.
This concept leverages this trend of going mobile with a key technology to
improve health outcomes for patients around the world. This technology will be
developed to reach the 50% of the world that still needs access to ultrasound
imaging by increasing support and access to assistance with image
interpretation. Clinicians in emerging economies are impeded by limited economic
resources and lower levels of training that preclude the standard adoption of
expensive traditional cart-based ultrasound imaging. While improving maternal
health is a key United Nations health objective and hence the first area of
focus for this project, the ultimate goal is to be the number one mobile
ultrasound in the world for healthcare professionals serving trauma/emergency
care, women's health and family medicine patients. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
I-Corps project will focus on learning about pain points of using existing
ultrasound technology and barriers to adoption. Medical students, OBGYN, family
and emergency physicians will provide data and observations about their use of
cart-based ultrasound. Interviewing end users and buyers of ultrasound
technology will illuminate challenges with learning ultrasound, understanding
diagnoses, and navigating software platforms. Knowing these challenges that
potential customers have, the team will further develop and fine-tune the
handheld ultrasound software platform they have created. The technology has an
advanced user interface and display, the ability to gain insights about a
patient?s medical images, and the ability to conduct real-time diagnoses. The
technical results on which the project is based on feedback from probe
manufacturers, ultrasound technology specialists, and clinicians of varying
skill levels. In addition to interviewing users and experts, the team will also
conduct in-depth observations of various types of ultrasound technology in
use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.