* 1855208
* EAR-PF: A new oxybarometer to quantify spatial and temporal scales of redox variation in subducting slabs
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2023
* Megan Holycross, Holycross, Megan Elizabeth
* Standard Grant
* Aisha Morris
* 05/31/2023
* USD 174,000.00

Dr. Megan Holycross has been awarded an NSF EAR Postdoctoral Fellowship to
investigate how subducting slabs record the Earth's deep oxygen cycle. Her
research and public service will take place at the Smithsonian Institution and
at Yale University. The availability of oxygen in the solid Earth influences the
structure of the planet, the chemistry of rocks and ores as well as the
composition of the atmosphere. Mass transfer of oxygen between the Earth's
oxidized surface and its reduced interior takes place at subduction zones, but
the oxidation state of the subducting slab itself, and its consequences for
petrological, geochemical and geodynamic processes in subduction zones, is still
poorly understood. Dr. Holycross will perform experiments to calibrate a new
proxy for oxygen in eclogites, metamorphic rocks formed on subducting slabs that
have made their way back to the surface. Following experimental calibration, she
will apply the new proxy to determine how ancient and modern suites of natural
eclogites track spatial and temporal variations in the oxidation state of
subduction zones. During her tenure as an NSF Postdoctoral Fellow, Dr. Holycross
will host educational events at both the National Museum of Natural History and
the Yale Peabody Museum of Natural History to share the excitement of geoscience
with the public. She will also develop a virtual peer-to-peer mentoring and
support group to connect early career scientists at 8+ U.S. institutions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Eclogites form on subducting slabs during high-pressure
and high-temperature alteration of oceanic basalts. Therefore they may retain
important information about the oxidation state (or oxygen fugacity, fO2) of
their basalt precursor, or alternately, their oxidation state may be a result of
the mass transfer of oxidized materials throughout the subduction system.
Comprehensive interrogation of the eclogite fO2 record, and understanding the
geological significance of these values, requires an experimentally calibrated
proxy that can be applied to natural samples using commonly available analytical
tools. Eclogitic mineral assemblages (here, rutile, garnet and pyroxene) are
excellent candidates for the development of a new fO2 proxy that will utilize
the sensitivity of the multivalent trace element vanadium (V) to changes in
redox environment. Vanadium shifts speciation (V2+, V3+, V4+, V5+) over Earth-
relevant fO2s, and thus the incorporation of Vanadium in different phases should
change as function of oxygen fugacity. Eclogite-melting piston-cylinder
experiments will be run to calibrate the partitioning of Vanadium between
rutile, pyroxene, garnet and silicate melt as a function of fO2, pressure and
temperature. The new fO2 proxy will be applied to Archean eclogite xenoliths
from West Africa and an exhumed Eocene terrane from the Cyclades subduction
complex in Greece to probe redox changes in subducting slabs over time (scale of
billions of years) and space (scale of a subduction
zone).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.