* 1855290
* RET Site for Sustainable Polymer Engineering Research
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2019,03/31/2024
* SARAH MORGAN, University of Southern Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 03/31/2024
* USD 578,403.00

The University of Southern Mississippi (USM) School of Polymer Science and
Engineering's (SPSE) RET Site for Sustainable Polymer Engineering Research (RET)
will host local community college instructors and high school teachers for a
six-week summer research experience with polymer science and engineering faculty
to perform research in the area of sustainable materials. Teachers will work in
pairs with faculty and student researchers in efforts focused on addressing 21st
century grand challenges in engineering in three areas: (1) reducing waste
through design of degradable and bio-based polymers, (2) improving water quality
through polymer sensors and delivery vehicles, and (3) enabling alternative
energy approaches with high performance polymers. The goal is to build
professional relationships between faculty researchers and local teachers to
improve teacher and student understanding of materials research, and promote
student interest in science and engineering. Science and engineering are crucial
for the nation's sustained economic strength and security, and there is a
critical shortage of U.S. students pursuing engineering careers today. The
proposed research in sustainable materials has direct impact on the key economic
drivers in the State of Mississippi in areas that are highly relevant to
teachers, students, and their families. Teachers will gain appreciation for
polymer engineering by working in the laboratory, attending short courses,
touring the research facilities, taking field trips to local polymer industry,
and attending faculty research presentations. Teachers will develop activities
and laboratory modules based on their summer research for implementation in
their classrooms. USM faculty and graduate students will visit teacher
classrooms during the school year to help in delivery of the research-based
activities. It is expected that interaction with graduate students (who are
closer in age to community college and high school students) will help encourage
K-14 students to pursue studies and careers in science and engineering. Teachers
will make their curricular modules available to other teachers by publishing
them on the RET website, demonstrating them at the MS Science Teachers
Association Annual Meeting, and publishing in Teach Engineering. Teachers will
be recruited from institutions with high minority and poverty-level underserved
student populations, to help broaden participation in science and engineering.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The sustainable materials engineering research
platform of the RET site provides the framework to build long-term relationships
between engineering faculty and teachers while providing cutting-edge research
experiences that are readily incorporated into high school and community college
science curricula. The increasing demand for energy and use of hydrocarbons
create a wide range of issues, such as the Deepwater Horizon BP Oil Spill of
2010 off the Mississippi Gulf Coast, as well as opportunities, such as
production of biodegradable polymers and alternative energy development, which
have high impact on Mississippi teachers and students. The proposed RET will
immerse high school teachers and community college faculty in sustainable
polymer engineering research in efforts aligned with the National Academy 21st
Century Grand Challenges of Engineering, including providing access to clean
water and making solar energy affordable. Teachers will develop research-based
classroom modules aligned with the MS College and Career Readiness Standards for
Science. The proposed effort is transformative in providing avenues to engage
the public in the impact of sustainable materials engineering research through
relevant research experiences that will resonate with teachers, students and
parents. The proposed research has direct impact on the key economic drivers in
the State of Mississippi: energy, agriculture, and marine/coastal activities.
Teachers will gain hands-on experience in the processes by which materials
research addresses sustainability challenges and will develop tools to engage
students in the engineering enterprise, encouraging them to pursue science and
engineering careers. Teachers will be recruited from schools with high minority
and free and reduced lunch student populations, and research modules will be
broadly disseminated. A week-long workshop for middle school teachers will be
implemented to broaden the reach of the program to younger
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.