* 1855978
* IGE: Accelerate to Industry (A2i)
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Jason Cramer, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Denecke
* 08/31/2024
* USD 389,708.00

Graduate education excels in producing graduates with advanced technical
knowledge and research skills. However, these graduates have limited knowledge
as to how to translate those skills into approaches highly valued by companies,
such as market evaluation, project management, product development, and finance.
Given that an ever-increasing number of graduate students are pursuing
employment in industry, the NC State Graduate School recently piloted a module-
based training approach (Accelerate to Industry) with professional development
opportunities that specifically address the transition from academia to
industry. Training goals include developing graduate students' career awareness
and exploration, entrepreneurial skills, ability to complete real-world work
experiences, and, ultimately, career success in industry. This National Science
Foundation Innovations in Graduate Education (IGE) award to North Carolina State
University will allow broader testing of the Accelerate to Industry approach at
diverse institutions. To expand to other universities, the project created
scalable, modular activities intended to allow universities to implement the
components that best fit their needs and resources. In addition, this project
will establish a two-day train-the-trainer event for 10 new institutional
partners annually that will focus specifically on providing graduate students
with an immersive, industry-intensive learning experience. By implementing
Accelerate to Industry within diverse institutions, the project will test the
robustness and efficacy of the overall approach, the modular platform, and the
professional development content. While mixed method assessment tools will
address these broader questions, the most intensive cross-institutional
assessment efforts will focus on delivery of the module from the train-the-
trainers workshop that provides students with a week-long, industry-intensive
immersive learning experience. If successful, this approach could provide a path
forward for institutions to facilitate the successful transition of graduate
students from academia to industry, and the study results will add to our
understanding of best practices to support diverse career pathways for the
nation's graduate population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This graduate education
research project will test and validate the Accelerate to Industry (A2i)
approach at 30 universities representing Research 1, Research 2, and Masters-
Intensive institutions. The range of institutional types will generate the data
necessary to evaluate broader implementation and customization. The research is
intended to advance academic knowledge in three areas: (1) the employment
success derived from training STEM graduate students, including those from
underrepresented groups, across a variety of academic institutions through
university-industry consortia; (2) the impact on employability through increased
industry-relevant experiential learning, including interdisciplinary project-
based experiences framed by Adult Learning Theory; and (3) the impact of
facilitating industry workforce training through central administrative units
(e.g., graduate schools), in contrast to more decentralized approaches (i.e.,
department or academic college level). Accordingly, this project will test four
central hypotheses: (1) A2i participants will have increased employment and
career success in industry tied to the skill development and interdisciplinary
interactions offered by A2i as compared to those with no training; (2) given its
flexibility and modular structure, A2i can be effectively developed in a range
of different academic settings; (3) student participants value the programming
afforded by A2i and feel more confident about their ability to succeed in
industry; and (4) self-awareness of skills, interests, and values enhances A2i
participants' learning and employment outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Innovations in Graduate Education (IGE) program is focused on research in
graduate education. The goals of IGE are to pilot, test and validate innovative
approaches to graduate education and to generate the knowledge required to move
these approaches into the broader community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.