* 1855199
* Collaborative Research: Enantioselectivity in Heterogeneous Catalysts via the Addition of Chiral Modifiers
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2022
* Wilfred Tysoe, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 04/30/2022
* USD 268,042.00

Biomolecular building blocks can exhibit either right- or left-handed
symmetries; such building blocks are known as enantiomers. All biomolecules
found in living organisms have only one "handedness', that is, the molecules
exist only in one enantiomeric form. Moreover, different enantiomers of the same
molecule can interact with living organisms in completely different ways,
sometimes beneficially and sometimes with catastrophic effects. As the wrong
handedness can cause harm, pharmaceuticals and agrochemicals must be synthesized
in enantiopure forms. This synthesis may be accomplished by purification after
the drug has been synthesized, but that approach is often difficult and
cumbersome. It is preferable to develop processes in which only one enantiomer
of the drug is made. Enantiopure syntheses can be accomplished by using solid-
phase catalysts with surfaces that are specifically modified to preferentially
produce molecules with only one handedness. There have been a number of trial-
and-error efforts to discover such heterogeneous catalysts, but success has so
far been limited. Drs. Tysoe (University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee) and Zaera
(University of California-Riverside) have considerable experience in studying
the surface chemistry of catalytic systems under ideal conditions. Their
research project focuses on understanding the molecular interactions that
control enantio-selectivity in more complex and realistic systems for the
advanced manufacturing of pharmaceuticals. Drs. Tysoe and Zaera are strongly
committed to educating women and minorities, in particular, Hispanic students
both in the laboratory and through formal courses. They participate in outreach
programs at Milwaukee and Riverside, and are incorporating the research
associated with this project into those activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With
funding from the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry Division, Drs.
Tysoe and Zaera are studying the surface chemistry of model palladium(111) and
platinum(111) chiral catalysts modified by a cinchonidine analog, 1-(1-naphthyl)
ethylamine (NEA), using scanning tunneling microscopy (STM), infrared absorption
spectroscopy, reactivity measurements, and first-principles density functional
theory (DFT) calculations. This research provides a molecular-level
understanding of the diastereomeric interactions between a number of prochiral
reactants and NEA, and the forces that control them. They are investigating
whether the detailed molecular understanding of the chiral surface chemistry
from single-crystal studies in ultrahigh vacuum is relevant to the reaction
pathways occurring under realistic conditions, that is, under atmospheric
pressures and in the presence of a liquid phase. The resulting understanding may
provide insights into how to improve catalytic selectivity. The research may
facilitate the targeted design of supported heterogeneous enantioselective
catalysts. Such an ability is expected to have a significant economic impact in
the pharmaceutical and agrochemical industries. Drs. Tysoe and Zaera focus on
educating women and minorities through their research and outreach programs as
part of the broader impacts of the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.