* 1855278
* RET Site: Biologically and Physically Inspired Computing Models and Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 02/15/2019,01/31/2024
* Kevin Bowyer, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Allyson Kennedy
* 01/31/2024
* USD 592,333.00

This award renews a Research Experiences for Teachers (RET) Site at the
University of Notre Dame. The RET Site focuses on engaging local high school
teachers in summer research projects that explore computational models inspired
by physical and biological systems. The RET Site will develop a strong
partnership between Notre Dame and high schools in the greater South Bend,
Indiana area, including public and private schools. The site will recruit
cohorts of high school teachers in the areas of computer science, biology, math,
physics, and other engineering disciplines who will work on compelling research
projects with faculty mentors and research teams in the summer and then will
implement related learning modules and activities in their classrooms during the
academic year. The interdisciplinary nature of the research theme will provide a
fertile ground for developing creative and appealing high school lessons and
teaching activities in biology, physics, math, and other engineering disciplines
that align with state and national curricular standards. The RET Site will
engage with a Computer Science Teachers Association (CSTA) regional chapter and
the Indiana Department of Education to help develop strategies to establish
computer-science-centric curricula in every high school in the state of
Indiana.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;RET Site teachers will attend a 7-week summer
institute to participate in cutting-edge research projects with mentoring from
engineering faculty who lead current research programs in the areas of emphasis.
The research projects focus on systems that are inspired by biology and the
brain, exploit the evolution of a physical system to solve a problem of
interest, can be more easily realized with new technologies, and can meet the
computational needs of emerging applications. Working with the principal
investigators and faculty mentors, teachers will develop innovative, standards-
compliant curriculum modules and participate in a number of professional
development activities. The teacher-created modules and lessons will be
disseminated through the CSTA online repository and TeachEngineering.org, a
nationally recognized repository for searchable, standards-based engineering
curricula. Extensive follow-up activities are planned throughout the academic
year to ensure the translation of lab experiences into classroom practice, and
to foster and strengthen long-term partnership between engineering faculty and
the local school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.