* 1855336
* EAR-PF: Water in the Lower Mantle: Gaining Insight through Melt Generation and Deformation Textures
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2021
* Cara Vennari, Vennari, Cara Elizabeth
* Standard Grant
* Aisha Morris
* 08/31/2021
* USD 174,000.00

Dr. Cara Vennari has been granted an NSF EAR postdoctoral fellowship to carry
out research and education plans at the University of Chicago and the University
of Utah. Water has been studied extensively in the upper mantle, where it has
been shown to lower the melting temperature of mantle rock and weaken it;
however, there has been less systematic study of water in the lower mantle.
Using diamond anvil cells to generate high pressures during laboratory
experiments, she will investigate the melting temperature and strength of lower
mantle rock with a variety of water content to advance our understanding of
hydrous silicate melts and explain local anisotropic regions of the lower
mantle. Broader impacts of this work include its direct application to other
Earth science disciplines (geodynamics, petrology, geophysics, planetary
sciences and geochemistry), mentorship of younger students, and volunteering
through outreach programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this
project is to understand the effect of water in the lower mantle. The first is
high pressure melting of synthetic pyrolite composition, with the goals being to
determine (with a range of water content) the melting temperature, explore the
stable phases, and probe the melt and recrystallized products for the cation and
hydrous distribution. Hydrous melts and mineralogy have been assumed to affect
the rheologic character of the lower mantle properties; however, there have been
no experimental evidence to support this, so the second type of experiment will
be an axial stress experiment at lower mantle pressures to investigate the
deformation of hydrous peridotite. Techniques used for the melting measurements
include in situ powder diffraction coupled with ex situ SEM analysis. Strength
measurements of hydrated lower mantle phases will be investigated using X-ray
diffraction with radial geometry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.