* 1855191
* EAR-PF: Abrupt climate change in the alpine: Glacial and ecological responses to the Younger Dryas climate oscillation in the Teton Range, Wyoming
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2020,11/30/2022
* Sarah Crump, Crump, Sarah E
* Continuing Grant
* Aisha Morris
* 11/30/2022
* USD 127,167.00

Dr. Sarah Crump has been granted an NSF EAR Postdoctoral Fellowship to carry out
research and professional development activities at the University of California
Santa Cruz and Occidental College. Her project is aimed at assessing
environmental changes in the western US during and after the Younger Dryas, an
abrupt climate change event that occurred approximately 12,000 years ago. She
will analyze sediment cores from an elevational transect of lakes in the Teton
Range, Wyoming, to investigate how glaciers and montane ecosystems responded to
a long cold interval followed by rapid warming. Key questions in both the earth
sciences and biological sciences will be addressed, including: 1) how do alpine
glaciers respond to rapid climate oscillations? 2) how quickly can treeline
elevation and species' ranges shift in response to warming at rates comparable
to the modern? and 3) how do coupled glacial-ecological systems co-evolve under
rapid climate change? Dr. Crump will engage broad audiences in this paleo-
example of abrupt climate change through popular science articles and accessible
public talks. This project will provide research opportunities for
undergraduates at UCSC and Occidental, as well as field-based educational
experiences for high school groups, with a focus on broadening participation in
the earth sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Younger Dryas was an abrupt
~1200-year return to glacial conditions during the latest Pleistocene that was
likely caused by a temporary collapse of Atlantic Meridional Overturning
Circulation. While this event is widely recognized as an archetypal example of
abrupt climate change driven by a mechanism that may come into play in the near
future, its impacts on distal terrestrial environments remain sparsely
documented. Leveraging high-resolution lacustrine sediment records from a
network of lakes spanning a bioclimate gradient in the Teton Range, Dr. Crump
will use elemental data from scanning x-ray fluorescence to constrain glacier
extent before, during, and after the Younger Dryas. She will then analyze
sedimentary ancient DNA in the lake cores to reconstruct plant communities
through time, thereby constraining the rate of treeline response to a rapid
climate oscillation. This project takes advantage of recent developments in
genetic techniques to answer essential earth science questions and advance the
growing field of molecular paleoecology. The resulting paleoenvironmental
constraints on the spatial scale and magnitude of ocean circulation changes
driving abrupt climate change will be relevant to multiple scientific
communities spanning the geological and life sciences. This project is supported
through programs in the Directorates for Biological Sciences and Geological
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.