* 1855759
* RI: Small: Collaborative Research: A Topological Analysis of Uncertainly Representation in the Brain
* CSE,IIS
* 08/26/2018,07/31/2020
* Chao Chen, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Hwa
* 07/31/2020
* USD 254,827.00

Characterizing how brain regions activate, collaborate, and interact in
cognition empowers us with advanced approaches to help humans make the right
decisions on high stress jobs, prevent drug abuse, and treat neurological
disorders. This project will study cognitive control in terms of the uncertainty
representation, namely, how brains execute the same cognitive task with
different levels of uncertainty. Based on theory and algorithms in topology data
analysis, the project will analyze brain functional MRI images using novel
topological descriptors, which directly model global interactions between brain
regions in a principled manner. These descriptors will be used in novel learning
models to discover brain activity patterns that are crucial for uncertainty
representation. The outcome of the project will include (1) new knowledge in
uncertainty representation, e.g., fine-scale activity patterns and interactions
between brain regions correlated to the uncertainty level; (2) new topological
analysis tools for brain imaging study. This project will bring research and
educational opportunities to graduate and undergraduate students from both
computer science and neuroscience. The PIs will also mentor students from
underrepresented groups and high school students through the CUNY College Now
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will create new computational
topology algorithms to extract rich information from the intrinsic structure of
data. Novel machine learning methods will be created in order to leverage the
topological structures for not only prediction, but also knowledge discovery. A
novel interactive data exploration platform based on topological features will
be developed for brain imaging study. These techniques and software will be
validated on task-evoked fMRI data to produce quantitative assessments of
accuracy and to characterize advantages and limitations of these approaches.
Domain experts will validate the quality of the approach in validating
scientific hypotheses and data exploration.