* 1855281
* EAR-PF: Biomass burning in the terrestrial Arctic during past warm periods: New insights from organic biomarkers in Lake El'gygytgyn (Siberia)
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* William Daniels, Daniels, William C
* Standard Grant
* Aisha Morris
* 08/31/2023
* USD 246,000.00

Dr. William Daniels has been granted an NSF EAR Postdoctoral Fellowship to carry
out research and education plans at the University of Massachusetts Amherst. The
research will use geologic records of past wildfires to investigate factors that
might impact future fire prevalence in the Arctic tundra. Wildfires play an
important role in forest ecology, contribute to the global carbon cycle, and can
interfere with human activities. In the Arctic, wildfires are historically rare,
but their frequency is increasing as climate warms. This recent trend is
surprising given that existing paleofire records demonstrate that a cold and dry
climate is more conducive to burning then a warm and wet climate. Ancient lake
sediments from the Siberian Arctic will be analyzed for evidence of past
wildfires during time periods that span a wide range of climatic conditions to
better understand climate-wildfire linkages. The study will test the ideas that
permafrost, aridity, and vegetation can influence the relationship between
temperature and tundra wildfires. The research will be coupled with community
education activities, including teaching environmental science camps for local
youth in Massachusetts and Arctic Alaska.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research will use organic geochemical proxies in a Lake El'gygytgyn sediment
core covering 3.6 million years to reconstruct variations in Arctic biomass
burning over the Plio-Pleistocene. Levoglucosan and polycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbons, molecular byproducts of biomass burning, will be compared with
independently-derived paleoclimate reconstructions during the mid-Pliocene Warm
Period (3.02-3.26 Ma; a key analog for future global climate) and during the
Superinterglacial Marine Isotope Stage 31 (1.06-1.08 Ma). Results will provide a
direct comparison of glacial-interglacial variability during the Pliocene versus
the Pleistocene to test if permafrost and vegetation shifts under prolonged
warming could lead to profoundly different fire systematics. The study will
further develop and test molecular fire proxies needed to generate additional
paleofire records.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.