* 1855744
* Diol-Mediated Benzannulation for Polyaromatic Hydrocarbon (PAH) Construction
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Michael Krische, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Paul Blakemore
* 06/30/2023
* USD 480,000.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Michael J. Krische of the Department of Chemistry at the
University of Texas at Austin is applying catalytic reactions developed in his
laboratory to the construction of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons. Polycyclic
aromatic hydrocarbons are used in commercial electronic display screens and show
promise in a range of other applications, for example, high-speed electronics
and solar cells. The project involves expertise spanning the fields of organic
chemistry, homogenous transition metal catalysis, and materials chemistry.
Professor Krische mentors and trains undergraduates, graduate students and
postdoctoral research associates, including students from groups historically
underrepresented in the sciences. Professor Krische founded and continues to co-
organize a state-wide organic chemistry symposium in Texas, known as ?TEXSYN.?
This annual event, which attracts &gt;100 attendees, includes a poster session
and short talks by undergraduate and graduate students, connecting students with
leading researchers to design new routes to commodity and fine chemicals.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Michael J. Krische's laboratory has pioneered a
new class of catalytic carbon carbon bond formations that directly convert lower
alcohols to higher alcohols. These processes bypass the use of stoichiometric
metals and discrete alcohol-to-carbonyl redox reactions, which are hazardous and
contribute to waste generation. Based on this new reactivity pattern, diol-
mediated benzannulation reactions were developed. Under the aegis of NSF
support, this benzannulation methodology will be used to advance new strategies
for the synthesis of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons and related nanographene
materials, which are of significant importance in the growing field of molecular
electronics. Whereas the field of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon synthesis is
largely reliant on cross-coupling technology, this diol-mediated benzannulations
could unlock broad and new polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon chemical
space.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.