* 1855501
* CRII: III: Computational Methods to Explore Big Bioassay Data for Better Compound Prioritization
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2018,04/30/2022
* Xia Ning, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 04/30/2022
* USD 107,886.00

Bioassay data represent an extremely valuable source of experimental Big Data
with rich content that have been substantially produced in the early stages of
drug discovery for testing chemical compound bioactivities and identifying
promising drug candidates. However, the power of such Big bioassay data has not
been fully unleashed, particularly for the purposes of discovering novel
knowledge and improving drug development. This is largely due to the fact that
the exploration of a much larger space of bioassays has been fundamentally
hindered by the less developed ability to identify and utilize the relations
across bioassays. In this project, the PI and her team will develop novel
computational methods and tools that can effectively explore a wide range of
heterogeneous bioassays, identify experimentally unrevealed relations among
them, and utilize the novel knowledge derived from them so as to improve
compound prioritization. The research will bring scientific impacts and shed
light on fully utilizing the existing wealth of Big Data, stimulating knowledge
distillation in innovative manners, establishing visionary conceptual hypotheses
and developing novel analytical techniques correspondingly. This research aims
to solve critical problems in drug discovery through Big Data means, and has a
great potential to improve drug candidate identification through accurate
compound prioritization, and thus it will have far-reaching economic and
societal impacts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI and her team will develop a
computational framework to produce better compound ranking for each bioassay.
This framework will consist of a local structure learning component and a global
structure learning component to discover and leverage the compound ranking
within a bioassay and ranking relations across bioassays, respectively. They
will also develop new methods to better rank compounds under a combination of
criteria. In particular, they will solve compound ranking based on activity and
selectivity simultaneously by leveraging ranking difference across bioassays.
The research will be innovative, both in terms of employing original
computational models and methods into important problems in drug discovery, and
in terms of developing unique methodologies and computational techniques for
core Computer Science research. For drug discovery, the research will provide
novel perspectives and methodologies as to how researchers can utilize the
large-scale experimental data to solve important problems in drug discovery. For
core Computer Science, the research will contribute a new solution framework and
methods spanning the areas of data mining and machine learning. Specifically,
the research will lead to novel methods for boosting ranking performance by
actively including additional data, incorporating relevant information within a
regularized optimization framework, deploying iterative procedures and greedy
strategies for large-scale problems with multiple simultaneous tasks, etc. All
these methods are generalizable to a variety of other Computer Science
applications. For further information see the project web page:
http://cs.iupui.edu/~xning/compRank.html