* 1855128
* RAPID: Molecular and Metagenomic Understanding of Coastal Water Quality and Health Risks After Hurricane Lane
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/2018,04/30/2024
* Tao Yan, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 04/30/2024
* USD 239,094.00

This is a RAPID research project involving perishable data on microbial
contamination as a consequence of Hurricane Lane, which hit the Hawaii islands
during August 2018. As a consequence of Hurricane Lane, the City of Hilo on the
Island of Hawaii experienced its wettest three-day period on record with 31.85
inches of precipitation, while a staggering 52.02 inches of rainfall occurred in
Mountain View, Hawaii. These torrential rains throughout the Hawaii islands
resulted in significant flooding and caused raw sanitary sewage spills in
communities where aging sewer infrastructures were overwhelmed. Because of the
diverse pollutant sources in storm-impacted coastal water, the conventional
fecal indicator bacteria (FIB)-based water quality monitoring approach alone is
inadequate for assessing human health risks. This project aims to achieve more
comprehensive understanding of risks by using use molecular and metagenomic
tools for direct pathogen detection, microbial source tracking, and assessment
of coastal water microorganisms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is important to
understand how coastal water quality is impacted by the different sources of
storm-related pollutants and how the coastal water quality recovers after major
storms. The use of molecular and metagenomic tools is expected to provide a more
comprehensive understanding than the traditional FIB-based approaches. This
study will also generate water microbiology quality data that are urgently
needed for such major storm-impacted water, which could improve future
preparation and recovery efforts for similar events. Preliminary sampling
efforts have been conducted and have collected unique and precious water samples
that are essential for answering these important scientific
questions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.