* 1855283
* EAR-PF: Controls on weathering, solute fluxes, and geologic carbon cycling in glacierized catchments
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2023
* Anna Bergstrom, Bergstrom, Anna
* Continuing Grant
* Aisha Morris
* 06/30/2023
* USD 130,500.00

Dr. Anna Bergstrom has been awarded an NSF EAR Postdoctoral Fellowship to work
at Colorado State University to study chemical weathering and its role in
biogeochemical cycles on glacierized watersheds. Depending on geologic
properties and other characteristics of the watershed, watersheds have the
potential to be major contributors to the geologic carbon cycle though
consumption or release of carbon dioxide. However, the role of glacierized
watersheds in the global carbon cycle is unknown because hydrology and solute
flux from these systems is poorly understood. This research will unify
hydrologic theory and geochemistry in a novel way to understand the controls on
weathering-derived impacts in glacierized watersheds of costal Alaska, an area
currently seeing rapid glacier mass loss with very large ecologic and economic
implications. This understanding will then be applied to a global dataset to
evaluate the role of glacierized watersheds in the global carbon cycle. A series
of teaching modules for high schools and undergraduate classes will be designed
to introduce students to these watersheds and concepts. The postdoc will also
give public talks and collaborate with citizen science
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research brings together two
closely related but not fully integrated theories to understand processes
driving weathering-derived solute flux and the strength of carbon sink or source
from glacierized watersheds. In watershed hydrology, concentration-discharge
relationships are used to infer a process understanding of solute generation
mechanisms, with little exploration of the solute fate. In geochemical
weathering estimates of flux, this knowledge of varying relationships has not
been fully integrated into our understanding of solute flux estimates and carbon
cycling. Coupling these two approaches is a powerful way to advance our
understanding of the role of glacierized watersheds in global biogeochemical
cycles, and the dominant controls on chemical weathering rates more generally.
This integrated research framework will be developed for the Wolverine Glacier
watershed located on the Kenai Peninsula of Southcentral Alaska using continuous
water quality monitoring and regular water sampling for solute chemistry. This
will then be applied to, and tested with, a global dataset of glacierized
watersheds to understand the dominant processes and watershed characteristics
determining the magnitude and nature of weathering-derived solute flux. This
research will improve our understanding of hydrologic processes within
glacierized watersheds and the role of these watersheds in the global carbon
cycle and will provide a large publicly available global dataset of solute flux
and landscape characteristics from high solute flux
watersheds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.