* 1855240
* RUI: Aromaticity, Tautomerization and Metalation of Carbaporphyrinoid Systems
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Timothy Lash, Board of Trustees of Illinois State University
* Standard Grant
* Jon Rainier
* 08/31/2023
* USD 339,999.00

With this award, the Chemical Synthesis program of the NSF Division of Chemistry
is supporting the research of Professor Timothy Lash at Illinois State
University to explore the synthesis, characterization, and reactivity of
compounds that resemble a class of molecules called "porphyrins". Porphyrins
possess many valuable properties and have applications in material science,
catalysis and medicine. They also have an impressive array of functions in
nature that range from oxygen transportation to photosynthesis. Porphyrins
contain 4 nitrogen atoms, and related systems, called carbaporphyrins, have a
carbon atom in place of one of the nitrogens. These molecules often have
properties that complement those of naturally occurring porphyrins. The
supported work is leading to efficient routes to novel carbaporphyrins and
related systems that have unique reactivity and spectroscopic properties. Access
to new classes of porphyrin analogues are improving our understanding of
fundamental chemistry concepts such as aromaticity, a fundamental concept in
chemistry which can lead to the enhanced stability of molecules. Furthermore,
these types of structures commonly form stable complexes with palladium, rhodium
and other important metal catalysts. Professor Lash and his students are
studying applications of these molecules in the preparation of fine chemicals,
as these derivatives modify the catalytic activity of bound metals. In addition,
related compounds are being explored for use as photosensitizers in photodynamic
therapy. These projects are not only providing an excellent environment for
training undergraduates and Master's level graduate students in the field of
organic synthesis, they are also exposing these students to the
multidisciplinary nature of modern scientific research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
this research, synthetic routes to new porphyrin-like systems, including
phenaliporphyrins, quiniporphyrins and carbachlorins, are being developed.
Further application of the "3 + 1" variant of the MacDonald reaction is
providing structures that incorporate phenalene, quinoline and numerous related
heterocyclic units. The competition between aromatic hydroxyporphyrinoids and
nonaromatic keto-tautomers can be particularly insightful, and these processes
are being probed using spectroscopic techniques. True chlorins are widely
studied, in part because they show the potential for applications as
photosensitizers. Carbachlorins, which contain a carbocyclic ring in place of
one of the pyrrole units, are generally more stable than the parent
tetrapyrrolic structures and may have equally useful properties. However,
carbachlorins have been little studied to date, and the development of new
routes to these dihydroporphyrinoids will be of significant value. The
introduction of fused aromatic rings onto carbaporphyrin structures offers the
opportunity to further modify the properties of these compounds, and a new
methodology to prepare carbaporphyrins with fused naphthalene, anthracene and
related structural units is being developed. This approach is also being applied
to be synthesis of larger dimeric systems that are expected to exhibit strong
electronic interactions upon protonation. Hence, these investigations are
revealing important new porphyrinoid systems and will have a major impact in the
field of Porphyrin Chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.