* 1855550
* Fractal Geometry for Dynamics on Random Media
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2022
* Alan Hammond, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2022
* USD 210,000.00

When a laser pulse is fired into a liquid crystal, causing an unstable region to
grow from where the pulse makes contact, or when the stain of an ink blot
spreads on paper, interfaces grow in the presence of a locally disordered
environment. A central task of the rigorous theory of statistical mechanics is
to analyze which features of physical systems are universal, shared by many
models with apparently very different microscopic specifications. Understanding
of the Kardar-Parisi-Zhang universality class, which concerns many surfaces
growing with local randomness, has been greatly advanced by many mathematicians
and physicists over the last forty years. Often these advances have been aided
by the use of integrable techniques, in which sometimes rather special models
are analyzed via algebraic tools or exact formulas. The Principal Investigator
will analyze certain important universality classes, including the Kardar-
Parisi-Zhang class, by using probabilistic proof methods in unison with limited
but crucial integrable inputs. The structure of certain random fractal
geometries arising in scaling limits of dynamics on random media will thus be
explicated.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed probabilistic
investigation of fractal geometries has three principal components. The first
concerns anomalous transport in disordered random media. Namely, when a particle
with a uniform tendency to move in a preferred direction does so in a milieu
that is random and strongly disordered, trapping is a vital phenomenon that
interrupts and sometimes eliminates linear progress. The phenomenon will be
elucidated by a detailed inquiry into biased motion on the infinite cluster of
supercritical percolation in the integer lattice of dimensions at least two. The
second direction concerns scaled last passage percolation. Rich aspects of
Kardar-Parisi-Zhang universality will be explored by studying the scaled random
geometry of extremal paths moving through random fields using probabilistic
modes of proof such as resampling of random energy profiles and surgery on
paths. The final principal component will address noise sensitivity and last
passage percolation. The stability and sensitivity of last passage percolation
paths under perturbation by noise of the random environment will be studied,
strengthening the bridge between two key theories: Kardar-Parisi-Zhang
universality and discrete harmonic analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.