* 1855516
* Multitype Particle Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2019,10/31/2019
* Matthew Junge, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Pawel Hitczenko
* 10/31/2019
* USD 129,523.00

Interacting particle systems with random dynamics are fundamental for modeling
phenomena in the physical and social sciences. Such systems can be used to
describe chemical reactions, as well as the spread of disease, information, and
species through a network. These models often become more meaningful when
multiple particle types are incorporated. For example, the celebrated First
Passage Percolation model describes the spread of a single species through an
environment; the incorporation of competing species enriches the model. This
project seeks to study more realistic variants of well-known models for chemical
reactions, epidemic outbreaks, and the spread of information as to deepen our
understanding of important phenomena from across the sciences and further
develop the mathematics that helps explain them. The project will involve the
undergraduate students training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will consider
five different stochastic multi-type interacting particle systems: (1) The
Diffusion-Limited Annihilation model is an annihilating particle system in which
collisions between opposite type particles result in mutual annihilation. The
version in which particles have different speeds is difficult to study and
conjectured to exhibit anomalous behavior when different particle types are
initially balanced. (2) The Ballistic Annihilation model has three particle
types and all collisions result in annihilation. The limiting particle density
in different regimes will be characterized. (3) The Chase-Escape model is a
competitive stochastic growth model conjectured to have a coexistence phase even
when the predatory species is fitter than the prey. The effect of the
environment and fitness of the different species on coexistence will be
investigated. (4) The A+B-&gt;2A model describes a growing system of infected
particles. This process was recently generalized to the continuum, which leads
to several new questions at the intersection of discrete and continuous
probability, which will be addressed. (5) Lastly, the classical Susceptible-
Infected-Removed model is well-understood on random graphs near the critical
connectivity threshold. A natural extension is to have susceptible individuals
rewire their connections away from infected individuals. This more realistic
modification may change the size of epidemics. These five processes will be
studied using a variety of tools from discrete and continuous probability theory
such as the mass transport principal, recursion, couplings, large deviation
estimates, and stochastic differential equations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.