* 1855018
* Collaborative Proposal: Using Organic Carbon Isotopes of Single Microfossils to Illuminate Proterozoic Eukaryotic Ecosystems
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2019,12/31/2022
* Christopher Junium, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Yurena Yanes
* 12/31/2022
* USD 59,212.00

Much about the early evolution of life on earth still remains a mystery, and
while advances have been made in recent decades, major questions remain,
especially about the relationships between biology and the rise of oxygen in the
earth's atmosphere. Our proposal will measure organic carbon isotopes of
microscopic fossils that represent our best window into the evolution of life
before the rise of animals. These measurements will help us figure out where in
the oceans early organisms were living and if early life could thrive in waters
with little to no oxygen. This work will involve undergraduate students in every
aspect of the research, analysis, and writing. We will create new geochemical
and paleontological educational modules for K-12 and college educators, develop
innovative organic geochemistry techniques that will be shared with the broader
scientific community and add information on early fossil life to the open-access
Paleobiology Database. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While we have learned a significant
amount about the Proterozoic Earth system in the last few decades, major
questions remain, especially about the interplay between biology and the rise of
atmospheric oxygen. One window into the biological record of the Proterozoic is
via organic carbon isotopes, which track the isotope systematics of fixed
carbon. However, these measurements are almost always done on bulk samples that
represent the entire biological community time averaged into a sedimentary
sample, which limits our ability to use these measurements to reconstruct short-
term carbon cycle dynamics and to probe the structure of ancient ecosystems.
Recent advances in NanoEA-IRMS now allow us to reliably measure the carbon
isotopic composition of a single organic microfossil and compare that value to
the bulk 13C. We seek to use this new technique to explore how organic carbon
isotopes can illuminate two persistent unknowns in the Proterozoic Earth-life
system: 1) What were the habitats and metabolisms of early eukaryotes? and 2)
What can single microfossil carbon isotopes reveal about the controls on bulk
carbon isotopes in the Proterozoic stratigraphic record and what do these
records tell us about the Proterozoic Earth system?. We will approach these
questions by analyzing bulk, kerogen and fossil organic carbon samples from four
richly fossiliferous units that span the history of Proterozoic eukaryotes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this proposal include continued
development and refining of stable isotope analysis techniques, and integration
of the Proterozoic microfossil record into the open-access Paleobiology
Database. The proposal team will involve undergraduate students in all aspects
of the research, and undergraduates will be meaningfully involved in data
collection and interpretation. The team will also develop new educational
activities for both high school and college-level audiences. The proposed work
will include a postdoctoral fellow who will be mentored by all three PI's on
research, professional development, and teaching.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.