* 1855914
* Computational and Theoretical Modeling of Active Nematics in 3D and Under Confinement
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Michael Hagan, Brandeis University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 07/31/2023
* USD 396,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and computational
modeling of active materials and related educational activities. Active
materials are made from components that can use energy from their local
environment to propel themselves. This capability enables active materials to
have properties which are not possible in traditional materials. Examples of
naturally occurring active materials are found within biological cells, and
these materials enable cells to perform functions such as moving, replicating
themselves, and healing of wounds. Recent experimental advances are now making
it possible to construct artificial active materials, that potentially could
have similar capabilities. However, the current theoretical understanding of
active materials is incomplete. Improving this theory will guide the design of
novel artificial materials, and will help to understand biological processes
such as organismal development, cell motility, and cancer growth.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will support research aimed at making progress
towards such a theory. The PI will develop theoretical and computational models
for a recently developed experimental artificial active material made from
biological filaments and molecular motor proteins. The models will describe how
the system behaves when it is confined in a variety of geometries, such as
within channels or spherical droplets. The accuracy of the theoretical and
computational models will be assessed by testing model predictions against data
from experiments in the same confinement geometries. Goals of the research
include understanding how the individual components of an active material work
collectively to enable behaviors such as large-scale motions, and how propulsion
affects the structural order of the system. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The supported
research will provide valuable science, technology, engineering, and
mathematical (STEM) training for undergraduate and graduate students at the
interface between mathematical methods and theoretical and experimental soft
matter physics. Research activities include training programs that are designed
to engage diverse students in computational research, and to provide instruction
in scientific communication to specialized and non-specialized audiences. The
award also supports public outreach programs that use the spectacular visual
effects that arise in active matter simulations and experiments to excite the
interest of lay audiences in scientific research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports
theoretical and computational modeling of active materials and related
educational activities. Active matter describes intrinsically non-equilibrium
materials whose constituent elements consume energy to generate forces and
motion. For example, the consumption of ATP by molecules within a biological
cell enables it to perform diverse functions such as motion, replication, and
self-healing. It is now possible to construct artificial active materials from
biomolecules or synthetic colloids which have a similar capability to convert
energy to motion. These building blocks could enable a new class of soft
materials, with functionalities currently found only in biological organisms.
However, the current theoretical understanding of active matter is far from
complete. Developing such a theory is crucial to enable rational design of novel
artificial active materials, and would elucidate biological processes such as
organismal development, cell motility, and cancer growth, and would enable
rational design of novel artificial active materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award will support research aimed at progressing toward such a theory, by
developing theoretical and computational models motivated by a model active
material developed by experimental collaborators - a three-dimensional (3D)
"active nematic" constructed from a suspension of microtubules and motor
proteins. The PI will develop continuum hydrodynamic models of 3D active
nematics, and use recently developed numerical methods to solve them in a
variety of confinement geometries. The continuum models will be linked to
particle-based simulations that probe how energy generated at the particle scale
dissipates into larger scale modes. A particular focus of the research will be
elucidating the structure of topological defects in 3D, and how they power
emergent dynamics. Model predictions will be extensively tested against the
experimental 3D active nematics system. The research will build on the current
theoretical understanding of active matter by overcoming the following
limitations: (1) Most real-world applications require 3D materials, but to date
almost all controllable experimental active systems have been 2D or quasi-2D.
Thus, the current theoretical understanding of active matter is largely limited
to 2D. (2) While boundaries can usually be neglected in an equilibrium theory,
they have profound, long-ranged effects on active matter. Thus, models for
active matter must treat boundaries explicitly and with appropriate boundary
conditions. (3) Energy input at the particle scale in an active system cascades
continuously to larger scales, making it difficult to identify a separation of
scales that can be exploited to simplify theoretical descriptions. Thus, models
that link the microscale force generation units to large-scale descriptions of
collective behaviors are needed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The supported research
will provide valuable science, technology, engineering, and mathematical (STEM)
training for undergraduate and graduate students at the interface between
mathematical methods and theoretical and experimental soft matter physics.
Research activities include training programs that are designed to engage
diverse students in computational research, and to provide instruction in
scientific communication to specialized and non-specialized audiences. The award
also supports public outreach programs that use the spectacular visual effects
that arise in active matter simulations and experiments to excite the interest
of lay audiences in scientific research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.