* 1855724
* Third Midwestern Microlocal Meeting: Microlocal Analysis, Inverse Problems, and Resonances
* MPS,DMS
* 02/15/2019,01/31/2021
* Kiril Datchev, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 01/31/2021
* USD 22,501.00

This award supports participation in the "Third Midwestern Microlocal Meeting:
Microlocal Analysis, Inverse Problems and Resonances" held at Purdue University
from March 22 to 24, 2019. The involvement of graduate students and postdoctoral
researchers in any scientific meeting is extremely important; this is one way
scientific knowledge gets transmitted from one generation to the next. The award
gives early-career researchers, researchers who are members of underrepresented
groups, and researchers without other sources of support a chance to attend
lectures and interact with the invited speakers and with each other. This will
expose junior mathematicians to an exciting and dynamical mathematical
environment and will motivate and encourage them to continue working on
mathematical research. The topics of the conference are closely related to
questions that are of interest in physics, such as mathematical resonances,
scattering, the long-time behavior of waves, and inverse problems. Participants
will be exposed to these possible applications, potentially leading to future
developments in medical imaging, geophysics, and other interdisciplinary
subjects.

The topics discussed in the meeting belong to the field of mathematical
analysis, and include scattering theory, inverse scattering, resolvent
estimates, resonances, inverse problems, and generalized Radon and X-ray
transforms. The conference will help disseminate recent results and contribute
to future developments in these fields. More information can be found at
http://www.math.purdue.edu/~kdatchev/Plamen/

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.