* 1855216
* EPCN: Enabling a Transactive Energy System from a Stochastic Geometry Framework
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Bala Natarajan, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Kuh
* 06/30/2023
* USD 481,798.00

The ability of active consumers and end devices to buy/sell energy and related
services in a dynamic and interactive manner is expected to create a transactive
energy (TE) market presenting new opportunities and challenges for distribution
system operations. The implications of a market-based approach to operational
management need to be better understood at both the consumer and utility levels.
Researchers have typically attempted to address important and open operational
questions using a simulation-based scenario analysis approach. The spatial and
temporal randomness associated with energy generation/consumption as well as the
stochastic behavior of consumers in response to pricing, significantly
complicates the scale and number of Monte-Carlo simulations required to make
meaningful and statistically valid inferences. Any changes to the network can
force a re-computation that is cumbersome. While simulations provide useful
insights on system operations for a specific set up, the dynamic nature of the
TE market with multiple sources of uncertainty begs for the design of new
planning tools. In this project, a suite of novel stochastic geometry based
analytical approximations and bounds are derived in order to develop a unique
operational planning tool that can be used in a sustaining mode (i.e., in
conjunction with simulation tools) or as a disruptive standalone alternative
depending on the needs of distribution system operator
(DSO).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal introduces a new paradigm for
operational planning incorporating analytical approximations and stochastic
bounds in lieu of cumbersome simulations. By bringing together techniques from
stochastic geometry, graph theory, information theory and power systems
analysis, the PIs will derive new probabilistic voltage and loss sensitivity
metrics that can be computed quickly and scale well with the size of the
network. The probabilistic sensitivity analysis relies on both consumer level
and network level stochastic abstractions that help quantify the average impact
of varying penetration levels of active consumers on grid performance. The
results from the probabilistic sensitivity analysis are used to develop the
unique concept of a dominant influencer. Using the dominant influencer models, a
network vulnerability rank can be determined and used to (1) quantify the
susceptibility of the network to various points of cyber/physical attack, and
(2) develop a hybrid control framework for DSOs to deploy and manage control
assets within a TE system. The stochastic geometry framework also enables fast
identification of inactive voltage constraints that can expedite power flow
computations &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In summary, this project provides tools that
will enable distribution systems operators to efficiently plan and operate
distribution systems with large penetration of distributed renewable energy
resources, electric vehicles, and engaged consumers. These tools will allow true
techno-economic analysis of the system while incorporating consumer preferences.
Results from this research will be: (1) integrated into several undergraduate
and graduate courses, and (2) disseminated via publications in academic
conferences and journals. The PIs will educate the public through Open House
displays and field trips for K-12 students to encourage students from under-
represented groups to pursue STEM careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.