* 1855416
* The Determinants State-Level Immigration Law in New Immigrant Destinations
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2018,05/31/2022
* Jennifer Jones, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 05/31/2022
* USD 66,754.00

Project Title: Immigration Law in New Destination States&lt;br/&gt;PIs: Hana
Brown (Wake Forest University) and Jennifer Jones (University of Notre
Dame)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project examines why some states have adopted
anti-immigrant laws while others have embraced newcomers with more supportive
incorporation initiatives. The investigators examine immigration law in the U.S.
South, a prominent new immigrant destination region marked by radically
different state-level approaches to immigration governance. The researchers draw
on interviews, media analysis, and archival data to understand the origins of
different enforcement regimes. Findings will clarify patterns of access to key
institutions that affect immigrant incorporation with significant implications
for communities, organizations, and state entities that work with new immigrant
populations. More broadly, this project will reveal the forces that drive a
patchwork policy system that increasingly grants subnational entities
jurisdiction across a range of legal issues. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the United
States and globally, immigration laws exist at the intersection of two
prevailing trends: the criminalization and racialization of non-citizens and the
devolution of legal enforcement to subnational authorities. Dominant
explanations for variation in state immigration law emphasize the role of
partisan politics, political ideology, and demographic change. However, these
paradigms cannot satisfactorily explain recent lawmaking patterns in new
immigrant destinations. Comparing two cases (Alabama and Georgia) where
conservative politics and a growing Latino population gave rise to omnibus anti-
immigrant laws to two cases (Mississippi and North Carolina) where the same
forces did not have the same result will help to specify the dynamics that drive
the criminalization of immigrants and the extension of states' punitive powers.
The researchers examine the role of interracial activist networks in thwarting
enforcement efforts. Specifically, the project examines Black-Latino coalitions
as (1) cultural brokers, race makers who strategically shape beliefs about
Black-Latino commonalities and diffuse these racial schemata across media,
legal, and political forums and as (2) organizational brokers, liaisons who
forge or activate networks across established legal movements (labor, civil
rights) to heighten the political risks of supporting anti-immigrant laws and
pressure lawmakers to reject such reforms. Findings will help elucidate how
social context and non-state actors shape immigration law and specify the
central role that advocacy organizations and legal processes play in the racial
formation process. As the country becomes majority-minority, such findings will
also have important implications for our understanding of the role of the legal
context in shaping immigrant incorporation and racialization in the contemporary
United States.