* 1855624
* CSEDI: Ultra-High Velocity Zones (UHVZs) at the core-mantle boundary
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Edward Garnero, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Panero
* 05/31/2024
* USD 544,767.00

Nearly half way to the center of the Earth, 2900 km deep, lies the boundary
between the rocky mantle and the molten iron-rich outer core. There, at the
core-mantle boundary (CMB), small enigmatic structures of tens of km in size
were recently observed on the mantle side. The CMB is a critical boundary. The
heat conducted away from the core by mantle materials contributes to power the
Earth's magnetic field which shields us from the solar wind. Mantle thermal
convection, which drives plate tectonics and associated hazards, might have
brought unique materials to the CMB; possibly large sections of the Earth's
crust and upper mantle. Characterizing the newly observed structures is
important, because they hold clues on the planet dynamics, chemical evolution
and present-day state. Here, the researchers use seismology - the study of
seismic-wave propagation within the Earth - to image and characterize these
structures. They are called ultra-high velocity zones, because seismic waves
passing through them exhibit remarkably high velocities. To identify their
origins, the team studies the convective properties of the mantle using
geodynamic modeling. The researchers also carry out experiments and
computational calculations to investigate the properties of candidate materials
at the extreme pressure and temperature of the deep mantle. These data help to
constrain and interpret seismic observations, lifting the veil on the nature of
ultra-high velocity zones. This project provides support to an early-career
scientist, a postdoctoral associate and two female graduate students. It also
promotes training for an undergraduate student and educational outreach to the
public at yearly events and via the internet. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
multidisciplinary project frames the detection, imaging, modeling, and
characterization of ultra-high velocity zones (UHVZs). The team's preliminary
work finds them in spots beneath the Cocos and Caribbean tectonic plates, a
region located beneath past and present active subduction zones. The researchers
focus on mapping and modeling UHVZs there and in other geographical locales,
analyzing seismic waves that reflects off of Earth's core (named ScS, ScP, and
PcP waves). In addition, they explore compositional possibilities by performing
high-pressure experiments and calculations. These involve materials introduced
from above, such as subducted ocean crust and sediments, and from below (core-
mantle interactions). Experiments on phase relations and properties of minerals
are carried out using multi-anvil press and diamond-anvil cell setups at
synchrotron national facilities. They explore a large range of pressure, up to
the extreme pressure of 135 GPa (~1.3 million atm) prevailing in the lowermost
mantle. Experiments are combined with calculations leading to estimates of
expected velocities, which are compared with seismological results. In parallel,
geodynamic modeling investigates the dynamical behavior of compositional input
from subduction or the CMB. This provides a framework guiding the experimental
work and the interpretation and modeling of seismic observations. UHVZs may have
important effects on a number of deep mantle phenomena, including heat and
chemistry exchange between the core and mantle. They may relate to important
geodynamical cycles at the origin of the previously documented ultra-low
velocity zones and/or thermochemical piles. Investigating the newly discovered
CMB structures may provide insights on larger scale processes, like whole mantle
convection and the evolution of mantle chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.