* 1855256
* RET Site: Building Education
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Sez Atamturktur Russcher, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 08/31/2023
* USD 600,000.00

The proposed Building Education Research Experiences for Teachers (RET) site
will advance STEM education by engaging teachers in building science research
topics including indoor air quality, lighting effectiveness, thermal comfort,
and energy efficiency. Multiple domains of building science will be utilized to
engage teachers in STEM disciplines in a way that offers Education for
Sustainability as a unifying and energizing theme and Systems Thinking as the
overarching learning objective. Participating teachers will be equipped with the
capabilities and instruments to experiment with air quality, lighting systems,
and energy use in their respective school buildings as hands-on and applied
STEM-based teaching modules. This will be accomplished through offering
immersive RET experience for three cohorts of teachers across urban and rural
school districts and Intermediate Units and the engagement of 30 teachers in
developmental research experiences and curriculum integration practices that
link research, student engagement, and STEM/Systems Thinking education outcomes.
This research will advance methods in Education for Sustainability and as a
result, is expected to attract women and underrepresented minority students into
STEM fields. Linkages to state and national partners will enable broad
dissemination and adoption of Education for Sustainability principles and the
living laboratory strategy as instruments for advancing STEM education as well
as global challenges in energy and human health. The project will lead to
shareable teaching modules that can be adapted by science, math, physics, and
chemistry teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RET site will demonstrate direct
linkages between teacher-engaged research, sustainability focused teaching
contexts, and STEM learning outcomes. Teacher-led and student engaged data
collection and analysis as an innovative and meaningful context will be
evaluated for its impact on student STEM self-efficacy and student ability to
use data and evidence to effectively solve problems and optimize systems,
environments, interfaces, and devices. This research will also evaluate
Education for Sustainability as a strategy for cultivating teacher capacity to
design effective instructional methods in systems
thinking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.