* 1855180
* RET Site: Atomic Scale Design and Engineering
* ENG,EEC
* 05/15/2019,04/30/2024
* Melissa Jones, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 04/30/2024
* USD 600,000.00

This Research Experience for Teachers (RET) Site program at North Carolina State
University (NCSU) will equip teachers with the knowledge, tools, and resources
they need to teach nanotechnology to their students including the equipment and
techniques that are used to fabricate or manufacture at the nanoscale, ways to
see and identify atoms in a manufactured structure, and the ability to relate
research to real-world applications. Nanotechnology is impacting sectors as
diverse as medicine, textiles, electronics, and energy. However, concepts in
nanotechnology are often complex and teachers are not readily exposed to tools
and techniques because of their expense or availability. This RET program will
immerse teachers in state-of-the-art university research laboratories to learn
nanotechnology concepts and contribute to a research project. The program will
help them to develop unique curricula that will be shared with hundreds of
students in their classrooms, schools, and districts. The research focus is
timely as scientific advances have given engineers greater control over the
creation and analysis of materials at the nanoscale using tools like
transmission electron microscopes. This program gives educators the experiences,
knowledge, and tools needed to communicate the underlying science effectively,
allowing them to train a generation of students who better understand
nanotechnology and its role in addressing societal grand
challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Educators' experiences will be enabled through
participation in university research projects as well as tours and usage of
nanotechnology core facilities within the Research Triangle Nanotechnology
Network (RTNN) and engagement with companies. The NSF-funded RTNN, which is one
of 16 sites in the National Nanotechnology Coordinated Infrastructure, is a
collaboration between North Carolina State University, the University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill, and Duke University. Participants will be recruited
from local school districts and community colleges with high populations of
underrepresented students. Teams of 2-3 teachers will be assembled to enable
nano-focused curriculum development integrated across multiple grades. Each team
will be advised by a faculty research mentor at one of the RTNN institutions.
Participants will create and characterize nanoscale materials or devices,
connect their work to real-world applications, and gain experience with state-
of-the-art research tools and techniques. Currently, most K-12 and community
college students have limited access to this field and the resources necessary
to support nanotechnology fabrication and development. The first week is
dedicated to orientation activities; the following weeks will intertwine project
work with curricular development. To cap off the program, educator teams will
finalize curricular materials and share their research experiences with fellow
RET participants in a symposium. Upon return to their home institutions,
educators will implement their curricula and continue to work with open-access
user facilities at the participating universities. Through dissemination
efforts, this program has the potential to impact thousands of students, many of
whom are minorities from low wealth communities, and to encourage their pursuit
of STEM careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.