* 1856439
* Epigenetic control of steroid hormone signaling in axon pruning
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* John Bethea, Drexel University
* Continuing Grant
* Quentin Gaudry
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,310,000.00

The connections between cells in brain circuits that produce behavior can change
throughout life, a phenomenon referred to as plasticity. One mechanism
contributing to brain plasticity consists of different types of experiences
turning genes that control the connections between brain cells on and off
(epigenetics). This research examines one gene that controls the expression of
other genes by making a specific protein called Kismet; the team's previous work
has shown that Kismet regulates the activity of other genes that control how
brain cells are wired together. By more fully understanding the specific ways
that Kismet regulates brain plasticity, the investigators hope to better
understand how different experiential factors (such as social interaction) and
biological factors (such as aging) affect gene expression to form or alter
connections in the brain. This type of information will also be important for
better understanding natural and disease-related changes that occur in the brain
throughout life. This award will also support the enhancement of directed
research opportunities for undergraduate students by building upon an existing
Classroom Undergraduate Research Experience (CURE). The CURE class addresses a
critical problem that multiple universities face: accommodating the large number
of undergraduate students who want to participate in undergraduate research but
cannot due to limited faculty: student ratios. By further improving the
provision of significant research experiences for large numbers of
undergraduates in a classroom setting, this work will help educational
institutions to better addresses important pedagogical concerns in science
education and training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A major question in neuroscience is
how signaling cascades integrate experiential, environmental and/or internal
cues to form long-lasting changes in gene expression required to form precise
neural circuits. This award will address this question by examining the
epigenetic mechanisms that link steroid hormone receptor gene expression to axon
pruning in the developing brain. Axon pruning is critical for proper synapse
elimination required to sculpt precise neural circuits. Defective pruning is
associated with altered brain connectivity and behavior. A premier model of
developmental axon pruning is the pruning that occurs in the developing mushroom
body (MB) neurons in the fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster. This pruning
requires precise control of the expression of the steroid hormone receptor
Ecdysone Receptor (EcR) in MB neurons, which is a cell-autonomous, rate-limiting
step in axon pruning. Disruption of EcR expression in Drosophila leads to
unpruned axons. The investigators have shown that Kis binds cis regulatory
elements of EcR, where Kis is required to activate EcR transcription by
promoting H3K36 methylation and H4K16 acetylation. Further, they have shown that
Kis protein levels are themselves controlled by the TGF-Beta signaling pathway,
which is known to promote EcR levels and MB axon pruning. This award will
determine how Kis links TGF-Beta signaling to control EcR transcription and MB
pruning. It will also determine how Kis promotes epigenetic changes to control
EcR transcription and MB pruning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.