* 1856626
* Deciphering the evolution of galling by gall wasps (Hymenoptera: Cynipidae), using a comparative and integrative approach
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Sean Brady, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 06/30/2024
* USD 867,769.00

Insects that consume plant tissues have an inordinate impact on the health,
survival and evolution of plant species, including all agricultural crops. In
some cases, insect herbivores also alter the developmental and physiological
programs of their host-plants, which cause the plants to produce more tissue for
the benefit of the insect. The mechanisms by which insects cause these plant
responses and the pathways by which insects evolved these remarkable abilities
are largely unknown. This project will examine the evolution of these complex
plant-herbivore interactions using the gall-wasp family, Cynipidae, as a model
system. This family contains thousands of species that manipulate host-plants to
create tumor-like structures, called galls, in which wasp larvae feed while
being protected from predators and the outside environment. Galls vary
tremendously in their architecture and location on the plant depending on the
wasp species that initiated the gall. Researchers will generate genome-scale
data to test how gall-wasps evolved the ability to make galls and how plant gall
architecture has evolved over time. By examining the anatomy and physiology of
these wasps, researchers will also shed light on how gall inducers are able to
manipulate host-plants. The project will support the training of multiple early-
career researchers, including members of underrepresented groups, and develop
curricula that will improve insect biology education. Public outreach events
will highlight the ecological and economic impact of insects in our society and
will use the rich history of gall biology to engage diverse audiences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will resolve the evolutionary history of
Cynipidae to determine whether gall induction evolved more than once in the
family, establish whether viral or microbial symbionts are associated with
galling, and determine how wasp species shifted among host-plant species over
time. Researchers will reconstruct Cynipidae phylogeny using sequence data from
2,000 loci of ultra-conserved elements from more than 200 exemplar taxa,
including every tribe and almost all genera. The evolution of gall induction
strategies will be inferred from this tree using relevant meta-analyses,
including ancestral states reconstruction, divergence time estimation, and
comparative methods. Adult (venom) and larval (iliac, salivary) glands will be
characterized for gross morphology, chemical composition, and transcriptomic
profiles to uncover possible gall-inducing gene products, such as plant hormone
mimics. Other outcomes of the research will include new diagnostic tools,
expanded collections and genomic repositories, as well as a publicly-accessible
database that will collate and synthesize historical gall-wasp research to
accelerate description and discovery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.