* 1856627
* TRTech-PGR:  Comprehensive identification and functional characterization of cis-regulatory elements in legumes
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2019,05/31/2024
* Robert Schmitz, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 05/31/2024
* USD 3,584,830.00

This project will produce a large, high-quality and uniform dataset that
includes several, complementary types of data to address a number of outstanding
questions in the economically important legume family of plants, which includes
soybean, common bean and peanut. These data are highly valuable for studying
diverse developmental pathways such as leaf, root and seed development, as well
as the formation and function of root nodules, specialized plant structures that
fix atmospheric nitrogen. The datasets will also lead to the identification of
critical DNA sequences that control gene expression and will allow their more
accurate characterization as well as lead to engineering of these sequences for
crop improvement. The datasets and genomic resources generated here will be
released publicly and immediately following quality control through an
interactive website and federal data repositories. In addition to the scientific
and agricultural impact, the project continues a partnership with primarily
Hispanic and Native American tribal colleges in the Southwest. A workshop that
presents modern-day computational biology approaches to explore DNA sequences
will be hosted at Santa Fe Community College. This event serves as a conduit to
engage the public and interested undergraduates in research activities and also
serves as a means to recruit interns and their faculty mentors for summer
training at our research institutions annually.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Significant progress has been made in recent years in
plant genome assembly and gene annotation. However, the systematic
identification and functional characterization of plant cis-regulatory DNA
elements remain a challenge, as methods that are highly effective in animals
have not translated to plants. A comprehensive and well-curated data set of
plant cis-regulatory DNA elements is instrumental to understanding
transcriptional regulation during development and/or in response to external
stimuli. In addition, cis-regulatory DNA elements are hotspots for genetic
variations underlying agronomically and evolutionarily important traits. The
research team has recently optimized several high-throughput methods to identify
cis-regulatory elements by chromatin signatures, their bound transcription
factors, their target genes by direct physical chromatin interactions, and their
regulatory activities in high-throughput reporter assays. The goal of this
project is to use these methods to systematically identify, analyze and
functionally validate cis-regulatory elements in important legume species
including Glycine max (soybean), Phaseolus vulgaris (common bean), Phaseolus
coccineus (runner bean), Arachis ipaensis, Arachis duranensis and Arachis
hypogea (peanut). The results will be used to address a number of mechanistic,
developmental and evolutionary questions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.