* 1856176
* Midwest Dynamical Systems Conferences 2019-2020
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Roland Roeder, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 07/31/2022
* USD 40,000.00

This award supports participation in the Midwest Dynamical Systems Workshops in
Fall 2019 and Fall 2020. The 2019 Workshop will be held at the University of
Illinois, Chicago from October 25-27, 2019. The 2020 workshop will be hosted by
another regional academic institution with an active program in dynamical
systems research; the 2020 host institution will be selected by the conference's
Scientific Advisory Board in 2019. The Midwest Dynamical Systems Workshop is an
ongoing educational experience for graduate students and a vehicle for
supporting the research careers of new researchers. This award gives early-
career researchers, researchers who are members of underrepresented groups, and
researchers without other sources of support the opportunity to participate in
the conferences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshops focus on recent
developments in the field of dynamical systems. Several important topics will be
covered in the 2019 meeting, including but not restricted to arithmetic
dynamics, holomorphic dynamics, parabolic dynamics, thermodynamic formalism,
symbolic dynamics, ergodic Ramsey theory, and rigidity phenomena. Connections
between dynamical systems and other areas of science will also be covered,
potentially including theoretical physics, statistical mechanics, electrical
engineering, information theory, economics, game theory, voting theory, and
epidemiology. More information can be found on the workshop web site
http://sites.math.northwestern.edu/mwds/&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.