* 1856617
* DNA Lesion Bypass in Sulfolobus solfataricus
* BIO,MCB
* 06/16/2018,07/31/2024
* Zucai Suo, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 07/31/2024
* USD 679,604.00

DNA is the genetic material that gives each cell and organism its unique
character. The accurate duplication of DNA as well as its subsequent transfer
from parent to offspring is critical for life. Some environmental factors such
as chemical carcinogens, UV light, or even natural cellular processes can cause
oxidative or physical damage to our DNA, which can cause mutations or
temporarily block its duplication. In fact, it has been estimated that there are
tens of thousands of damaged DNA sites (lesions) in each human cell per day.
Lesions in genomic DNA of other organisms are also widespread. If left
unrepaired, these lesions can inhibit the duplication of DNA, cause cell death,
or detrimental mutations. This project will use cutting-edge biophysical
techniques to investigate how a commonly occurring oxidative DNA lesion prevents
proteins from accurately duplicating the DNA. The results generated from this
project will determine the consequences of DNA damage at the molecular level. In
addition to its scientific importance, the project will also support
undergraduate and graduate students at The Ohio State University with
opportunities to receive scientific training, provide them tools for designing
and testing scientific hypotheses, as well as learning about the nature of
scientific discovery.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Cellular DNA is frequently damaged
by both endogenous and exogenous sources to form a myriad of DNA damaged sites,
which can stall the cellular DNA replication machinery during genome
duplication. Some key proteins for DNA replication are the replicative DNA
polymerases, which synthesize the majority of DNA, and translesion synthesis
(TLS) DNA polymerases, which bypass and extend DNA across from damaged DNA sites
but often in an error-prone way. The processivity factor PCNA enhances the
ability of replicative polymerases to synthesize long stretches of DNA and plays
a key role in polymerase switching at sites of DNA damage. It is not known how
common DNA lesions affect the conformational dynamics of replicative and TLS
polymerases in solution. Furthermore, it is not known how these two different
types of polymerases are switched at a lesion site. To study the first
mechanistic question, the project will utilize Förster resonance energy transfer
techniques and a stopped-flow apparatus, a rapid mixer, to monitor the
conformational dynamics of a replicative polymerase and a TLS polymerase during
binding to substrates, or PCNA, as well as catalysis. To elucidate molecular
details of polymerase switching, this project will employ cutting-edge single
molecule techniques to investigate how a replicative polymerase and a TLS
polymerase are switched on and off at a DNA damaged site with the help of PCNA.
The project will also offer undergraduate and graduate students at The Ohio
State University opportunities to receive important scientific training in the
field of advanced enzymology. The project will provide them training in
designing and testing scientific hypotheses as well as support for further
career development and educational opportunities in STEM fields.