* 1856619
* Synthetic, Mechanistic, and Catalytic Studies of Electrophilic d- and f-Element Complexes
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Tobin Marks, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 07/31/2023
* USD 636,370.00

With this award, the Chemical Catalysis Program of the NSF Division of Chemistry
is supporting the research of Professor Tobin J. Marks of Northwestern
University in Evanston, Illinois. Professor Marks and his coworkers are
discovering, understanding, and optimizing new catalytic reactions, and closely
combining this effort with educational outreach activities. Such catalytic
processes are of great importance to the U.S. chemical industry, and it is
estimated that catalysis underpins 25% of the U.S. GDP, producing fertilizers,
fuels, plastics, pharmaceuticals, coatings, and other chemicals on a huge scale.
Future catalytic transformations must be more efficient, non-toxic, non-
polluting, and use low-cost, earth-abundant metals in more selective,
sustainable, and economically competitive technologies. Addressing these
challenges will require a skilled National technical workforce, and US
universities are playing a major role by broadly educating young scientists to
attack global-scale problems, while conducting excellent research across broad
disciplinary fronts. Projects funded by this award involve a multi-faceted,
educationally rigorous mix of catalyst creation, catalytic reactions, and
understanding reaction products. This, combined with a highly interactive
research group environment, provides excellent training/mentoring for graduate,
undergraduate, and postdoctoral scholars planning industrial, national
laboratory, or academic careers, and includes women and underrepresented
minorities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is built around two integrated
exploratory, hypothesis-driven themes stimulated by the unique properties of
earth-abundant lanthanide (4f), actinide (5f), and d0 early transition metal
complexes. In the first, catalytic reactions that create or cleave carbon-
heteroelement bonds via non-traditional pathways are being developed. Unusual
catalysts are being used to selectively create heteroatom (boron, nitrogen,
oxygen, sulfur, phosphorus) bonds to important chemical building blocks such as
olefins, alkynes, ketones, aldehydes, esters and amides, either in single or in
closely coupled multiple steps. Useful substances with diverse ring structures
such as pharmaceuticals and fine chemicals and being produced by this work.
Topics being studied include chiral ligands for pharma-related enantioselective
catalytic processes, and catalytic systems capable of reversing the
aforementioned bond-forming processes to deconstruct bio-based feedstocks and
other heteroatom-containing molecules. In the second theme, catalyst nuclearity
effects applied to unusual olefin polymerization and hydroelementation processes
are being studied. The team is using designed catalytic centers to effect
polymerization reactions which link unsaturated building blocks, including those
with normally deactivating polar and basic groups, to produce plastic materials
with superior bulk properties including mechanical or processing properties,
and/or surface properties such as adhesion, wettability, water-repellence,
compatibility with other polymers, or bacteriocidal characteristics. Catalyst
design includes ways to orchestrate cooperative enzyme-like processes that are
"switched on" when two catalytic centers are placed in close but variable
proximity with the objective of achieving unique polymerization processes. These
include polymerization reactions to produce novel types of polymer architectures
derived from catalysts in which two cooperating metal centers have similar or
different, complementary reactivities. A second goal with such catalysts is
bond-forming processes which create expanded structures accessible only by the
cooperative interaction of two catalytic metal
centers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.