* 1856597
* The Correlation Between Domestic Status and Social Organization Form
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2019,02/29/2020
* Elizabeth Stone, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/29/2020
* USD 74,186.00

Dr. Elizabeth Stone, of Stony Brook University, along with colleagues from the
University of Chicago, Stony Brook University, Oxford University and the
University of Munich will undertake archaeological research to study the degree
of continuity in domestic life at the site of Ur, located in southern Iraq, as
the city was transformed from the imperial capital in the late third millennium
to one of many small city states in the early second millennium B.C.E.
Interpretations of Mesopotamian society, heavily influenced by the written
record, have often interpreted the earlier level where the archaeological record
is dominated by public buildings, as a very top down society, with some
suggesting that much of the population were comparable to chattle slaves.
However, the subsequent period is best known for its domestic areas which have
yielded private letters and contracts and testify to considerable agency on the
part of the larger population. This project aims to recover comparable data from
domestic areas dating to both both periods to determine whether or not the
differences in the current written record reflect real changes in society or the
effect of differences in site formation. The research will provide basic insight
into factors which underlie the rise and often subsequent decline of complex
societies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These funds will be used to support the third
and last season of work at the site. The uppermost architectural in Area 3 was
owned by a general and indicates considerable construction investment. However
the architecture in the overlying level incorporates few courses of baked brick
and exhibits some of the narrowest walls and room widths known from the earlier
excavations at Ur. The goal is to obtain a sequence of architectural,
artifactual, faunal and floral data that can be compared with the contemporary
data which can be compared between time periods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.