* 1856775
* RUI: Computational Methods for Molecular Resonances and Study of Electron-induced Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/2020,06/30/2023
* Thomas Sommerfeld, Southeastern Louisiana University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 06/30/2023
* USD 125,065.00

Professor Thomas Sommerfeld of Southeastern Louisiana University is supported by
an award from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in
the Division of Chemistry. He develops computational methods to study the
properties of negatively charged molecules called molecular anions. The presence
of extra electrons (negative charges) can alter the strengths of the chemical
bonds in a molecule. A chemical bond is formed when electrons are shared between
nearby atoms. These shared electrons act like a "glue" that hold the atoms
together to form a molecule. However, the presence of either too little or too
much glue can weaken a chemical bond. If the bond is weakened enough, a
molecular anion can become metastable and the bond can be easily broken.
Alternatively, the metastable molecular anion can undergo a rearrangement and
release an electron so that it can go back to having stronger, more stable
bonds. Examples of areas in which these phenomena are applied are the etching of
integrated circuits, studies involving chemical reactions in the upper
atmosphere, radiation damage to living tissue, and some cancer therapies. Dr.
Sommerfeld develops computer models of metastable anions. Making computer models
of metastable anionic molecules is a challenge because one needs to simulate the
quantum mechanical equations of motion describing all the electrons in the
metastable anion, as well as all the electrons of all possible rearranged
species that result from the released electron. Dr. Sommerfeld's goal is to
identify a reliable, cost-efficient method to calculate the time it takes for
electron release, a critical parameter for characterizing metastable anions. The
project is being carried out at Southeastern Louisiana University, a
predominantly undergraduate institution. Professor Sommerfeld engages lower
income and underrepresented students in research projects involving high-level
theory and sophisticated computational methods. In order to introduce
undergraduates to this research, he also designs educational mini-projects using
standard quantum chemistry methods,so that his students can be introduced to the
research area step-by-step. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project Dr.
Sommerfeld studies electronically metastable states, so called resonance states,
or resonances. He develops first-principles methods that characterize resonances
and employs these methods to study electron-induced reactions. Computing both
the energy and lifetime of a resonance is a challenging task for quantum
chemistry because it combines an electron-scattering phenomenon with an
electron-correlation problem. Dr. Sommerfeld pursues objectives that aim at
improving the accuracy and reliability of one of the existing methods used to
compute the energy of resonances and he pursues more specific projects aimed at
implementing a set of reliable methods in systematic
steps.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.