* 1856749
* RESEARCH-PGRP - Adapting to a Harsh Environment:  Arbuscular Mycorrhizal Fungi, Drought Stress and Plasticity of Plant Architecture for a Beneficial Outcome
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Uta Paszkowski, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 07/31/2023
* USD 1,200,000.00

To meet the food and nutritional demands of an ever-growing population, food
production must increase despite declines in arable land and limitations in key
plant nutrients such as nitrogen and phosphorous (Pi), increased soil salinity,
and predicted increases in the frequency of droughts. Meeting future food needs
is one of the greatest challenges facing the world today, and can be addressed
through crop improvement and soil management. Little is known of how plants
integrate beneficial interactions with soil microbes and environmental
limitations (i.e., insufficient water) to modulate their growth. This project is
developing new technologies for studying the interaction between plants and
microbes, focusing on how rice and tomato interact with beneficial fungi under
varied irrigation conditions. The results will make it possible to improve
plant-microbe interactions so that plants can better sustain vital functions
under stressful conditions. The technologies will be broadly applicable to other
aspects of plant-environmental interactions and to other multicellular
organisms. In addition, the project is introducing students in local schools to
topics in plant genetics that highlight the importance of beneficial organisms.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to identify key gene regulatory,
signaling, and response networks that underlie beneficial plasticity in plant
root development and shoot meristem activity mediated by the symbiosis with
Arbuscular Mycorrhizal Fungi (AMF), particularly under water deficit conditions.
The project assesses how AMF influences root architecture and meristematic
development under low water availability. The specific aims are to (1) Develop
inducible i-INTACT and i-TRAP to capture epigenome to translatome dynamics in
the subset of cells responding to distinct AMF elicitors or developing
arbuscules; (2) Initiate a high-resolution survey of AMF and water deficit
interactions from the organ to the cellular level in the greenhouse; and (3)
Pursue education and broader impact activities. This includes (i) prompt
dissemination of genetic material, genomic data, protocols, software, and
workshop materials; (ii) annual instruction of methods in courses, workshops and
undergraduate teaching labs; and (iii) hands-on training of undergraduate and
high school students in plant genomics research. Mentoring is tailored to each
institution's community, targeting underrepresented groups. The project also
develops teaching materials to enhance the 3rd grade Next Generation Science
Standard curricula through instruction on plant parts at the microscopic level,
empowering youths with an appreciation of plants and the importance of plant
research to humankind.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.