* 1856048
* Collaborative Research: Assessing the Global Climate Response to Melting of the Antarctic Ice Sheet
* GEO,OPP
* 02/15/2018,11/30/2020
* Alan Condron, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 11/30/2020
* USD 400,570.00

There is compelling historical evidence that the West Antarctic Ice Sheet (WAIS)
is vulnerable to rapid retreat and collapse. Recent observations, compared to
observations made 20-30 years before, indicate that both ice shelves (thick ice
with ocean below) and land ice (thick ice with land below), are now melting at a
much faster rate. Some numerical models suggest that significant ice retreat may
begin within many of our lifetimes, starting with the abrupt collapse of Pine
Island and Thwaites Glaciers in the next 50 years. This may be followed by
retreat of much of the WAIS and then the collapse of parts of the East Antarctic
ice sheet (EAIS). This research project will assess the extent to which global
ocean circulation and climate will be impacted if enormous volumes of fresh
water and ice flow into the Southern Ocean. It will establish whether a rapid
collapse of WAIS in the near-future poses any significant threat to the
stability of modern-day climate and human society. This is a topic that has so
far received little attention as most prior research has focused on the response
of climate to melting the Greenland ice sheet. Yet model simulations predict
that the volumes of fresh water and ice released from Antarctica in the next few
centuries could be up at least ten-times larger than from Greenland. The
Intellectual Merit of this project stems from its ability to establish a link
between the physical Antarctic system (ice sheet dynamics, fresh water discharge
and iceberg calving) and global climate. The PIs (Principal Investigators) will
assess the sensitivity of ocean circulation and climate to increased ice sheet
melt using a combination of ocean, iceberg, ice sheet and climate models.
Results from this study will help identify areas of the ice sheet that are
vulnerable to collapse and also regions of the ocean where a significant
freshening will have a considerable impact on climate, and serve to guide the
deployment of an observational monitoring system capable of warning us when ice
and fresh water discharge start to approach levels capable of disrupting ocean
circulation and global climate. This project will support and train two graduate
students, and each PI will be involved with local primary and secondary schools,
making presentations, mentoring science fair projects, and contributing to
curriculum development. A novel, web-based, interactive, cryosphere learning
tool will be developed to help make school children more aware of the importance
of the Polar Regions in global climate, and this software will be introduced to
science teachers at a half day workshop organized by the UMass STEM Education
Institute. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent numerical simulations using a
continental ice sheet/shelf model show the potential for more rapid and greater
Antarctic ice sheet retreat in the next 50-300 years (under the full range of
IPCC RCP (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, Representative
Concentration Pathways) future warming scenarios) than previously projected.
Exactly how the release of enormous volumes of ice and fresh water to the
Southern Ocean will impact global ocean circulation and climate has yet to be
accurately assessed. This is in part because previous model simulations were too
coarse to accurately resolve narrow coastal boundary currents, shelf breaks,
fronts, and mesoscale eddies that are all very important for realistically
simulating fresh water transport in the ocean. In this award, future projections
of fresh water discharge and iceberg calving from Antarctic will be used to
force a high resolution eddy-resolving ocean model (MITgcm) coupled to a new
iceberg module and a fully-coupled global climate model (CCSM4). High resolution
ocean/iceberg simulations will determine the role of mesoscale eddies in
freshwater transport and give new insight into how fresh water is advected to
far-field locations, including deep water formation sites in the North Atlantic.
These simulations will provide detailed information about subsurface
temperatures and changes in ocean circulation close to the ice front and
grounding line. An accompanying set of fully coupled climate model simulations
(NCAR CCSM4) will identify multidecadal-to-centennial changes in the climate
system triggered by increased high-latitude Southern Ocean freshwater forcing.
Particular attention will be given to changes in the strength of the Atlantic
Meridional Overturning Circulation (AMOC), wind stress, sea ice formation, and
global temperatures. In doing so, this project will more accurately determine
whether abrupt and potentially catastrophic changes in global climate are likely
to be triggered by changes in the Antarctic system in the near-future.