* 1856431
* Role of the FEI/ACC pathway in regulating cell wall synthesis
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2023
* Joseph Kieber, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Aruna Kilaru
* 03/31/2023
* USD 813,639.00

Plant cells are surrounded by a semi-rigid wall that is made primarily of chains
of sugars. This plant cell wall provides structural support, defines the size
and shape of cells, and provides a barrier to infection by pathogens. Plant cell
walls are diverse and highly dynamic structures that respond to developmental
and environmental cues. The main load-bearing component of plant cell walls is
cellulose, which is made at the surface of cells by a large enzyme complex
called cellulose synthase. In this project, it will be characterized how plants
regulate how much cellulose they make. Prior work uncovered a pathway that
controls this process by modulating the movement of the cellulose synthase
complex to the cell surface. How this pathway works and how it interacts with
the other elements in the cell to control cellulose synthase will be explored.
Further, a novel signaling molecule, 1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylic acid
(ACC), a precursor to ethylene, was found to act in this pathway. How ACC is
perceived by cells and how it acts to modulate cellulose synthase function will
be determined. The results from this work will provide insight into how plants
regulate cell wall biosynthesis, which is crucial to understanding the
development of plant form and other processes and is important for the
burgeoning biofuels industry. This project will interact with programs designed
to increase the representation of minorities in the sciences and several
outreach programs that aim to increase the public understanding of plant
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A signaling pathway regulating cell wall synthesis
has been defined that includes the FEI receptor-like kinases, SHOU4 (a novel
transmembrane protein), and ACC acting as a signal independent of its conversion
to ethylene. Prior results suggest that this pathway regulates CESA (cellulose
synthase) function by modulating CESA trafficking to the plasma membrane. A
diverse set of complementary experiments are proposed to further elucidate how
this pathway regulates CESA function. A primary hypothesis that will be tested
is that SHOU4 acts as a counter of CESA levels at the PM, with the complex
generating a signal to negatively regulate CESA exocytosis to maintain optimal
levels of cellulose biosynthesis. One key aspect of this model is the direct
interaction of SHOU4 and CESA. This interaction will be further characterized,
including elucidating the role of phosphorylation, potentially by the FEI
kinases. Outputs of this complex will be identified by screening for proteins
that interact with SHOU4. A second hypothesis that will be tested is that ACC
negatively regulates CESA function. A genetic screen was used to identify
elements involved in ACC perception. These mutant lines will be further
characterized and the genes corresponding to these mutations will be cloned and
characterized. These studies will increase the understanding of how cell wall
biosynthesis is regulated, a process that is central to many aspects of plant
growth and development and which is important for the burgeoning biofuels
industry. Further, these studies will begin to define the mechanisms underlying
ACC function in plants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award was co-funded by the
Physiological Mechanisms and Biomechanics Program in the Division of Integrative
Organismal Systems and the Cellular Dynamics and Function Cluster in the
Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.