* 1856150
* Evaluating the Impact of CURE Course Design Characteristics on Student Interest, Engagement, and Persistence
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Mark Graham, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Mindy Capaldi
* 09/30/2023
* USD 299,598.00

With support from the NSF Improving Undergraduate STEM Education Program:
Education and Human Resources (IUSE: EHR), this project aims to serve the
national interest by examining how students benefit from Course-based
Undergraduate Research Experiences (CUREs). Evidence suggests that early,
authentic research experiences have a more positive affect than traditional
learning contexts on college students' STEM learning, motivation, and academic
plans. Unfortunately, opportunities for undergraduate research are available to
relatively few students. Although traditional undergraduate laboratory classes
can support a large number of students, they do not typically engage students in
discovery and iteration, which are characteristics of authentic research. A
solution that provides more students with greater access to an "authentic"
research experience is the CURE. CUREs combine many of the authentic features of
a faculty member's research lab with the larger capacity of a course
environment. This scalability and authenticity have led to growth of CURE
programs and expansion across colleges and universities. As CURE offerings
spread, however, the enthusiasm for them has not been matched by a consistent
approach to evaluation or educational theory grounding. Therefore, research is
needed to assist instructors in understanding how CUREs work, when CUREs are
most effective, and who CUREs benefit. Addressing this gap in the literature
will contribute to improving undergraduate STEM education in the United States
by providing evidence and tools to improve the quality of research opportunities
experienced in course settings. In turn, access to these improved research
opportunities can increase the retention of potential STEM majors who are
vulnerable to exiting the major early in their academic careers, including those
from groups underrepresented in STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although assessment of some pre-/post-
CURE student outcomes has been conducted, it is not yet documented how students
experience and react to various CURE course design features, such as iterative
experimentation and dealing with ill-defined, complex tasks. In addition, it
remains unknown how students react to CURES over a semester-long experience.
Finally, it is not known how the instance and emphasis of different features of
CURE courses throughout a semester interact with student interest to increase
(or decrease) students' motivation to persist in a course of study. This project
will address these gaps in the literature by: 1) Developing a taxonomy of
"authentic research" characteristics for systematic classification of CUREs
across departments and institutions; 2) Measuring how student interest (based on
motivation theory) varies over the course of a given CURE as a result of these
course characteristics; and 3) Exploring interactions between course
characteristics, student interest, and longer-term STEM persistence and career
goals. The project aims to complete these tasks by studying course design and
student outcomes in a natural sample of undergraduate CURE courses at three
universities: a research-focused private, a research-focused public, and an
undergraduate-focused public. Data collection will include a combination of
quantitative (syllabus analysis and student interest surveys) and qualitative
(student interviews) research methods. The results of this study will expand
practitioners' knowledge of course-based approaches to STEM engagement. It will
also inform those in the STEM education research community who are interested in
studying CUREs with new research questions to explore. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program
supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM
education for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the
program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising
practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.