* 1856307
* NSF Student Travel Grant for 2019 Integer Programming and Combinatorial Optimization (IPCO)
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2020
* Jonathan Lee, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 04/30/2020
* USD 10,000.00

The 2019 Conference on Integer Programming and Combinatorial Optimization(IPCO)
and the associated IPCO Summer School runs annually under the auspices of the
Mathematical Optimization Society, the leading organization for research in
mathematical optimization. IPCO presents the latest ground-breaking results
aimed at the solution of difficult decision and optimization problems that have
strong ramifications throughout engineering, logistics, mathematics and science.
It is a competitive refereed conference. This award supports student travel,
attendance and participation, including by members of under-represented groups.
Supporting students in this fashion is vital for the long-term success of the
combinatorial-optimization community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IPCO 2019 will be
held at the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, May 22-24, 2019. The
IPCO Summer School, aimed at graduate students, will be at the University of
Michigan, May 20-21, 2019. The subject of the IPCO Summer School are:
Discrepancy and Combinatorial Optimization, Semidefinite Programming for
Combinatorial Optimization, and Sums of Squares in Polynomial
Optimization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.