* 1856248
* Transcriptional Regulation of the Cytokinin Signaling Network
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Joseph Kieber, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Bianca Garner
* 07/31/2023
* USD 874,996.00

The plant hormone cytokinin regulates many agronomically important traits,
including grain yield, biomass, shoot and root architecture, senescence, and
disease resistance. How a hormone regulates such a diverse array of traits
remains a central question in biology. The goal of this project is to uncover
how cytokinins regulate plant growth and development, with a particular focus on
differences in regulation that occur in the shoot and root. Investigators use
interdisciplinary methods to experimentally quantify and mathematically model
gene regulatory networks underlying cytokinin signaling. The understanding
gained by their work will facilitate predictions for how perturbation of
cytokinin function alters plant development. Outcomes of this work will
ultimately enable precise manipulation of plants to optimize performance in
various agricultural settings. Broader impacts of the project will provide
interdisciplinary training opportunities for undergraduate students, graduate
students and postdoctoral fellows. In addition, through local partnerships,
programs will be developed that aim to encourage education and science awareness
among elementary and middle school students through participatory
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cytokinin modulates plant growth and
development in a potentially tissue specific manner, stimulating cell
proliferation in the shoot but inhibiting it in the root. Focusing on
transcriptional networks initiated by type-B ARR transcription factors, which
act at the top of a transcriptional cascade to mediate the cytokinin response,
investigators use an integrated set of experimental methods to dissect the
mechanisms by which cytokinin regulation occurs. A dynamic Bayesian network
approach will be used to mathematically infer gene regulatory networks that
mediate the cytokinin response in roots and shoots and identify unique
regulatory aspects that correlate with the tissue specific effects of cytokinin.
Using genetic approaches the transcriptional networks will be perturbed to
determine the role that various mechanisms play in mediating signaling output,
with perturbations focused on key elements that regulate cytokinin signaling
sensitivity and downstream transcription factors associated with the signaling
network. RNA-Seq will be used to globally characterize gene expression and ChIP-
Seq to identify targets of the transcription factors. By iteratively using
network modeling to guide experimental investigations, which in turn further
inform the model, this project will result in a systems level understanding of
cytokinin signaling and the mechanism by which various transcriptional factors
enable cytokinin to mediate development associated
phenotypes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.