* 1856643
* Geometric Representation Theory and Low Dimensional Topology
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/2019,12/31/2020
* Daniel Freed, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Krishnan Shankar
* 12/31/2020
* USD 29,475.00

The conference "Geometric Representation Theory and Low Dimensional Topology"
will take place at the International Centre for Mathematical Sciences in
Edinburgh, Scotland, June 10-14, 2019. There will be a summer school June 3-7
with several lecture series to provide background material for early career
participants in the conference. The overall goal of the conference is to study
interactions between the two areas of mathematics in the title.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"Topology" is the study of shapes that are allowed to
stretch and bend. For example, a triangle and circle are considered to be
topologically equivalent because one can be stretched into the other, and
similarly a cube and sphere are considered topologically equivalent. "Low
dimensional topology" studies shapes or objects in dimensions 2, 3, and 4, such
as surfaces, or knotted loops in 3-dimensional space. This can be useful in
other sciences; for example, DNA can be knotted, or the shape of the universe
could have a nontrivial topology. "Representation theory" is the study of
symmetries in mathematics, and at a concrete level, these symmetries often
manifest themselves as solutions to systems of equations where the variables
represent matrices instead of numbers. This mathematical area has also had
applications in other sciences, such as symmetries of elementary particles in
physics, or symmetries of molecules in&lt;br/&gt;chemistry. There are
sophisticated mathematical techniques for taking certain spaces of solutions to
polynomial equations and producing solutions to matrix equations, and recently
low dimensional topology has been used to find solutions to the same equations,
using completely different mathematical constructions. One of the goals of the
conference is to understand this new phenomenon using ideas coming from
mathematical physics. This award will fund participation of early career US
scientists in this summer school and conference so they can learn about these
exciting new ideas.More details about the conference are available at
https://www.icms.org.uk/geometricrepresentation.php.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.