* 1856492
* Photoisomerization:  New Complexes, Circular Dichroism, and the Faraday Effect
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Jeffrey Rack, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Tong Ren
* 07/31/2022
* USD 390,000.00

Complexes that undergo a change in color when exposed to light are termed
photochromic. These types of compounds have a variety of applications in diverse
settings including computing and photonic materials. This research program is
dedicated to understanding how these photochromic compounds (and ultimately
materials) interact with light to generate color changes. Most of the known
photochromic compounds operate through a light-triggered molecular rearrangement
that occurs on an ultrafast timescale (picosecond). There are many unanswered
questions regarding how molecules convert light energy into potential energy to
initiate molecular rearrangement. A new aspect of this research program is the
development of new optical experimental techniques to monitor structural and
magnetic changes in molecules on very short timescales. Professor Jeffrey Rack
at the University of New Mexico is engaged in a series of outreach efforts to
encourage students to pursue careers in STEM disciplines. He has a particular
interest in supporting Native American students, Hispanic students, and women in
their career development. The project provides experience in the design of
instrumentation to address questions at the interface between chemistry and
physics. The multidisciplinary nature of the project demand that the student
researchers be aware of literature contributions in disparate research
areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research award in the Chemical Structure,
Dynamics and Mechanisms B Program within the Division of Chemistry at NSF
supports the research efforts of Professor Jeffrey Rack at University of New
Mexico to investigate a new class of transition metal complexes which change
structure and color when exposed to solar radiation (light). These studies focus
on discovering the kinetic and thermodynamic parameters for the action of this
unique family of chromophores that utilize light to break and make bonds on a
very fast timescale. The mode of action in these complexes is an excited state
isomerization of the bound sulfoxide ligand. In addition, two new instrumental
techniques are introduced. First, Professor Rack is studying the development of
a time-resolved circular dichroism to monitor chirality changes, not only in
transition metal sulfoxide complexes, but also in chiral sulfoxide compounds.
Second, Professor Rack is developing a Faraday rotation spectroscopic
instrument, which monitors magnetic fields in compounds and materials. This
technique is used to monitor the creation and fate of triplet states in
molecular photophysics. Professor Jeffrey Rack at the University of New Mexico
is engaged in a series of outreach efforts to encourage students to pursue
careers in STEM disciplines, and has a particular interest in supporting Native
American students, Hispanic students, and women in their career
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.