* 1856402
* ARTS:  SG:  Diversity, taxonomy, and systematics of flightless sand dune weevils, Trigonoscuta, in western North America
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Matthew H Van Dam, California Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Balakrishnan
* 06/30/2023
* USD 199,491.00

Detecting how species differ from each other (also known as species
delimitation) is one of the foundational areas of biology, because species are
fundamental units of biodiversity in planning, management, and conservation.
Correctly delimiting species has far-reaching consequences; for example,
recognizing agricultural pest species is necessary for effective management and
avoiding damaging economic consequences. Determining whether populations belong
to an endangered species is crucial for conservation planning and has long-
lasting impacts on biodiversity. This research focuses on desert weevils, native
to the U.S. and Mexico, as the model system. High-quality species delimitation
research on weevils is particularly important given their economic importance as
pest species. The process of delimitation involves integrating data from diverse
sources such as genetics and external characteristics, a time-consuming and
meticulous process. Moreover, traditional methods of taxonomy often neglect
ecological and natural history information that is vital for correct
delimitation. This research will improve the species delimitation process by
integrating phenological information, which is the timing of activities such as
breeding season length, new environmental data collected using geographical
information systems, morphological characteristics, and genetic data. The
research will also introduce new methods of automation of species delimitation
research using newly developed software. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;How phenology,
biogeography, and environment intersect is of key importance to delimiting
species boundaries. Biogeographic and environmental barriers have received the
most attention, however in habitats that have punctuated seasonality (e.g.,
deserts or tropical deciduous forests), phenology is likely to be equally
important. This project will integrate across these sources of data utilizing
novel custom-built environmental layers, tailored for the phenology of each
species or putative species. This information will be used to evaluate the
results of various delimitation methods. Further, by accessing genomic data, the
work will test the hypothesis that historical geological processes (especially
change in sea level) account for present diversity and distribution.
Additionally, the research will advance the use of integrative approaches to
describe species in a rapid fashion, including further development of R-based
software for species descriptions, through which taxonomic studies can be
formatted rapidly and uniformly. This research will also provide a predictive
classification through use of phylogenetic analyses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.