* 1856449
* Charge regulation in metalloproteins: from electron transfer to self-assembly.
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Bryan Shaw, Baylor University
* Standard Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 08/31/2022
* USD 400,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Dr. Bryan Shaw from Baylor University to investigate how the
net electrostatic charge of proteins, Z, is affected by biochemical processes
such as electron transfer. Most naturally-occurring proteins have a net
electrostatic charge at neutral pH, that is an imbalance in the number of
positively- and negatively-charged chemical groups of the protein. This net
charge may affect many chemical processes involving proteins, such as electron
transfer or protein aggregation. However, the charge Z at physiological pH has
been measured for very few proteins. The lack of accurate measurements of Z may
obscure a rigorous understanding of basic biochemistry; the knowledge of Z may
create opportunities to chemically manipulate electrostatic forces inside living
cells. Dr. Shaw's research group is using one of the very few tools available to
rapidly measure Z to study how the net charge of a proteins is affected by
electron transfer, molecular crowding, and protein aggregation and is also
designing small molecules that can affect the electrostatic properties of
proteins inside living cells. Dr. Shaw develops "mouth models" to enable
students who are blind to use their touch and taste to visualize the structure
and charge of proteins (Patent No. 10,043,413 B2). The mouth models are bite-
sized exact 3D replicas of known proteins made of edible material. Students
sense the structure of the model by placing the model in their mouth instead of
sensing the model with their fingers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project
seeks to answer the following scientific questions: how and why do
metalloproteins regulate net charge during single electron transfer? When two
proteins approach one another in solution to form a stable or transient complex
(or to crowd), does the net charge of each protein affect the other's net charge
by the magnitude predicted by theory? Can the electric field of a highly-charged
protein alter the activity of a metalloenzyme with which it interacts? These
questions are being addressed by measuring the net charge Z of folded proteins
under various conditions using "protein charge ladders" and capillary
electrophoresis. The new knowledge is applied to the design and chemical
synthesis of aryl ester molecules that can selectively amplify the net charge of
proteins via lysine acylation. These "charge boosting" molecules are designed to
make possible electrostatic control the self-assembly of proteins into amyloid-
like fibrils. The results of this research will deepen our fundamental
understanding of the electrostatic forces in biological chemistry and to test
the possibility that these forces can be chemically manipulated inside living
cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.