* 1856720
* Getting Through the Gateway: Can Corequisite Algebra Improve STEM Progress and Degree Attainment at Community and Technical Colleges?
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Lauren Schudde, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 09/30/2023
* USD 300,000.00

With support from the NSF Improving Undergraduate STEM Education Program:
Education and Human Resources (IUSE: EHR), this project aims to serve the
national interest by broadening participation and institutional capacity for
STEM learning at community and technical colleges. According to mathematics
placement tests, the majority of beginning students arrive at public two-year
colleges under-prepared for college-level mathematics. College-level mathematics
is an essential milestone for entering STEM fields and, unfortunately, many
students never complete their first college-level math course. The traditional
pathway for students who are not ready for college-level math is a sequence of
developmental math courses that students must complete before taking college-
level math (e.g., Algebra); the developmental courses do not usually receive
credit towards a college degree. Corequisite algebra pairs credit-bearing
college algebra with a developmental-education support course, with the
potential to allow students to more quickly pass their first college-level
mathematics course in the STEM sequence. Using Texas state administrative data,
this project will examine whether taking corequisite algebra, as opposed to the
traditional developmental math sequence, influences the STEM pipeline at
community and technical colleges. The goals of the study are to: 1) Estimate the
extent to which students who enroll in corequisite math courses are more likely
to complete STEM courses and to obtain a certificate or degree than students in
traditional developmental education programs; 2) Test which corequisite models
offer the largest and smallest improvement in student outcomes, using measures
of course design; 3) Examine whether students from various backgrounds (race,
gender, socioeconomic status) benefit more or less from corequisite mathematics
and illuminate the processes that students follow after success and failure in
their corequisite course.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To examine the effects of
corequisite algebra course enrollment on students' educational outcomes in STEM
fields, this project will apply quantitative research methods to Texas state
administrative data and course-level information from corequisite courses. The
PI will use two complementary methods that strengthen the possibility of making
causal inferences about the impact of corequisite algebra on various STEM
milestones: regression discontinuity design and difference-in-differences. To
adjust for pre-treatment characteristics, the project will use placement cutoff
scores and variation in course offerings across colleges to support a rigorous
research design. The study will examine the varied effects of corequisite
algebra across race, gender, and family income, and study which corequisite
models are most effective and for which students. Community colleges and
technical colleges educate the majorities of Black, Hispanic, and low-income
students in the American higher education system. The study will offer evidence
about how corequisite algebra courses impact key outcomes in STEM pathways (Goal
1), which corequisite models are most and least effective and for which students
(Goal 2), and whether those effects vary across subgroups (Goal 3). The results
will offer practical findings that colleges in Texas and across the country can
use as they develop additional corequisite math coursework and seek to improve
their output of students in STEM fields. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports
research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education
for all students. Through the Institutional and Community Transformation track,
the program supports efforts to transform and improve STEM education across
institutions of higher education and disciplinary
communities&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.