* 1856055
* Molecular basis of tunable iridescence and excellent proton conductance of the reflectin assembly
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Bo Chen, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 05/31/2024
* USD 510,845.00

Reflectins are a family of largely-disordered proteins in cephalopods that form
tunable nano-assemlies to enable instantaneous change of their body color. In
vitro these assemblies exhibit superb protonic conductance, comparable to the-
state-of-the-art artificial materials. This project will elucidate the molecular
mechanism underpinning the tunable coloration and superb protonic conductivity
of reflectins. This knowledge will enable rational design of bio-compatible
artificial materials based on reflectins with programmable optical and
electrical properties. Multiple undergraduates and one graduate will be trained.
The PI will exploit the fascinating nature of the protein in his outreach
activities for local K-12 schools to promote STEM and to inspire next general
scientists and engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Several conserved
amino acid sequences were found in homologous reflectins, recapitulating the
properties of the full-length proteins. The intriguing optical and electrical
properties were attributed to the ordered hierarchical structures and
accompanied hydrogen bonding network in assemblies. However, the strong disorder
of subunit proteins prohibits characterization at high resolution by techniques
such as cryoEM or X-ray diffraction. This project will apply solid state NMR
(ssNMR), the ideal technique for noncrystalline sample, to determine the atomic
structural model of the assembly formed by one of the conserved fragments called
(ref2C)4. This knowledge will resolve the paradox: how largely disordered
subunit proteins assemble into ordered Bragg reflectors at light wavelength
scale to modulate optical properties. Further ssNMR experiments will be
performed to probe proton diffusion in the assembly, which will dissect the
molecular motif at a residue-specific resolution responsible for the outstanding
protonic conductivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal is co-funded by
Division of Materials Research (MPS/DMR), Division of Chemical, Bioengineering,
Environmental, and Transport Systems (ENG/CBET) and Division of Molecular and
Cellular Biosciences (BIO/MCB).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.