* 1856436
* Mechanisms of context: modulatory feedback to the auditory system
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2024
* Laura Hurley, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Quentin Gaudry
* 08/31/2024
* USD 629,568.00

For most social animals, vocal communication is heavily influenced by the
context in which it occurs. The calls that animals produce, as well as the ways
they respond to calls produced by others, depend on an individual's immediate
social environment. The set of studies will explore the ability of the
neuromodulator, serotonin, to signal context within auditory brain regions,
allowing the auditory system to respond to calls in context-appropriate ways.
The role of auditory neuron serotonin will be addressed in laboratory mice,
which produce a rich repertoire of context-dependent calls. The studies will
address 1) how serotonin reflects different features of the social context
within auditory regions of the brain, 2) how serotonin alters the responses of
auditory neurons to calls and 3) how changes in serotonin influence behavioral
responses of mice to context-dependent calls. Because the auditory brain region
that will be studied and the presence of serotonin in this region are conserved
across a range of vertebrate species, these studies will illustrate basic
principles of how the brain uses information about context. These studies will
also emphasize the active role that sensory systems play in social decision-
making. In conjunction with these studies, this award will support the
development of an online educational unit for K-12 students: 'Decoding the
secret language of mice'. The goal of this project is for students to develop
hypotheses on the functions of mouse vocal signals and test them through curated
audio and video files. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For most social animals, producing
and responding to communication vocalizations is heavily dependent on the social
context. There is growing evidence that sensory systems are sensitive to social
context, but how social brain regions collaborate with sensory systems to
represent contextual information is not well understood. The studies will test
the model that higher social regions instruct the auditory system on social
context in part through the serotonergic system. The studies will be
accomplished in laboratory mice, which have a rich repertoire of context-
dependent vocal signals and responses that are influenced by acute events, prior
experience, and internal state. Experiments will focus on the inferior
colliculus (IC), a conserved auditory bottleneck important to a number of
acoustically driven behaviors. Three main objectives will address 1) how
serotonin reflects different features of the social context within auditory
regions of the brain, 2) how serotonin alters the responses of auditory neurons
to vocalizations and 3) how changes in serotonin influence behavioral responses
of mice to context-dependent calls. These objectives will rely on a recently
developed behavioral paradigm in which male mice respond to female squeaks with
the suppression of courtship vocalizations. These studies will provide novel
information on how social brain regions instruct sensory systems, and
additionally focus on the role of sensory brain regions in social decision-
making. An outreach project associated with these studies will develop
hypothesis-testing skills in junior high- and high school students using curated
audio and video files of socially interacting mice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.