* 1856729
* Nano-ceria shape effects on non-equilibrium plasma-catalysis for chemical looping CO2 reuse
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2024
* Ruigang Wang, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 07/31/2024
* USD 440,071.00

Non-equilibrium plasmas, also known as low-temperature plasmas, are highly
reactive and can be used in catalytic chemical processes. Chemical looping
processes can convert natural gas into electricity, liquid fuels, hydrogen, or
chemicals while providing capture of carbon dioxide (CO2). The use of non-
equilibrium plasma-catalysis (NEPC) for chemical looping and methane processing
can have a global impact on energy conversion infrastructure such as small-scale
reactors for chemical synthesis, power plants, gas-to-liquid technology, oil
exploration, and fuel cells, etc. This project will study the shape effects
(such as rods, cubes, octahedra, and fibers) of ceria-supported catalysts (CuOx
and RuOx) on performance and selectivity in non-equilibrium low-temperature
plasma-enhanced chemical looping hydrogen production from water, using CO2,
water and natural gas as feedstock. The proposed research could lead to
economically viable approaches for synthesis of sustainable fuels from CO2
obtained directly from power plants, water and natural gas feedstock, thus
providing alternatives to fossil fuels while mitigating greenhouse gas
emissions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will test the hypothesis
that gaseous non-equilibrium low temperature plasma containing vibrationally and
electronically excited species/radicals/hot electrons etc. together with the
metal oxide catalysts supported on different ceria nano-shapes can
synergistically enhance heterogeneous reactions leading to low temperature
performance and selectivity in products which can include syngas (CO+H2) and
larger hydrocarbons (C2H4, C2H6, C2H2) during the reduction cycle and H2 during
the oxidation cycle. The plasma-catalysis synergy can enhance the yield at low
temperatures and also lead to understanding towards catalyst design for product
selectivity. For example, the plasma can dissociate CH4 to CH3+H at low
temperatures. With the right docking sites on catalysts or interfaces, two CH3
radicals can combine to form C2H4 after losing H2. The RF discharge plasma can
by sustained using solar energy or wind energy and novel high efficiency surface
discharge techniques can be developed. The proposed outreach program will be
aimed at teachers and students in rural Alabama to increase participation of
underrepresented minority students in science and engineering
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by Process
Systems, Reaction Engineering and Molecular Thermodynamics and the Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.