* 1856622
* Collaborative Research: Testing the consequences of wing flexibility to comprehensive flight performance in freely flying insects
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2024
* Andrew Mountcastle, Bates College
* Standard Grant
* Miriam Ashley-Ross
* 04/30/2024
* USD 170,062.00

Many aspects of insect flight performance rival or surpass that of birds, bats,
and man-made aircraft; yet unlike these other groups, insects have little active
control over the three-dimensional shape of their wings. Insect wings bend and
twist passively during flight, and until recently it wasn't known whether these
wing deformations are an inevitable drawback of ultra-light, flapping wings, or
whether wings have evolved to bend in ways that benefit flight performance.
Recent studies have shown that flexible wings can produce higher aerodynamic
forces than stiff ones, but the effects of flexibility on other aspects of
flight performance remain unknown. In this study, a powerful new technique
developed by the researchers to stiffen the wings of live bumblebees and mason
bees will be used, along with tests of several aspects of flight performance,
including maximum force production, efficiency, stability in windy environments,
and maneuverability, to develop a more comprehensive understanding of wing
flexibility and design in insects. In addition, the effects of body size on wing
flexibility and flight performance will be quantified. This work will have broad
implications and spur future research in biomechanics, animal behavior,
evolution, physics, and robotics. The project will provide training for
undergraduate and graduate students and post-doctoral researchers at two
institutions, a small liberal arts college and a large, diverse, public
university. In addition, to address the declining representation of female
scientists at higher career stages, five early-career, female biomechanists will
be recruited for a three-year peer mentoring program.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent studies have shown that the passive deformations of
flexible insect wings can enhance aerodynamic force production. However, the
effects of flexibility on other aspects of flight performance involving more
complex environments or behaviors have received little attention, as these are
difficult to simulate with computational or physical modeling approaches. In
this study, a technique developed by the investigators to alter the stiffness of
ultra-light insect wings without adding significant mass (by "splinting" a
flexible wing-vein joint) will be used, along with tests of multiple aspects of
flight performance, to develop a more comprehensive understanding of wing
flexibility and design. This project has three main goals: (1) test how
chordwise wing flexibility in bumblebees affects all major aspects of flight
performance, including maximum force production, energetic efficiency, stability
in unsteady flow, and maneuverability during voluntary tracking and collision
avoidance, (2) examine the relative importance of spanwise versus chordwise
flexibility to force production and energetic efficiency in mason bees, and (3)
explore how the effects of flexibility on passive wing deformations and maximum
force production vary with size in bumblebees. This work will have broad
implications and spur future research in numerous fields, and will provide
training for undergraduate and graduate students and post-doctoral fellows. The
researchers will also create a mentoring program aimed at addressing the "leaky
pipeline" phenomenon, targeting five early-career, female biomechanists to
participate in a three-year peer mentoring circle that will provide monthly
discussions, feedback, and support, as well as funding to attend an annual
biomechanics conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.