* 1856196
* CAREER: Effects of Alloy Concentration on the Tribocorrosion Resistance of Al-TM Supersaturated Solid Solutions
* MPS,DMR
* 08/10/2018,04/30/2021
* Wenjun Cai, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Yang
* 04/30/2021
* USD 312,490.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Tribocorrosion is a material degradation process
caused by the combined effects of wear and corrosion. It is a research area that
emerged recently, driven by increased demand for wear- and corrosion-resistant
materials from biomedical implants, nuclear power generation, marine and
offshore industries, etc. The complexity of tribocorrosion lies in the fact that
the chemical and mechanical attacks act synergistically to cause accelerated
failure. The synergetic effect is most prominent for passive metals, such as
stainless steels, titanium and aluminum alloys, which rely on the presence of a
thin surface oxide film (passive film) as a protective barrier against
corrosion. When mechanical wear takes place during corrosion, the passive film
can be locally destroyed, with the ensuing depassivation leading to rapid
corrosion and early component failure. This research seeks to offer insight
concerning the degradation mechanisms during tribocorrosion of passive metals
using experiments and modeling. The obtained results can lead to the development
of new tribocorrosion resistant alloys and coatings with enhanced durability.
Research opportunities and a mentorship program are created for undergraduate
students and under-represented minorities. Relevant core undergraduate courses
are updated to include tribocorrosion-related topics. The outreach program
features hands-on demonstrations for girls in elementary and middle schools from
Pinellas County, Florida, to stimulate their interest in STEM fields. Published
and promoted videos demonstrating the physical concepts related to this research
are on popular social media platforms to educate a broad and diverse audience
about tribocorrosion. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: Al
exhibits excellent corrosion resistance but poor scratch resistance, which
greatly limits its potential usage in industrial applications where mechanical
contact and corrosive environment coexist. Recent studies from our group
demonstrates that alloying Al with a transition metal (TM) in supersaturated
solid solution has the potential of simultaneously increasing the wear
resistance of Al alloys as well as the protectiveness of the passive layer, thus
improving the overall tribocorrosion resistance. This research project is
directed towards identifying how alloy concentration affects deformation and
degradation during tribocorrosion and is centered on a comprehensive study that
integrates material processing, characterization, tribocorrosion testing, and
theoretical modeling. The proposed processing technique produces materials with
various alloy concentrations while minimizing crystallographic texture and
residual stress effects. Materials are characterized site-specifically to
evaluate the microstructural modifications induced by different degradation
mechanisms during tribocorrosion, including wear and corrosion and their
synergistic and stochastic aspects. The specific technical objectives include
(1) establishment of the alloy concentration/tribocorrosion resistance
relationship for Al-TMs, (2) determination of whether an optimum alloy
concentration exists for the best tribocorrosion resistance, and (3)
investigation of whether (and how) in-service conditions (e.g., applied load,
sliding speed) and corrosion conditions influence the tribocorrosion resistance.
The obtained results help establish better guidelines for the application of
metals in harsh environments and service conditions. The findings also serve to
improve design principles for new tribocorrosion-resistant Al alloys, the use of
which presents great potential for increasing the sustainability of global
energy consumption.