* 1856189
* IGE: Enhancing Diversity by Changing Institutional Culture and Scaffolding Student Success
* EDU,DGE
* 07/15/2019,01/31/2024
* Markus Kemmelmeier, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Dorian Davis
* 01/31/2024
* USD 499,797.00

Racial, ethnic and gender diversity enhances creativity and is essential for
sustained innovation, entrepreneurial activity and global competitiveness.
However, diversification at the graduate level remains a major challenge for
many universities. What is needed is a comprehensive, scalable and cost-
effective approach that can address: low ethnic/racial diversity; low doctoral
degree completion rates, and inadequate preparation to succeed in graduate
school and pursue academic, private sector and professional careers in science,
technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM). This National Science Foundation
Innovations in Graduate Education (IGE) award to the University of Nevada, Reno
will test a novel recruitment, retention and career preparedness approach for
increasing the representation of first-generation college students and students
from historically underrepresented groups in STEM graduate education. Students
will be engaged in two 3-week summer boot camps as well as additional
professional development, mentoring, and social network support activities
during the first 1.5 years of graduate school. Unique elements of this project
include (1) intentional development of a recruitment/retention positive feedback
loop, (2) family/community involvement to enhance support groups, and (3)
training in marketable skills (e.g. communication via virtual reality
platforms). Outcomes from this project will generate new knowledge concerning
best practices for recruitment and retention of historically underrepresented
populations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While this project is broadly focused on
recruitment, retention and career preparedness for historically underrepresented
groups of graduate students, there are five major areas being addressed.
Specifically, the project will test interventions and compare results across
control and test groups to examine potential changes in: (1) academic
performance and research quality, (2) non-financial family support, (3) ease of
navigation toward degree completion and career placement, (4) recruitment and
retention, and (5) student research and communication skills. Interventions
include quantitative disciplinary and transferrable skills modules, social
support networks and enhanced mentoring and mentor training. Formative/summative
assessment and hypothesis testing procedures will include surveys, academic
performance comparisons, course evaluations, focus groups, one-on-one
interviews, social network interviews, FIG (Family Involvement in Graduate
School) assessment of students/family members and National Resource Mentoring
Network surveys of faculty members. Interventions will be evaluated individually
and collectively to determine whether student and faculty participation enhanced
graduate education outcomes, improved mentor/mentee relationships and enhanced
recruitment of historically underrepresented groups and first-generation
students through positive feedback loops. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Innovations
in Graduate Education (IGE) program is focused on research in graduate
education. The goals of IGE are to pilot, test and validate innovative
approaches to graduate education and to generate the knowledge required to move
these approaches into the broader community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.