* 1856426
* EAGER: MethaneAIR
* GEO,AGS
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2022
* Steven Wofsy, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 01/31/2022
* USD 277,144.00

The goal of this project is to test a newly developed instrument, named
MethaneAIR, on the NSF Gulfstream-V aircraft. This new instrument will measure
carbon dioxide and methane in the atmosphere at a higher resolution than
previously possible. The design and acquisition of MethaneAIR is funded by the
Environmental Defense Fund (EDF) and private philanthropy, as part of the EDF
International Methane project. MethaneAIR will provide new observing technology
and research infrastructure for the atmospheric science community as well as
opportunities for student education and research training and public engagement
with science and technology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The MethaneAIR instrument
consists of two imaging spectrometers that have been designed as the precursor
to MethaneSAT, a small satellite intended to revolutionize measurements and
modeling of emissions of CH4 from regional (100s of km) to fine scale (&lt; 1
km) across the globe. Two deployments of MethaneAIR are suggested to take place
over Colorado on the NSF G-V aircraft during November 2019 and February 2020. In
addition to high resolution measurements of the total-column dry air mole
fraction of CH4 and CO2, the fine scale spatial and temporal variability of
atmospheric airglow will be characterized and incorporated into retrievals of
total column O2. The research flights will incorporate emission surveys of major
targets of interest, including the Julesburg Basin O&amp;G field in Northeastern
Colorado, the coal mines near Gillete-Campbell in Wyoming, and other targets
along the Colorado Front Range such as cities, landfills, and cattle operations.
The EDF has committed to partnering with the broader community to apply these
tools widely to atmospheric and environmental investigations. This project meets
the criteria for an EAGER award because of its exploratory nature and the
multiple engineering and science challenges that must be
met.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.