* 1856383
* LTREB:  Community reordering alters ecosystem processes in desert grassland
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2019,04/30/2024
* Scott Collins, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 04/30/2024
* USD 517,500.00

Global environmental change can cause large-scale disruptions to ecosystems by
gradually shifting both the presence and abundance of different plant species.
Many ecosytems are characterized by a few dominant plants, but it is unclear if
these species will remain dominants as environmental conditions change. The loss
of dominant species may have a large impact, creating a potential cascade of
effects on the overall structure and function of the ecosystem. Ongoing work at
the Sevilleta National Wildlife Refuge in New Mexico indicates that a common
desert grass is gradually replacing a widespread Great Plains grass. To
understand how changes in rainfall amount, timing and variability affect the
rate, amount and direction of reordering among the dominant grass species, this
project will link the effects of species reordering to carbon cycling and net
primary production. Experiments will alter water, temperature and nitrogen
availability to test how grasslands respond to these environmental changes.
Dryland ecosystems, which cover ~45% of global continental land area, have
measurable impacts on the global carbon budget. Drylands are changing rapidly in
response to droughts, air pollution, and increased rainfall variability.
Community reordering may be key to advancing the understanding of different
global change factors affecting dryland ecosystems in the southwestern United
States and elsewhere.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Grasslands cover &gt;240
million ha (33% of land area) in the continental US, providing valuable
resources for livestock, wildlife habitat, water resources, recreation, and
carbon storage. Three experiments will test how environmental change alters the
presence, success and contiuity of 2 important grasslands, one dominated by the
Chihuahuan Desert grass, black grama, and the other by Great Plains grass, blue
grama. Both are important forage grasses that respond differently to global
change. One experiment will alter the severity of drought and seasonality of
rainfall, while a second experiment manipulates warming, nitrogen fertilization
and winter (El Nino) rainfall on plots located in the ecotone where blue and
black grama co-occur. The third experiment alters the size and frequency of
summer rain events in black grama grassland, which is most likely to experience
future invasion by native shrubs (another kind of reordering among species). To
improve understanding of the causes and consequences of community reordering
among these species, measurements of important carbon processes (root production
and soil respiration) along with additions of seeds and biological soil crusts
will directly test for interactive effects of plant and microbe community
reordering on ecosystem function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.