* 1856724
* Neurobiology of Female Aggression
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Robert Meisel, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Lynch
* 09/30/2023
* USD 650,001.00

Public Award Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Everyone knows that among mammals
males are aggressive and females are not. Despite the common knowledge, this is
a misconception that was born from testing and observing animal social behavior
is situations that favored males to be aggressive. Female mammals are indeed
aggressive, though in different circumstances than are males. This long-
standing, but incorrect view, of sex differences in aggression has hindered our
understanding of the biology underlying aggression in females. This research is
therefore highly innovative in its concept and as well as its goal to correct
the imbalance in our knowledge of the neuroscience of female aggression. The
research will address a specific set of hypotheses targeted at brain sites
regulating aggression in female animals. Within the nerve cells (neurons) in
these brain areas, fluctuations in the balance of specific chemical reactions
are proposed to regulate whether or not female animals engage in aggression.
Finally, the idea that the nerve cells physically change as a result of repeated
aggressive encounters (at least for the winners of those encounters) will be
tested. Beyond the research itself and communicating the results of the research
to the public, the research program will be used to foster science education in
the classroom, provide public outreach in the form of community events and
lectures, and to generate interest in scientific careers for undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research in this proposal is designed to
uncover news insights into the regulation of female aggression in several
realms. It is well known that winning an aggressive encounter increases the
likelihood that females will be aggressive in future encounters. This
experience-based escalation of aggression correlates with increased dendritic
spine density in medium spiny neurons of the nucleus accumbens, a novel finding
for either males or females. Underlying this structural plasticity are changes
in mTOR and FMRP signaling following aggressive experiences. This research
identifies a natural role for FMRP and its regulation of neuronal plasticity
beyond the pathology of fragile X syndrome, a research direction that is another
innovative component of the proposed research. Further, the research in this
proposal is designed to identify a functional link between aggression,
intracellular signaling and structural changes in the nucleus accumbens.
Overall, the research will test the novel hypothesis that there is a feed-
forward process with repeated aggressive experience in females that escalates
aggression in future encounters, thus increasing dominance and ultimately
reproductive success. This behavioral process requires neuronal signaling that
produces long-term plasticity in the nucleus accumbens. Collectively, the
research will develop a detailed understanding of the neurobiology of female
aggression, yielding a transformational shift in how we view aggression in
female mammals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.