* 1856535
* RUI: SYNTHESIS, STRUCTURE, AND REACTIVITY OF ALKYNE-LINKED OLIGOPHENYLENES AND CYCLOPHENYLENES
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2024
* Derik Frantz, California Polytechnic State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Jon Rainier
* 07/31/2024
* USD 250,000.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Derik K. Frantz of the Department of Chemistry and
Biochemistry at California Polytechnic State University, San Luis Obispo is
developing three-dimensional, cyclic and multicyclic molecular structures. These
unique molecules are of fundamental interest as the researchers explore their
unusual properties and investigate their potential applications in functional
materials. A versatile synthetic strategy permits the creative design and
construction of a wide variety of these molecules, which contain nanometer-scale
rings that are clamped or tethered by short, linear linkers (alkynes). Outside
of the laboratory, the Broader Impacts of this work support Professor Frantz's
efforts to improve student success and increase inclusivity in organic chemical
education through the production and presentation of video lessons to help
students understand challenging concepts and to supplement an active, engaging
classroom experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Frantz and his
undergraduate research group aim to synthesize and investigate a variety of
alkyne-linked oligophenylenes and cyclophenylenes. The synthetic methodology
incorporates alkyne linkers as templates for the generation of phenylene- and
ethynylene-based macrocyclic and multicyclic systems. In the targeted
structures, alkyne groups internally link macrocycles to form structures with
constrained molecular geometries. The researchers are studying the effect that
this constrain imparts on the molecules' static and dynamic structures and on
their reactivities and properties. The constrained targets include highly
strained systems, twisted and helical structures, and designs possessing
interlinked units. To construct these molecules, the researchers will apply a
synthetic strategy that features robust, transition metal-catalyzed, C-C bond-
forming reactions. This transferrable and modifiable approach will generate a
variety of creative and unprecedented structures. Undergraduate students
contributing to this project are to have an immersive research experience and
gain significant practical scientific training and familiarity with advanced
organic chemical concepts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.