* 1856318
* The Role of Phylogenetic Relatedness and Diversity on Community Assembly and Ecosystem Functioning: Experimental Tests Using Laboratory Protist Microcosms
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2023
* Lin Jiang, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Porras-Alfaro
* 04/30/2023
* USD 471,502.00

Human activities, such as the conversion of forests into agricultural land,
overexploitation of natural resources, environmental pollution, and the ever-
increasing release of greenhouse gases into the atmosphere have resulted in
tremendous biodiversity loss. Concerned over the possibility that the decline in
biodiversity may reduce the ability of natural and managed ecosystems to provide
products and services for humanity, ecologists have studied relationships
between biodiversity and ecosystem functions (e.g., crop production). These
studies have significantly improved our knowledge on the consequences of
biodiversity loss. Nevertheless, the majority of these studies have focused on
species diversity, that is, the number of species in an ecological community,
and relatively little attention has been paid to other components of
biodiversity. As a result, there is a significant gap in our knowledge on the
consequences of the loss of biodiversity components other than species
diversity. This project will explore the ability of phylogenetic diversity (PD),
a component of biodiversity that accounts for species evolutionary
relationships, for predicting the structure of ecological communities and the
functions of ecosystems. This project will also provide high-quality research
training for a postdoctoral fellow, and graduate and undergraduate students,
particularly those from underrepresented groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using
freshwater ciliated protists as model organisms, the proposed experiments will
advance knowledge in four specific areas. First, it will link ecologically
important traits and species niche and fitness differences in a phylogenetic
context. Second, it will investigate mechanisms underlying phylogenetic
diversity (PD)-ecosystem function relationships by testing the novel hypotheses
that PD-ecosystem function relationships depend on how PD translates into
species niche and fitness differences. Third, it will examine the role of the PD
of the species pool in modulating the historical contingency of community
assembly by linking PD with species niche and fitness differences. Fourth, it
will provide a rigorous test of Darwin's naturalization hypothesis by examining
both invader success and impact, with novel hypotheses informed by recent meta-
analysis of existing empirical studies. Together, the proposed research marries
phylogenetic ecology with contemporary species coexistence theory to gain a more
mechanistic understanding of the role of PD for community assembly and ecosystem
functioning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.