* 1856267
* 49th Annual Linguistic Symposium on Romance Languages (LSRL) at the University of Georgia; May 1-4, 2019; Athens, GA
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2021
* Margaret Renwick, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Tyler Kendall
* 03/31/2021
* USD 11,705.00

Speakers of all languages share the capacity for language, which is unique to
humans. Understanding the various aspects of this capacity lies at the core of
all linguistic research. What researchers learn about one language provides
insight upon comparison with the larger language family and this, in turn,
provides further insight on human language. The Linguistic Symposium on the
Romance Languages is the largest international meeting of linguistics focused on
Romance languages. National Science Foundation funding will provide partial
support for the 49th annual meeting (LSRL 49), to be held at the University of
Georgia in May, 2019. LSRL has consistently been at the forefront of linguistic
research, introducing innovative methods to the study of this particular
language family, and enriching our broader understanding of language and
linguistics based on studies of these languages. LSRL 49 seeks to bring together
linguists working on diverse aspects of Romance languages from a multiplicity of
theoretical perspectives, methodologies, and linguistic subfields, thus
fostering interaction and the potential for collaboration among researchers
investigating different languages. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;LSRL 49 highlights the
importance of documenting lesser-known languages and dialects by including an
invited speaker who studies endangered varieties of Romanian. Multilingualism is
common among speakers of minority languages. Research is increasingly focusing
on how language processing and representation in the multilingual mind. The
theme of LSRL49, 'Expanding Horizons in Romance Linguistics', represents the
increasingly diverse range of theories and methods used to analyze natural
language phenomena. Researchers in linguistics, as in many other disciplines,
have taken an interest in Big Data approaches to new and old problems, and LSRL
49 will host a day-long workshop on Corpora and Big Data Analysis for Romance,
focusing on the representation of Romance Languages in the context of
computational techniques in linguistic analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.