* 1856093
* A plant MAPK cascade in effector-triggered immunity: role of chloroplast-originated reactive oxygen species
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Shuqun Zhang, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Courtney Jahn
* 07/31/2024
* USD 680,000.00

Photosynthesis is essential to crop productivity and yield. Plants under
pathogen attack plants show reduced photosynthetic capacity but the molecular
mechanism responsible for this downturn is unknown. It is also unclear whether
the reduction is an actively regulated process or a passive result of pathogen
infestation and deterioration of plant vigor. In the process of studying the
function of two key signaling proteins in plant immunity, it was discovered that
the activation of these proteins during pathogen attack rapidly and actively
down-regulates various components and activities of the plant photosynthetic
apparatus, leading to the generation of reactive oxygen in chloroplasts under
light. These events are important to plant resistance against pathogens but at
the same time compromise photosynthetic activity. In this project, the
investigators will identify unknown components in this pathway. The combination
of genomic, molecular genetic, biochemical, and physiological approaches to be
used will provide an excellent training environment for students and post-docs.
Students (both graduate and undergraduate) and post-docs from under-represented
groups will be actively recruited by participating in institutional programs
that reach out to minorities. Photosynthesis is key to crop production, and
plant defense is always associated with reduced photosynthetic activities,
which, in turn, negatively impacts plant growth and yield. Therefore, it is
important that we understand the mechanisms that mediate the interaction of
these two key functions before we can breed both enhanced immunity and
growth/yield in crops by balancing the two sides. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
mitogen activated protein kinases (MAPKs) MPK3/MPK6 participate in plant
pathogen-responsive MAPK signaling cascade that plays important roles in both
pathogen associated molecular pattern (PAMP)-triggered immunity (PTI) and
effector-triggered immunity (ETI). Long-lasting activation of MPK3/MPK6 during
ETI results in active down-regulation of plant photosynthesis via a mechanism
which includes mRNA destabilization. Plant defense involves not only up-
regulation of gene expression, which has received considerable attention, but
also down-regulation. Rapid down-regulation of transcripts of housekeeping genes
such as those involved in plant photosynthesis frequently requires mRNA
destabilization. Components of the mRNA degradation machinery have been
identified, however, the regulatory pathway(s) are largely unknown. In this
project the investigators will use an integrative approach to identify and
functionally analyze the unknown components in this pathway. Deciphering the
mechanism(s) underlying the regulation of mRNA stability by the MPK3/MPK6
cascade during plant immunity is fundamental to our understanding of plant gene
expression regulation. Further characterization of MPK3/MPK6 in regulating plant
photosynthesis, reactive oxygen species generation in chloroplasts,
hypersensitive response mediated cell death, and plant immunity at molecular
level will be a major advance in the field. This research will also shed light
on the function of MPK3/MPK6 cascade in nucleus-chloroplast communication and
retrograde signaling. A deeper understanding of the interplay between
photosynthesis and immunity, two processes that have major impacts on crop
productivity, should facilitate efforts at crop improvement in support of the
production of sufficient food/feed/biofuel to sustain the increasing world
population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.