* 1856411
* Near-Earth asteroids are not uniform: Using thermal models of multiple observations to reveal inhomogeneities
* MPS,AST
* 05/15/2019,04/30/2024
* Larry Lebofsky, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Martin Still
* 04/30/2024
* USD 642,003.00

Asteroids can be studied both by the light they reflect and by the infrared
thermal radiation (heat) they emit. The investigators have developed a
sophisticated technique for studying asteroids that make close approaches to the
Earth (known as Near-Earth Asteroids, or NEAs). They will use their
thermophysical model (TPM), together with visible and radar observations of NEAs
to investigate the surface properties of the asteroids. While some asteroids are
known to have smooth surfaces, others are covered with a thick layer of dust,
and still others have regions of each type of surface. These different regions
emit and reflect radiation differently, and thus it is important to know the
nature of an NEA's surface when interpreting observations. The investigators
will use their thermophysical model to interpret reflected and emitted light
from NEAs and will identify possible targets for future missions. It should be
noted that an understanding of the nature of NEAs would be vital to the defense
of the nation should one be discovered on a collision course with Earth. The
investigators will involve a postdoctoral student and a graduate student in
outreach activities, which will include four workshops for K-12 teachers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Thermal modeling of asteroids reveals much about their
surface properties. Simple thermal models often do not fit multiple observations
of the same asteroid self-consistently. Both non-sphericity and surface
heterogeneity are required to fully understand an asteroid. The investigators
will use multi-epoch observations, with detailed shapes from optical lightcurves
and radar data to leverage multiple observation geometries to model the thermal
emission more realistically and better constrain the surface properties of NEAs.
They will investigate such properties as the heterogeneity of the asteroid
surfaces; the degree of roughness on each surface, the importance of thermal
inertia and how it varies with size, spectral type, or rotation rate; and how
derived thermal parameters using radar-derived shapes compare to those using
optical lightcurve-derived shapes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.