* 1856453
* Cationic gold-antimony complexes: Synthesis and electrophilic properties.
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Francois Gabbai, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* John Gilje
* 07/31/2023
* USD 664,836.00

A catalyst is a substance that speeds or otherwise facilitates a chemical
reaction. Catalysts are critical to the chemical and pharmaceutical industries,
where they are used to reduce the energy required for chemical reactions and to
guide the details of precise chemical transformations. While gold is an
expensive element, many catalysts incorporate it. Improving gold catalysts is an
important area of investigation. In this project, funded by the Chemical
Synthesis Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Francois Gabbai of the
Department of Chemistry at Texas A&amp;M University seeks to improve the
catalytic properties of gold by combining it with antimony, a non-metallic
element. The antimony is able to combine with gold in a way that enhances gold's
reactivity. The gold-antimony compounds that are isolated are developed into
catalysts for the activation of alkenes, which are major chemical industry
feedstocks. Professor Gabbai participates in outreach programs to K-6 students
in Spanish/English dual language programs in order to interest young students in
science and technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project investigates
the chemistry of gold (Au) complexes featuring ambiphilic ligands comprised of
two phosphine donors and an antimony moiety. The central objective is to
determine if the charge of the antimony (Sb) ligand can be used to modulate the
electrophilic character and catalytic properties of the gold center. A series of
dinuclear complexes with a gold atom held in close proximity to a pentavalent
antimony center are synthesized and ligand abstraction reactions generate
complexes in which the pentavalent antimony center is either monocationic or
dicationic. Structural, spectroscopic and computational studies indicate if the
accumulation of positive character on the antimony ligand promotes a donor-
acceptor Au-Sb interaction. A correlation between the charge of the antimony
ligand and the electrophilic reactivity of the gold center is indicated by the
catalytic activation of alkenes in polymerization and hydroamination
reactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.