* 1856346
* IGE: Developing a Research Engineer Identity
* EDU,DGE
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2023
* Bala Ram, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Dorian Davis
* 03/31/2023
* USD 461,226.00

This National Science Foundation Innovations in Graduate Education (IGE) award
to North Carolina A&amp;T State University (NCAT) will study the development of
research identity in engineering graduate students. Briefly stated, research
identity refers to the ways in which graduate students define themselves as
researchers and is an important factor in student success. Specifically, this
project will implement and test approaches to foster research identity
development for graduate students in non-research-intensive institutions. It
should be noted that smaller institutions/programs often face deficiencies that
can impact the ability of faculty mentors to foster student research identities
both individually and as part of a larger group. In engineering, a faculty
advisor generally guides the graduate research experience and the advisor is the
primary resource to help graduate students develop their identities as
engineering researchers. Given this apprenticeship model, the mentoring and
guidance that a student receives in developing a professional identity is
largely dependent on the style, resources, and graduate student group size of
the faculty mentor. This project is testing interventions that could potentially
overcome these limitations, particularly for students in smaller graduate
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study on engineering research identity will
be conducted at a Carnegie R2 institution (NCAT), a leading producer of African-
American engineers, and it will implement a three-pronged approach that is
grounded in sociological and psychological theories of identity. The project
entails (1) establishing a Research Engineer Network that will help graduate
students develop a research engineer identity; (2) forming Small Research Groups
of faculty members with common interests who will foster students' research
skills; and (3) designing and administering a survey-based Research Engineer
Identity scale and assessment using a mixed-methods research design that
includes focus groups, structured interviews, and web-based surveys. The design
will culminate with a quasi-experimental test comparing the development of
research identify among students participating in the study and a control group
of matched students. The three coordinated innovations in this project will
collectively build and assess an innovative infrastructure for developing
research identify in graduate engineering students. It is anticipated that the
project results will be applicable to universities broadly, while particularly
informing practice in smaller graduate programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Innovations in Graduate Education (IGE) program is focused on research in
graduate education. The goals of IGE are to pilot, test and validate innovative
approaches to graduate education and to generate the knowledge required to move
these approaches into the broader community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.