* 1856577
* Aggression evolving:  understanding how social interactions create evolutionary feedbacks at the behavioral and genomic levels
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Julia Saltz, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Susan Renn
* 03/31/2024
* USD 571,702.00

Predicting evolution over multiple generations is one of the central goals of
modern biology, with applications in agriculture, conservation, and human
health. Predicting the evolution of behavior presents special challenges,
because behavior often depends not only on the individual doing the behavior
(and its genes), but also on other interacting individuals (and their genes).
Such complex social behaviors may thus evolve in unique ways, termed
evolutionary feedbacks. Although evolutionary feedbacks are believed to be
widespread, little is still known about how they work to shape evolution over
time. In this project, the researcher will take advantage of a powerful model
system (fruit flies, Drosophila melanogaster), to directly observe evolutionary
feedbacks for aggressive behavior as they are happening over multiple
generations in the lab. The research team will evolve highly-aggressive fruit
flies under circumstances in which feedbacks are allowed or restricted. This
will allow the team to determine how feedbacks influence evolution across
generations, for both behavior and its underlying genes. This research will
provide scientific opportunities to community college students. NSF support will
allow talented community college students to experience research for the first
time, and contribute to educating the broader
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Evolutionary feedbacks occur when behavioral
evolution in one generation results in altered selection pressures in subsequent
generations. Despite longstanding hypotheses that feedbacks should be nearly
ubiquitous, little is still known about how feedbacks influence behavioral
evolution and its underlying genetic basis. This research will fill this gap in
knowledge by manipulating evolutionary feedbacks for aggressive behavior in
replicate fruit fly (Drosophila melanogaster) populations evolving under
artificial selection for increased aggressiveness. By manipulating the social
environment in which artificial selection occurs, replicate populations will be
artificially selected under conditions that permit positive, negative, or no
feedbacks, alongside unselected controls. Behavioral changes will be tracked
across generations, and whole-genome sequences from evolved populations will be
compared to identify population-genomic "signatures of feedbacks." Individual
genes that are putative targets of selection will be transgenically manipulated
to determine their effects on behavior(s), allowing direct measurement of
whether different feedbacks target genes with different roles in aggressive
interactions. Together, these Aims provide the first direct tests of the
hypotheses that evolutionary feedbacks alter the rate, trajectory, and genetic
basis of behavioral evolution. The results have the potential to reconcile
previously-incongruent studies, and will provide a conceptual and methodological
framework for studying the ways that social interactions during individuals'
lifetimes scale up to influence evolutionary change across generations. The
research will support diverse community college students to experience research
in evolutionary genetics during the summer. These scientific enrichment
opportunities will provide opportunities for diverse students to enter STEM
fields while learning about evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.