* 1856414
* Functional Materials Through Synthesis Informed Design
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Paul Wender, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Jon Rainier
* 08/31/2022
* USD 585,000.00

With this award, the Chemical Synthesis Program of the NSF Division of Chemistry
is supporting the research of Professor Paul Wender of the Department of
Chemistry at Stanford University. Professor Wender and his coworkers are
investigating the design, synthesis, characterization, and evaluation of new
materials that complex, protect, deliver, and release negatively-charged cargos
such as RNA and DNA inside of living cells. These cargos are of unsurpassed
importance in life science research, and these studies have potential utility in
understanding cancer, protein therapy, allergy tolerization, neuroscience,
universal flu vaccine development, disease detection and gene editing. These new
materials are first-of-their-kind positively-charged carriers, designed to
electrostatically grab on to the negatively-charged cargos. After cell entry,
the positively-charged carriers change their physical properties, dynamically
losing their positive charge and thereby releasing their negatively-charged
cargo. The released RNA/DNA cargos contain a molecular message that is then
translated by cellular machinery to produce proteins with research, diagnostic
and other benefits. Coworkers trained in this program are becoming the next
generation of scientific thought leaders and educators, joining over 300 former
coworkers of Professor Wender who are now in leading positions in academia and
the biotechnology industry. Many are also involved with science education at the
college and high school levels. Professor Wender is also hosting visits from
high school students, providing input on science projects, and lecturing at
several science-for-non-scientist events. He has pioneered a new undergraduate
course on scientific communication and innovation (SCI)
(https://news.stanford.edu/2017/11/30/undergraduates-start-popular-science-
publication/), engaging undergraduates in teaching high school and college
students about science. This has led to a new undergraduate organization that is
sharing and celebrating the fun, excitement and value of science through their
web site and other media (https://fascinatepublication.org).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, Professor Wender is studying the design,
synthesis, and evaluation of new dynamic functional materials for the delivery
of probes, imaging agents, catalysts, and other cargo across biological
barriers. To accomplish this, he is developing new reactions, reagents, and
catalysts for synthesis, and developing machine learning for retrosynthetic
analysis and material design. The intellectual foundation of these studies is
intrinsically chemical - synthesis, computer learning, and materials science,
with potentially profound consequences in life science research. Increasingly in
chemistry and in Professor Wender's research, mechanistic and synthetic
chemistry have been integrated into studies directed at the design, synthesis
and evaluation of functional materials of scientific and societal value (e.g.
catalysts, imaging agents, sensors, molecular machines, diagnostics, drug
delivery systems). The proposed research is primarily directed at the design,
synthesis and evaluation of dynamic materials that complex, protect, deliver and
release in cells polyanions such as RNA and DNA, representing the single most
significant bottleneck to the advancement of many new RNA/DNA technologies. In
this program, new classes of materials are being studied which serve initially
as cations that electrostatically complex polyanions and subsequently change
their physical properties, through an O-to-N acyl shift mechanism, thereby
converting to neutral byproducts and releasing their polyanionic RNA/DNA cargo.
The delivery vehicles, referred to as charge-altering releasable transporters
(CARTs), represent a novel challenge in synthesis as unlike most synthetic
targets which are selected for their stability, CARTs are designed to degrade.
This project is synthesizing unprecedented monomeric, dimeric and dendrimeric
CARTs (non-oligomeric CARTs), exploring the factors that influence their
performance and the rules for their use in delivering cargos into living cells.
These intrinsically chemical and synthetic studies are directed at goals that
enable new opportunities in biology, imaging, materials science, and
medicine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.