* 1856054
* Track-1- Food-Energy-Water Nexus in the Deep South: A Latent System Primed for Transition From Rain-fed to Irrigation-fed Agriculture
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2024
* Hamid Moradkhani, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,749,827.00

The Deep South states, including Alabama, Mississippi, Louisiana and Georgia,
continue to experience one of the highest poverty rates in the nation. As
agriculture plays a significant role in the economies of these states, one
potential option for their economic resurgence is through a drastic increase in
agricultural productivity. This project considers such an option based on a
scenario of a transition from rain-fed to irrigation-fed (RFtoIF) agriculture.
The project is conducted in the Mobile River Basin encompassing portions of
Alabama, Georgia and Mississippi. Given that food, energy and water (FEW)
systems are intricately linked within the basin, the study will evaluate the
impacts of RFtoIF agriculture transition on the distribution-of and
interactions-between these three resource systems. Through established
relationships and collaboration with the stakeholders in Alabama, the project
provides an opportunity for the investigators and relevant stakeholders to
facilitate identification of the barriers and incentives needed to spur RFtoIF
transition in the Deep South, as well as to discuss the significance of
findings, identify ways for improving their impacts, and enabling informed
decision making. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this project is
to develop a refined assessment of the feasibility of transition from rain-fed
to irrigation-fed agriculture and the potential ensuing impacts on food-water-
energy nexus in regions of the Deep South. In this regard, the project will
study FEW systems nexuses for: (a) a business-as-usual scenario, in order to set
a baseline; and (b) scenarios depicting varied intensities of transition from
rain-fed to irrigation-fed agriculture. RFtoIF intensities are considered for a
range of anticipated copped area transition. Through established relationships
and collaboration with the stakeholders in Alabama, the project will provide an
opportunity for the investigators and relevant stakeholders to further discuss
the significance of findings and identify ways for improving the impacts. The
project creates a fundamental body of knowledge on RFtoIF agriculture transition
in a water-plenty environment. Specifically, the project answers three
questions: 1) What will be the potential increase in crop productivity and
revenue if RFtoIF is implemented, and can the irrigation schedule be optimized
to minimize associated costs? 2) How does RFtoIF transition affect the
operations of water-supply reservoirs, power plants, and riverine navigation?
and 3) How do climatological, sociological and economic factors influence
farmer's receptiveness to RFtoIF transition? Findings from this project will
delineate a better quantitative picture of the FEW systems nexus and assessment
of integrated costs, thus facilitating harmonious apportioning by resource
managers under a RFtoIF transition scenario. Furthermore, it facilitates
identification of the barriers and incentives needed to spur RFtoIF transition
in the Deep South, thus enabling informed decision making. This project is
jointly funded by INFEWS and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research (EPSCoR); and managed by the GEOSCIENCES
Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.