* 1856637
* RUI: Shape Matters: Using the Preferred Structures of Gas-Phase Heterodimers to Investigate Intermolecular Forces and for Chiral Analysis
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Helen Leung, Amherst College
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 06/30/2023
* USD 338,733.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure Dynamics and Mechanisms
(CSDM-A) program of the Chemistry Division, Professors Helen O. Leung and Mark
D. Marshall of Amherst College use high speed, state-of-the-art methods to
measure the microwave radiation given off by complexes formed between two
individual molecules rotating together in space. The patterns of the specific
frequencies emitted is analyzed to determine the detailed shape of the complex.
The research gives fundamental information into how the two molecules are
arranged with respect to each other along with precise distances and angles.
This information, in turn, indicates the nature of the forces that molecules
exert upon each other. Such forces have important consequences for many chemical
and biological systems, but are difficult to separate from the larger effects of
the much stronger chemical bonds. This project seeks to provide a greater
understanding of intermolecular interactions. The research also use these
interactions to differentiate between mirror image molecules that have identical
physical properties but different biological effects. The undergraduate students
engaged in this research receive valuable hands-on experience with state-of-the
art microwave spectrometers, sophisticated data analysis, and modern quantum
chemistry program packages. Additionally, they learn how to formulate questions
and design the research methods. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses both
cavity-enhanced and chirped-pulse Fourier transform microwave spectroscopy to
obtain the rotational spectrum of gas-phase bimolecular heterodimers. A
macroscopic, coherent polarization is induced in the free-jet, gaseous sample
via a pulse of microwave radiation, which the rotating dimers re-emit at
characteristic frequencies in a free-induction decay (FID). The FID is digitized
and Fourier transformed to reveal the frequency spectrum that is analyzed to
provide molecular structures. The investigation of protic acid-haloethylene
complexes tests hypotheses regarding the interplay of electrostatic and
dispersion interactions with steric requirements that result in novel and
unexpected structures. Through the characterization of non-covalently bonded
heterodimers formed between a chiral analyte and a small tag molecule of known
chirality, which converts enantiomers of the analyte into spectroscopically-
distinguishable diastereomers, the project contributes to the development of a
new, improved method of chiral analysis with applications across chemistry and
particularly to the pharmaceutical industry. Called chiral tagging, the
technique promises to have broad impact by providing the absolute
stereochemistry of the analyte and, in a background-free manner, the
enantiomeric excess of a sample. Additional broader impacts of this work include
the education of undergraduates who are encouraged to pursue careers in STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.