* 1856539
* Collaborative Research:  Camponotine Ants and their Little Helpers: Phylogenomics of a Hyperdiverse Insect Clade and its Bacterial Endosymbionts (CAnBE)
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Philip Ward, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Fujita
* 08/31/2024
* USD 318,555.00

Recent years have seen an explosion of curiosity and interest in the microbial
associates of humans, especially symbiotic associations with gut microbiota that
convey benefits to human health. Such nutritional symbioses occur frequently
across many different organisms, including primates, plants, and insects. This
research will investigate the joint evolutionary history of a highly successful
and diverse group of insects, carpenter ants and their relatives, and the
bacteria Blochmannia. Carpenter ants are the most diverse and abundant group of
ants in the world - most kids have encountered them while playing outside. All
carpenter ants carry Blochmannia bacteria inside their gut cells, making the
bacterium an endosymbiont. Both organisms rely on one another to survive.
Evidence indicates that carpenter ants and Blochmannia have maintained a close
nutritional partnership for tens of millions of years. Obligate symbiotic
associations among different kinds of organisms can profoundly impact the nature
and tempo of the evolution of both partners, and microbial endosymbionts have
been suggested to have played important roles in the diversification of some
insect groups. This research will determine how the carpenter ants and their
relatives evolved alongside Blochmannia. The findings will improve our
understanding of how symbioses arise and are maintained in animals, with
potential implications for the evolution of human-associated microbial systems.
Moreover, the project will emphasize public education in ant biodiversity and
microbial symbioses, and the training of early-career
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will infer the phylogeny,
divergence times, and biogeographic history of ants in the tribe Camponotini,
and use this comparative framework to advance systematic and co-evolutionary
studies of their endosymbiotic bacteria Blochmannia. Like other obligate
endosymbionts, Blochmannia exhibits substantial genome reduction compared to
free-living bacteria. Genome evolution and functional variation in Blochmannia
will be evaluated across a phylogenetically representative selection of
camponotine ants with contrasting morphological and ecological attributes. By
jointly elucidating the ant and endosymbiont evolutionary histories, the project
will address such questions as: (1) What are the major features of Blochmannia
genome evolution across the Camponotini clade? (2) What processes shape rates
and patterns of Blochmannia sequence evolution? (3) Is Blochmannia gene content
variation associated with particular camponotine host attributes? By linking
phylogenetic and trait data on the ants to functional genomic properties of the
bacteria we will gain an understanding of the selective forces and constraints
underlying this remarkable symbiosis. A detailed phylogeny of the camponotine
ants will also create a strong foundation for much-needed monographic work on
this taxonomically neglected group, and allow the development of more effective
identification tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.