* 1856384
* IGE: Building A Multi-University Consortium
* EDU,DGE
* 04/15/2019,03/31/2023
* Nena Bloom, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Denecke
* 03/31/2023
* USD 499,898.00

This National Science Foundation Innovations in Graduate Education (IGE) award
to Northern Arizona University will implement and test a new consortium model
for building a multi-institution, multi-disciplinary, high-quality graduate
curricula. This collaborative effort ? WindU, for graduate training in wind
energy - between Northern Arizona University, Texas Tech University, Penn State
University, and the University of Massachusetts Amherst will offer expanded
graduate educational opportunities beyond what each institution can provide. The
project team will pilot and test a new, replicable model for creating an
expandable consortium in STEM graduate education, designed to increase the
breadth and frequency of course offerings and educational opportunities
available to a diverse group of students. The new model, Rapid, proposes an
innovative delineation of the elements required to successfully set up a
consortium, covering a range of activities from curriculum planning to financial
agreements, consortium management and governance, student support systems and
course delivery, and including future consortium expansion and sustainability.
Also innovative is its goal to create a consortium that is readily able to add
new members, and the inclusion of webinars shared among consortium members and
international partner organizations for swift diffusion of new knowledge. As
universities respond to society's demand for educational programs in rapidly
evolving technical fields, models for multi-university, multi-disciplinary
consortiums such as Rapid provide critical pathways for success.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main objective of the project is to pilot and test the
Rapid model, and to add to the knowledge base in how to effectively establish a
consortium. The Rapid model is a new facilitation model developed from evidence-
based models described in the literature and implemented in practice. The goal
of the project is to study the pilot-test of the Rapid model as applied to a
consortium in wind energy graduate education (WindU). Questions guiding this
research study are: 1) How was the Rapid model used for developing a consortium
in STEM graduate education? and, 2) In what ways was the Rapid model effective
for consortium development? The project team will use a design and development
research process described in the Common Guidelines for Education Research and
Development to provide real-time evidence for model pilot-testing during
consortium development and, ultimately, for identifying the final model for
dissemination. Design-based research supports the development and continuous
improvement of education innovations in complex systems, such as the WindU
consortium, by engaging the program team in iterative cycles of design,
implementation, analysis and redesign.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Innovations in
Graduate Education (IGE) program is focused on research in graduate education.
The goals of IGE are to pilot, test and validate innovative approaches to
graduate education and to generate the knowledge required to move these
approaches into the broader community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.