* 1856653
* Implementing a Framework for Assessing Teaching Effectiveness
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Megan Frary, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Eleanor Sayre
* 09/30/2023
* USD 299,331.00

With support from NSF's Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Education and
Human Resources (IUSE: EHR) program, this project aims to serve the national
interest by encouraging and measuring the use of effective teaching practices in
college STEM courses. Widespread improvement in the learning and academic
success of students requires widespread commitment to good teaching by faculty
and by educational institutions. Good teaching includes the use of student-
centered, evidence-based, active-learning instructional practices. Although it
is well-established that instruction using these practices enhances student
success, faculty and institutions have been slow and inconsistent in adopting
them. Shared measurements and evaluation approaches can enhance commitments to
good teaching, but more work is needed to sustain improvements and to make good
teaching the norm. To address this issue, the investigators have developed a
framework and accompanying rubric to assess teaching effectiveness that
emphasizes student-centered, evidence-based, active-learning practices. This
project will investigate the potential of the framework and rubric in faculty
evaluation processes. To do so, it will set up a mock STEM "department" of 30
diverse faculty members, along with a mock department chair and a mock promotion
and tenure committee. The mock department will use the framework and rubric in
the course of faculty evaluation. Using institutional data as the control, the
project team will investigate how using the framework affects faculty members'
teaching practices and attitudes about the campus climate around teaching. This
small-scale study is one step toward achieving the vision of an educational
system in which learner-centered teaching is appropriately assessed, recognized,
and rewarded.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is to introduce a new
strategy for assessing teaching and to explore challenges to its adoption, with
the intent of informing policy, practice, and further development of the
framework. The investigators' Framework for Assessing Teaching Effectiveness
focuses on four elements of effective teaching, all of which need to be present
to optimize student learning: effective course design, scholarly teaching,
learner-centeredness, and professional development. Workshops will be offered
through the Center for Teaching and Learning to support departmental
implementation of the framework in faculty evaluation processes, support faculty
members in compiling a teaching portfolio in response to the framework, and
support instructors in adopting the kinds of teaching practices described in the
framework. The investigators will examine whether changes to the framing and
assessment of teaching will result in (1) changes in faculty members'
perceptions of the campus culture and the value placed on teaching, (2) changes
to teaching practices, and (3) increased motivation to adopt the effective
teaching practices described in the framework. The investigators will measure
potential changes in practices and climate using data from different sources,
including faculty portfolio narratives and rubric scores, focus groups, and
student outcomes, as well as tools such as the Evidence Based Instructional
Practices Adoption Scale, the Classroom Observations Protocol for Undergraduate
STEM, the Current Instructional Climate Survey, the Postsecondary Instructional
Practices Survey, and the Student Evaluation of Teaching. NSF's IUSE: EHR
program supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness
of STEM education for all students. This is a project in the Engaged Student
Learning track, which supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of
promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.