* 1856747
* Natural product synthesis via attached ring formation
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Ryan Shenvi, The Scripps Research Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Blakemore
* 07/31/2023
* USD 449,997.00

With this award, the Chemical Synthesis Program of the NSF Division of Chemistry
is supporting the research of Professor Ryan Shenvi of the Scripps Research
Institute. Professor Shenvi and his team are developing new chemical reactions
to force two molecules to bond between crowded atoms. Over the last four
decades, organic chemists have learned how to connect relatively simple, flat
(two-dimensional) rings of atoms. Connecting three-dimensional rings, however,
remains challenging, especially when the atoms that constitute the connection
points are crowded or possess different geometries. Some of the most complex
molecules found in nature exhibit these congested, attached-ring structures, yet
there are few good ways to make them in the laboratory. In this project, the
Shenvi group is developing ways to synthesize molecules with attached-rings and
apply the new methods to making molecules with potential biological
applications. For example, the target molecules, Illicium terpenes, are approved
by the FDA to treat peripheral arterial disease. Professor Shenvi teaches
advanced topics in chemical synthesis, mentors summer undergraduate researchers,
and conducts public outreach in science education.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Shenvi and his students are exploring two
reactions capable of forging challenging attached-ring motifs from simple
building blocks. In the first area of study, the group is developing an
understanding of the very low energy barrier to butenolide heterocoupling, which
establishes polyfunctional attached rings bearing vicinal, fully-substituted
carbons. The origin of specificity and selectivity is being investigated and
applied to the synthesis of Illicium terpenes. In the second area of study, the
group is developing a catalytic cross-coupling method that alters the normal
steric demand for arylation reactions. Application to the synthesis of attached
rings embedded within polycyclic alkaloids is being explored. This work is
helping to expand the repertoire of chemical reactions that can forge attached
rings beyond biaryls, which heavily populate synthetic libraries, and where
sp3-sp3 attached ring motifs are underrepresented. Students in the laboratory
are gaining experience in mechanistic inquiry, chemical methods development, and
complex molecule synthesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.