* 1856570
* Designing and Assessing a Curriculum to Address Professional Learning Outcomes for Civil Engineering
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2023
* Mollie Appelgate, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 06/30/2023
* USD 299,138.00

With support from the NSF Improving Undergraduate STEM Education Program:
Education and Human Resources (IUSE: EHR), this project aims to serve the
national interest by enhancing the non-technical professional skills of civil
engineering students. The project intends to accomplish this goal by developing
Accreditation Board for Engineering and Technology (ABET)-compliant course
materials that promote sensitivity to the social and environmental implications
of engineering design. The ability to design engineering products that have
positive social and environmental impact is an essential engineering skill,
especially for civil engineers who use their technical expertise to solve
problems that have implications for real people. However, engineers are
typically taught to think of the physical dimensions of problems in isolation
from their social dimensions. This separation of physical and social
considerations can lead to engineering projects that exacerbate inequality,
ignore community questions and concerns, or fail to consider the consequences
for communities. Curricula are needed to help students learn these professional
skills and assessments are needed to measure the professional learning outcomes
at the individual student level. This project addresses these needs by: (1)
designing the Engineering Professional Skills curriculum for civil engineering
courses; (2) building a simplified civil engineering professional skills
assessment; and (3) implementing the Engineering Professional Skills curriculum
in civil engineering courses and using the assessment to determine the
effectiveness of the curriculum. Engineers need to think critically about who is
included in the design process and to what social ends the project is aimed.
Engineers who can do so are better prepared to respond to complex problems with
significant social impacts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work is grounded
in critical pedagogy literature as well as the socio-cultural theory of
learning, addressing the social implications of power-based distribution of
resources and the situation of learners as co-constructors of knowledge. The
project plans to focus the professional skills curriculum on these ABET learning
outcomes: the ability to apply engineering design with consideration of public
health, safety, and welfare as well as global, cultural, social, environmental,
and economic factors; the ability to communicate effectively with a range of
audiences; the ability to recognize ethical and professional responsibilities;
and the ability to function effectively on a team. To assess these outcomes, the
project will enhance a previously developed assessment tool for engineering
professional skills to assess individual learning rather than group learning.
This modification is expected to result in a better understanding of individual
learning gains, independent of group dynamics. The new assessment tool, the
Simplified Civil Engineering Professional Skills Assessment, will use a real-
life, case study approach, providing students with examples of local, national,
and international engineering projects. The curriculum and the associated
assessment are expected to contribute to improving engineering education, thus
contributing to a highly-qualified U.S. STEM workforce. The NSF IUSE: EHR
Program supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness
of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track,
the program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising
practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.