* 1856676
* CHS: Medium: Collaborative Research: Electromyography (EMG)-Based Assistive Human-Machine Interface Design: Cognitive Workload and Motor Skill Learning Assessment
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Maryam Zahabi, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 09/30/2024
* USD 360,000.00

CHS: Medium: Collaborative Research: Electromyography (EMG)-based Assistive
Human-Machine Interface Design: Cognitive Workload and Motor Skill Learning
Assessment&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over 100,000 people in the United States have
upper limb amputations. Such amputations are usually associated with substantial
disabilities. Activities of daily living may no longer be possible or require
additional effort and time. To restore functional ability as fully as possible,
amputee patients use upper-limb prostheses controlled by Electromyography
(EMG)-based human-machine interfaces (HMIs). However, over 50% of prosthetic
users report device dissatisfaction and abandonment due to frustration in use.
In order to increase accessibility and utility of EMG-based assistive HMIs, it
is critical to investigate the cognitive workload associated with using these
systems for supporting motor skill rehabilitation and activities of daily
living. In addition, with differences in individual muscle make-up and control,
it is necessary to customize EMG-based assistive HMIs to particular patient
conditions. However, at this time, there exists little to no general guidance on
what interface control features may be more or less conducive to supporting
learning and performance of psychomotor tasks. By testing various control
interface prototypes in a validated motor skill learning simulation as well as
high-demand, real-time tasks, specifically simulated driving, the investigators
seek to provide design guidance for engineers to develop EMG-based assistive HMI
technologies for various applications. This project also provides education and
training for young industrial, computer science, and biomedical engineering
students in assistive technology design and
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical aims of the project are divided
into three thrusts including (1) identifying cognitive load costs of EMG-based
HMIs using computational cognitive performance models and machine learning
algorithms - The developed cognitive workload models will be used for predicting
learning potential and performance outcomes of variations of control interface
designs, (2) demonstrating fundamental motor skill training through integration
of the EMG-based HMI with virtual reality (VR) simulations - In particular, the
investigators are interested in assessing whether the difference in cognitive
load of using EMG-based HMIs translates to variations in learning potential and
retention of psychomotor task skills, (3) translating fundamental motion
components trained in the VR psychomotor test to a real-world application by
demonstrating the possibility of operational driving control with an EMG-based
HMI in a high-fidelity driving simulator - This thrust provides empirical
validation for the findings regarding differences in cognitive load of using
EMG-based HMIs, as well as the potential for increased learning and operational
task performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.