* 1856530
* Reaching New Horizons in Iminyl Radical Chemistry via Microwave Irradiation
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Steven Castle, Brigham Young University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Blakemore
* 07/31/2023
* USD 496,404.00

With this award, the Chemical Synthesis Program of the NSF Division of Chemistry
is supporting the research of Professor Steven L. Castle of Brigham Young
University. Professor Castle is developing new methods for synthesizing organic
molecules that are facilitated by microwave energy rather than by catalysts or
reagents that are often toxic, hazardous, or expensive. In comparison to
traditional organic synthesis techniques, these methods are providing safer,
more sustainable, and more efficient routes to compounds that have potential
application as pharmaceuticals. A key innovation is the use of microwaves to
trigger cascade processes that convert simple precursors into complex and useful
compounds by enabling a sequence of chemical transformations to occur in a
controlled fashion. Professor Castle and his students are impacting STEM
education by creating lesson plans that will assist high school chemistry
teachers with incorporating organic chemistry into their courses. These plans
are designed to inspire high school students to pursue STEM careers by exposing
them to the exciting world of organic chemistry and teaching them about the
positive impact that chemistry has on human health and quality of
life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Castle and his co-workers employ O-aryl
oxime ethers as precursors of iminyl radicals. Upon irradiation with microwaves,
these species undergo direct homolysis of the O-N bond. The resulting iminyl
radicals are then transformed by either cyclization or hydrogen atom abstraction
(i.e., C-H activation). In both cases, a radical intermediate is formed and
subsequently trapped by a reagent that forges a new C-C, C-N, C-O, C-S, or C-X
bond. By generating iminyl radicals under nonreducing conditions in the absence
of metal catalysts or redox cycles, these reactions permit a wide range of
functionalized radical traps to be used. Additionally, the cyclizations are
stereoselective and can be incorporated into cascade processes. The utility of
these microwave-based methods is being demonstrated through the efficient
construction of a member of the securinega family of alkaloids. The student
participants in this project are receiving training in experimental techniques,
troubleshooting, communication, and critical thinking that will enable them to
pursue careers in chemistry or other STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.