* 1856406
* New Technologies in Organic Synthesis in Water
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Bruce Lipshutz, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 07/31/2023
* USD 502,000.00

The Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry Division supports the research
of Professor Bruce Lipshutz at the University of California at Santa Barbara.
This project aims to develop more environmentally-friendly methods of making
organic chemicals, specifically by switching from petroleum-based (organic)
solvents to water as the medium to conduct the chemical reaction. Organic
solvents are often flammable and toxic, representing a major waste stream as
they may be separated from both the starting and ending products of a chemical
reaction. The increased use of water as a solvent has considerable potential
impact for reducing the use of organic solvents. In an example research theme,
micelles (similar to soap bubbles) are used as a way to avoid the use of organic
solvents in bringing compounds in close contact so that they react. In addition
to the scientific research which may benefit the advanced manufacturing of many
commodity chemicals such as fertilizers and pharmaceuticals, the team provides
training on the principles of sustainability to high school students and
teachers. These students and teachers spend their summer gaining hands-on
experience in the implementation of environmentally-friendly reaction
chemistries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research being conducted under this NSF award
focuses on development of new technologies in organometallic chemistry,
conducted under Green Chemistry conditions. Envirionmentally-friendly reactions
will be accomplished by developing palladacycle backbones that include the new
ligand HandaPhos, which enables the Suzuki-Miyaura (SM) couplings at the 300
parts per million (ppm) level of catalyst loading. A new ligand recently
disclosed, EvanPhos, offers new opportunities for SM couplings. Other projects
of value include the development of new nickel nanoparticles that dehalogenate
dihalocyclopropanes in water under very mild conditions as well as a new
reductive amination protocol done in water at room temperature. Also included in
this research is the discovery of a new palladium catalyst that converts
Buchwald-Hartwig aminations into an environmentally friendly processes and, for
the first time, allows for this chemistry to be done at the ppm level of
catalyst loading. New directions also presented include using conformational
control within crowded nanomicelles, rather than temperature, to maximize
enantiomeric excesses in asymmetric catalysis, and the further advancement of
continuous flow&lt;br/&gt;techniques using micellar catalysis as the reaction
medium.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.