* 1856678
* 2019 Redbud Geometry/Topology Conference
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/2019,09/30/2020
* Jing Tao, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 09/30/2020
* USD 21,760.00

The 2019 Redbud Geometry/Topology Conference will be held April 26-28, 2019 at
the University of Oklahoma. The conference will focus on topics in geometric
group theory. This conference is part of an ongoing series of conferences held
at universities in Arkansas and Oklahoma, intended to increase interaction and
collaboration among early career and senior mathematicians in the area. It will
feature prominent speakers from across North America, as well as a graduate
student workshop. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 2019 Redbud
Geometry/Topology Conference will be centered on topics concerning mapping class
groups of surfaces and CAT(0) cube complexes, and their applications to group
theory and topology. The invited speakers are Juliette Bavard (Universite de
Rennes), Mladen Bestvina (University of Utah), Michelle Chu (UC Santa Barbara),
Jingyin Huang (Ohio State University), Kasia Jankiewicz (University of Chicago),
Daniel Margalit (Georgia Tech), Andrew Putman (University of Notre Dame), Yulan
Qing (University of Toronto), and Balazs Strenner (Georgia Tech). The conference
begins with a workshop designed to enhance the experience of graduate students
and junior researchers. The workshop will feature expository talks by Bestvina,
Huang, and Putman. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Conference website:
http://www.math.ou.edu/redbud/&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.