* 1856009
* INFEWS/T2: NEWIR Manure: Nutrients, Energy, and Water Innovations for Resource Recovery
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2024
* Charles Coronella, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 07/31/2024
* USD 2,263,330.00

"NEWIR Manure" is a collaborative, multidisciplinary project involving the
University of Nevada at Reno, the University of Florida, California State
University, Chico, and Universidad Autonoma de Madrid (Spain). The project
addresses a challenge of modern agriculture: sustainable manure management at
large-scale concentrated animal feeding operations (CAFOs), and it requires
significant interaction between engineers, social scientists, and animal
nutrition scientists. The growth of CAFOs has enabled greater production of
dairy products and meat, but it has also generated significant environmental
impacts associated with manure disposal and management. A major concern is the
pollution of ground and surface water supplies that are critical in arid regions
such as Nevada and California. The team is developing a new technology to
recover nutrients from manure using novel thermochemical and biological
conversions to an algae-based cattle feed. The technology simultaneously
recovers and exploits energy to generate heat and power. The quality of the feed
product will be evaluated in an artificial rumen system. The technology will be
analyzed by life cycle assessment (LCA), to better understand environmental
impacts, and by economic analysis that considers the societal benefits from
improved environmental performance. The project will train a diverse future STEM
workforce through an REU for students at California State University, Chico (a
predominantly undergraduate, Hispanic-serving institution) to study at the
University of Nevada at Reno, an international scholar exchange, and the direct
training and mentoring of five Ph.D. students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the
NEWIR innovation, manure is processed by hydrothermal carbonization (HTC). In
the presence of selected metal oxides, phosphorous and nitrogen are selectively
partitioned to an aqueous phase, along with significant organic content. Carbon
is left behind as a char that can be converted to heat and power by gasification
and subsequent generation. Algae can be grown in the aqueous product of HTC,
making use of the organic content and nutrients. Two well-studied heterotrophic
microalgae strains, Chlorella vulgaris and Chlamydomonas reinhardtti, along with
the well-known dietary supplement blue-green algae strain Spirulina maxima, will
be evaluated. The algae serve as a high-value, nutrient-dense feed additive for
cattle that can be blended with low-cost crop residues (e.g., corn stover) to
provide a nutritious feed. Animal scientists will evaluate the feed via a well-
established in vitro dual-flow continuous culture system for nutrient
utilization and digestibility. Water is recycled for microalgae growth, and non-
recovered water will be purified via direct contact membrane distillation for
onsite reuse in sanitation and sterilization. LCA will be applied to evaluate
environmental impacts of integrated resource recovery from the NEWIR process
compared to conventional manure management practices, and benefits are
anticipated through reduction of key life cycle impacts (e.g., carbon footprint,
eutrophication, water depletion, and embodied energy). An economic analysis will
be performed based on engineering, feedstock, animal nutrition, lifecycle cost
analyses, and regulatory requirements to provide insight into the obstacles and
opportunities facing producers and policy makers. This project has the potential
to improve the sustainability of large CAFOs by turning waste products into
assets while reducing environmental impacts. Adoption of the NEWIR process could
significantly reduce the environmental footprint of dairy and cattle feed
operations, with resulting benefits to surrounding communities and increased
food production capacity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.