* 1856158
* Collaborative Research:  RoL:  Rapid Evolution of Reproductive Isolation via Hybrid Seed Lethality in Mimulus
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* James Sobel, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 05/31/2024
* USD 274,539.00

The divergence of living forms into nine million different species depends on
lineages becoming reproductively isolated. This reproductive isolation prevents
interbreeding, allowing for the emergence of distinct species. This research
project makes use of the tremendous species diversity present in the monkey
flowers (Mimulus). Comparison of many pairs of species in this group will
uncover the genetic changes responsible for and the evolutionary forces at work
that generated reproductive isolation. Understanding the interactions between
genetic mechanisms and evolutionary processes that lead to species
diversification will also contribute to agricultural breeding programs. The
project includes efforts to educate grade school and high school students about
evolution and the value of species diversity, and train undergraduate and
graduate students in evolutionary biology and the molecular genetics of
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project focuses on the evolution
of F1 hybrid seed inviability, a relatively unstudied but potentially common
reproductive barrier in flowering plants. This project integrates phylogenetic,
population genetic, developmental, transcriptomic, and genome mapping approaches
to systematically address whether hybrid seed failure is a key isolating
mechanism driving population and species diversification across the genus
Mimulus. The project will test the hypothesis that this form of reproductive
isolation evolves rapidly via natural selection generated by parent-offspring
conflict in all outbreeding flowering plant species. Such conflict-driven
selection is expected to cause divergent evolution of the genetic control of
endosperm development in seeds in different lineages via differential genomic
imprinting, quickly leading to strong postzygotic isolation regardless of the
ecological environments that the species experience. The main goals of this
project are to determine the rate of evolution, strength, and importance of
hybrid seed inviability in the speciation process across the genus Mimulus; to
assess the developmental mechanisms and transcriptomic signatures of hybrid seed
inviability, and finally to determine the genetic basis of hybrid seed
inviability and the degree of parallelism in the genetic basis of speciation in
this genus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.