* 1856205
* Effect of Heterogeneous Terrain on Wind Loads on Buildings
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* Xiuwen Liu, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 07/31/2023
* USD 451,993.00

Post-hurricane damage surveys show that the terrain near a building can have a
significant effect on the wind loads acting on the building, which in turn can
influence the building performance. Better modeling of the effect of the terrain
on wind loads can improve the wind resistance of buildings. Researchers and
engineers generally have relied on qualitative terms to describe the terrain,
leading to subjective interpretation and inaccurate modeling of the terrain
effect. The modeling of the terrain has been especially challenging when the
terrain is non-homogeneous, such as a mix of suburban buildings, trees, and
roads. In this research, wind tunnel testing will be conducted for different
types of heterogeneous terrains. Analytical and computational tools will be
developed to characterize the observed terrain effect. To obtain realistic
terrain configurations, a database of actual terrains will be developed using
terrain images and corresponding land usage classifications. The outcomes of
this research will include measurements of wind loading on buildings with
various heterogeneous terrain configurations; a database of terrain images, land
usage classification within each image, and corresponding heterogeneous terrain
roughness; a deep-learning neural network to recognize terrain features in
satellite or aerial images; and models to estimate the effect of heterogeneous
terrain on wind loading. These outcomes will contribute to national welfare and
prosperity by enhancing research and education in hurricane loss estimation,
performance-based wind design, and wind energy assessment, as terrain effect is
an important issue in these research areas. Data from this project will be made
publicly available in the NSF-supported Natural Hazards Engineering Research
Infrastructure (NHERI) Data Depot at https://www.DesignSafe-ci.org/.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to gain new knowledge on
how heterogeneous terrains affect wind loads on buildings. The research will use
the NHERI Boundary Layer Wind Tunnel at the University of Florida, which can
simulate heterogeneous terrain roughness in an automated way. Wind tunnel
testing will be conducted for three different types of heterogeneous terrains:
roughness transitions, small openings, and actual heterogeneous terrains. The
wind speed profile will be measured for all test cases. Wind loading will be
measured for one low-rise building and one mid-rise building. Analytical and
computational models will be developed to explain the observed terrain effect.
To construct heterogeneous terrain configurations for wind tunnel testing, this
research will create a database of actual terrains composed of terrain images
and corresponding land usage classifications. A deep-learning neural network
will be utilized to improve the existing land usage classifications,
particularly for enhancing roughness estimation of developed areas. After
constructing the database, clustering algorithms will be used to remove
redundancy in the data. Therefore, terrain configurations for wind tunnel
testing can be systematically constructed, and represent various possible
terrains without overlap. This research will also address the following: (1) The
effect of the upwind terrain will be compared between low-rise buildings and
mid-rise buildings; (2) It is often assumed that small openings (such as a small
parking lot) can be ignored in surface roughness estimation, but this has not
been proven experimentally. This research will investigate the opening effect
for various terrain types; (3) This project will quantify uncertainties in wind
loading when an equivalent homogeneous terrain is assumed for a heterogeneous
terrain. This knowledge will help in understanding the effect of simplifications
in building codes and standards; and (4) This project will formulate analytical
and computational models that can explain the observed experimental data. These
models will be useful in describing the effect of terrain not included in the
experiment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.