* 1856090
* Safe Bets and Risky Propositions: Leveraging Rich Data to Understand Potential in Science Teams
* SBE,SMA
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* Leslie DeChurch, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Feeney
* 07/31/2023
* USD 549,663.00

Innovation in science and technology is often the province of teams. As
knowledge becomes ever more specialized, teams can tackle complex problems
requiring insight from multiple domains. However, teams made up of diverse
experts often struggle to combine knowledge effectively. In fact, research shows
that while promising in theory, in practice, diverse teams often fail to realize
their potential. Diverse teams are crucial to society. We are on the cusp of
major breakthroughs in fields like artificial intelligence and brain science
that require diverse expertise. These breakthroughs require large public
expenditures in teams of scientists working in these fields. How can we identify
the ''safe bets'' and ''risky propositions''? Which mixes distinguish mediocre
teams from the teams whose work will fuel decades of important discoveries?
These are the questions we seek to answer. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We develop
methods for characterizing scientific expertise and markers of productive
collaboration among scientists based on machine-learning analysis of the full
text of the papers they have written. Previous work relies on structural
markers, and has yet to peer into the ideas themselves. Applying recent
developments in text analytics machine learning, the full text of publications
and patents is used to characterize expertise and diversity in ways that
otherwise would not be possible. These advances have scientific and practical
value. Practically speaking, we need a better way to predict which teams are
most likely to be productive, and invest in them. Beyond this application, being
able to predict diverse teams most likely to succeed will help to address
societal challenges involving teams in other contexts as well, such as
healthcare, disaster response, cybersecurity, and the
military.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.