* 1856477
* Defining the structural organization of the polysaccharide-synthesizing multiprotein complexes localized in Golgi
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Richard Honzatko, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Charles Cunningham
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,020,423.00

This interdisciplinary project will uncover the structures of biosynthetic
machines involved in polysaccharide biosynthesis in plant Golgi and unravel
exactly how they function. Xyloglucan is the major hemicellulose component of
primary cell walls in most plants and provides integral functions within plant
systems for growth, development, signaling, and stress responses. The work
should be applicable to a broad variety of plant species and hence contribute to
both fundamental research and the development of more desirable cell wall
structures for robust and productive crops. Overall, the findings could lay
foundation for biotechnological strategies towards improving crop quality and
yield increasing food and energy security and independence. The project will
provide research training across a broad range of cutting-edge research
methodologies in modern cell and structural biology and biochemistry for junior
scientists at the high school, undergraduate, and graduate level. Graduate
students will develop mentoring and teaching skills supervising high school and
undergraduate students through the framework of this project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this project to generate knowledge
of mechanisms that control polysaccharide pattern assembly through the
accomplishment of three specific aims: 1) Investigate xylosyltransferase -
substrate interactions to confirm the acceptor substrate binding mode, 2)
Investigate formation of xylosyltransferase T heterodimers or hetero-tetramers
and xylosyltransferase - CSLC4 complexes in Golgi to elucidate the structural
organization of the xyloglucan synthesizing complex, and 3) Structurally
characterize the complexes and their dynamics using single particle EM and
computational modeling. The research proposed will be carried out through a
collaboration in applications across structural, biochemical, and computational
biology through live cell imaging, protein immunoprecipitation and enzymatic
assays, X-ray crystallography, single particle EM and computational modeling
applied to multi-scale systems, such as recombinant proteins, plant and yeast
cells and a whole plant. This project is jointly funded by the Cellular Dynamics
and Function and Molecular Biophysics Clusters in the Division of Molecular and
Cellular Biosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.