* 1856461
* RUI: Selective Synthesis, Chemical Purification, and Characterization of a New Family of Nanotubular Fullerenes
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Steven Stevenson, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 07/31/2023
* USD 306,690.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamic &amp; Mechanism B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Steven Stevenson of the Department
of Chemistry at Purdue University Fort Wayne uses his newly discovered chemical
separation approach to isolate and characterize new tubular-shaped carbon
molecules that are part fullerene and part nanotube. Referred to as FullerTubes,
these fullerene-capped miniaturized single wall carbon nanotubes are largely
unexplored with few literature reports. These unusual FullerTubes have potential
applications in photovoltaics, heat transfer, medicine, and electronics.
Professor Stevenson sends isolated Fullertubes to collaborative institutions to
leverage NSF resources. Other broader impacts include high school research
internships, early undergraduate students, inclusion of non-majors, and
participation of underrepresented groups in his research.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;As preliminary data, the PI has isolated three fullertubes using a
selective chemical reaction that recognizes and separates tubular from
spheroidal shaped carbon structures. The reactivity differences are attributed
to the more inert ring junctions located on the belt region of the fullertubes.
In the 1st objective, this group will selectively target the synthesis of
fullertubes and suppress the formation of conventional spheroidal fullerene
contaminants that would otherwise dominate. The 2nd objective is to chemically
differentiate between spheroidal fullerenes and nanotubular shaped fullertubes.
In the 3rd objective, collaborative research opportunities with other
universities will be explored. These collaborative efforts include vibrational
spectroscopy, EPR, spectroelectrochemistry, photophysics, X-ray crystallography,
magnetic resonance, theoretical calculations, formation mechanism studies, and
functionalization to make derivatives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.