* 1856412
* Nanoparticle Dispersion Mechanisms in Additively Manufactured Metal-matrix Composites and Functionally-graded Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Joshua Gess, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 08/31/2023
* USD 486,220.00

This grant supports research to fill the scientific gap pertaining to full
utilization of three-dimensional printing to make metal-matrix composites and
functionally-graded materials that either can have a complex composition or
spatial gradation in composition. In this work, a metallic alloy is reinforced
by nanoparticles delivered by an ink-jet module to a powder bed and fused by a
laser beam. The process of jetting nanoparticles and melting with a laser beam
is repeated layer-by-layer to create a three-dimensional metal-matrix composite
or functionally-graded structure. This research identifies the mechanisms of
nanoparticle dispersion and re-distribution inside the melt pool and, after
solidification, inside the metallic structure during three-dimensional printing.
The research outcomes are used in controlling or varying the composition of the
alloy during the build and reducing the number of steps involved in conventional
manufacturing of metal-matrix composites and graded structures. The resulting
simplification and reduction in time, cost and energy consumption drives
transformational change for innovative material designs for high-temperature
applications, such as, heat exchangers and combustion chambers, which promote
the national economy, drive energy-efficient manufacturing, and secure the
national defense. This work contributes to education and outreach through
mentoring of undergraduate and graduate students, and engaging high school
students with hands-on experience through campus summer programs with focus on
increasing and retaining the participation of underrepresented minorities in
science, technology, engineering, and math.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current
technical and economic challenges in powder-bed fusion additive technologies,
such as selective laser melting, prevent adding reinforcement particles to the
melt during the build in order to produce metal-matrix composites or varying
chemical composition to form functionally-graded alloys. Ball-milling as a means
to produce the powder mixture as feedstock for laser powder-bed processes
presents nanoparticle dispersion and distribution challenges. Ball-milling
changes the morphology of the powder and reduces flow, spreading, packing and
wetting behavior leading to higher porosity and cracking in the as-built
components. To overcome this challenge, a jetting system is integrated into the
powder-bed to selectively and controllably add reinforcement nanoparticles to
the laser melt pool. Mechanisms for nanoparticle distribution and redistribution
are determined through coupled experiment and sequential reduced-order modeling
of the thermal and hydrodynamic phenomena within the nanoparticle-injected melt
pool. With increasing reinforcement content, stronger thermo-capillary
convection within the melt pool can accelerate the re-arrangement of particles
inside the melt pool. This contribution is significant because it is expected to
revolutionize the use of selective laser melting as a means of in-situ
composition variation and control to achieve targeted microstructures and
properties while simplifying manufacturing steps and reducing cycle time and
cost.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.