* 1856702
* A multireference coupled-cluster method for ground and excited states calculations of interstellar molecules
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Ludwik Adamowicz, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 06/30/2024
* USD 435,000.00

Professor Ludwik Adamowicz of the University of Arizona is supported by an award
from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the
Division of Chemistry. His project is based on using fundamental principles of
quantum mechanics (QM) in predicting chemical and physical properties of
primordial molecular systems. Some of these molecules, for example, the simplest
triatomic ion H3+, has played a pivotal role in the evolution of our universe.
Professor Adamowicz's QM calculations will use the most powerful present-day
computers to provide results pertaining to the spectral transitions and chemical
behavior of molecules relevant to experimental astrochemical/astrophysical
research. The major effort in this research will go to the development of new QM
computational methods whose accuracy matches or even exceeds the accuracy of
present-day experimental measurements. Most of our knowledge of the astronomical
world is derived from the absorption, emission and scattering of electromagnetic
radiation from atoms and molecules. Astronomical observations of atomic and
molecular spectra, including transition energies, intensities, and light
polarization, complement both laboratory experiments and the new theoretical
calculations from the Adamowicz group to develop a better understanding of
stellar atmospheres and their evolutions. Professor Adamowicz will engage both
science and non-science undergraduate students in the application of modern
computational methods. He makes the new software developed in this project
available to the broader scientific community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor
Adamowicz and his group are developing new methods that utilize first-principles
quantum mechanics to study chemical and physical properties of small and medium-
size molecular systems in the gas phase. The methods are expected to elevate the
predictive capability of computational quantum chemistry to a level of accuracy
unattainable using present-day approaches. The first focus is on an active-space
multireference coupled-cluster method that can be applied to study molecules in
their ground and excited states at and away from their equilibrium structures.
The second focus is on developing methods for performing molecular calculations
with all-electron explicitly correlated Gaussian (ECG) functions. Methods based
on the Born-Oppenheimer (BO) approximation and non-BO methods are also being
developed. The ECGs are implemented in rovibrational calculations. Professor
Adamowicz and his group are applying the new methods to study properties and
spectra of various molecular systems such as HCO+, CH5+, H3+, HeH2+, HeH, LiHe+,
BeH+, LiH2+, etc.. These are all important to the interstellar chemistry of the
universe from its primordial stages to the present.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.