* 1856337
* Systematic coarse-graining of inhomogeneous systems
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* William Noid, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 06/30/2023
* USD 450,000.00

Professor William Noid of the Pennsylvania State University is supported by an
award from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the
Chemistry division to develop low-resolution (coarse-grained (CG)) models of
soft materials at interfaces. Soft materials include colloids, gels, polymers,
liquid crystals, foams and biological tissues. An example of an interface is
when liquid comes into contact with air. Interfacial phenomena are fundamentally
interesting. They also have tremendous practical significance, since they
control the performance of many modern materials and devices. Because computer
simulation allow us to visualize the structure, organization, interactions and
changes of interfaces, they hold great promise for helping us understand
interfacial phenomena. Computer simulations are useful for designing interfaces
with desired material properties. However, simulations that include all the
atomic details of the interface are very computationally expensive. This expense
severely limits their use for understanding interfacial systems. Coarse-grained
(CG) models are less expensive computational methods. By representing molecules
in reduced detail, CG models provide the necessary computational efficiency for
effectively simulating length- and time-scales that cannot be effectively
addressed with atomistic models. In this research, Professor Noid and his
coworkers develop CG models that accurately describe interfacial phenomena.
Additionally, this project develops an intergenerational science club that
integrates Penn State students, emeritus faculty, and local retirees in
discovery-based scientific education and discourse.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"Bottom-up" CG models are not only exceedingly
efficient, but also provide an accurate description of the structural properties
of homogeneous materials. Unfortunately, these models generally provide a poor
description of interfaces and other inhomogeneous systems. Accordingly, the
central goal of this research is to develop theory and computational methods for
parameterizing and simulating CG models that accurately model the structure and
thermodynamic properties of inhomogeneous systems. The resulting insight and
software may enable highly efficient simulations that provide a realistic
description of interfacial systems and, ultimately, guide the design of specific
material systems with desired interfacial properties. In order to achieve these
goals, the research develops rigorous theory and numerical calculations to
understand why current bottom-up models provide a poor description of
inhomogeneous systems. The research also develops robust computational methods
for addressing these limitations in practice. In particular, a generalized-Yvon-
Born-Green formalism quantifies the force imbalances that arise at the CG
interfaces and illuminates useful connections with classical density functional
theories for inhomogeneous systems. A grand canonical formalism provides
insights into the thermodynamic consistency of CG models and also determines
effective potentials that are transferable to both homogeneous and inhomogeneous
environments. The resulting advances provide tools for investigating soft
material interfaces and, in particular, the structure and thermodynamic
properties of solid-liquid and polymer-substrate
interfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.