* 1856755
* The Korteweg-de Vries Equation and Beyond
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2023
* Rowan Killip, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2023
* USD 248,630.00

The Korteweg-de Vries equation was originally introduced (in the 1890s) to give
a simple effective explanation of the observation of solitary waves on the
surface of shallow channels of water. Solitary waves travel large distances
while maintaining their original shape. This is exceptional and represents a
subtle interaction between two phenomena: (1) Dispersion, which results in
longer waves traveling faster (e.g. tsunami travel much faster than the wind
waves seen at the beach). (2) Nonlinearity, which makes large amplitude waves
travel faster than shorter waves (this effect also manifests in waves traveling
faster in deeper water). These two effects are important in many wave systems
and controlling their interactions plays an important role also in technology,
such as fibre-optic communication. The Korteweg--de Vries equation and its close
relations provide a simple elegant framework both for deepening our
understanding of these effects and also for educating future scientists, at all
levels of preparation, about these important topics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
study of both invariant measures for dispersive PDE and stochastic forcing raise
challenging questions in the low-regularity theory of dispersive PDE. A major
theme of this project is to tackle such problems in the setting of the Korteweg-
de Vries equation (KdV) by employing new techniques developed recently by M.
Visan and the PI. In their current form, these methods exploit the complete
integrability of KdV in a significant way. A key goal in selecting the
progression of problems to be studied is to investigate how robust these methods
are against perturbations that destroy this complete integrability. A second
major component of the project is the adaptation of the new methods to other
completely integrable systems, most notably the nonlinear Schrodinger equation
(NLS) and the modified KdV equation (mKdV). The third facet of the project is
the study of threshold solutions, namely, those that lie at the boundary between
scattering and more complicated behaviour.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.