* 1856450
* RESEARCH-PGR:  Genomic architecture of porous species boundaries: implications for climatic adaptation and hybrid breeding
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Stephen Keller, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 05/31/2024
* USD 2,500,000.00

Fast-growing poplar trees (Populus spp.) are under intense development for
conventional forest products and bioenergy. Poplar hybrids comprise the vast
majority of trees in operational plantations due to their superior growth when
compared to pure species. However, compared with hybrid crop plants, the
undomesticated nature of trees makes predicting performance of their hybrids
more challenging. Understanding how variation in hybrid genomes and in the
environment lead to desirable (and undesirable) traits has the potential to
benefit poplar breeding programs significantly. In this project, natural hybrids
between two wide-ranging poplar species - black cottonwood and balsam poplar -
are used to characterize, predict, and test how hybridization translates into
complex adaptive traits of economic and ecological significance. In addition, a
citizen science collaboration with ArbNet, an international community of
arboreta, will coordinate establishment of 20 common garden experiments (mini
gardens) across North America. These experiments will all be planted with the
same set of different poplar genotypes that have had their full genomes
sequenced. The project will work with ArbNet to develop a middle school
curriculum focused on how traits vary in poplar trees originating from diverse
environments. This curriculum will include hands-on collection of data,
synthesis of data across sites and illustrating the principles of adaptation and
genetic variation. Students will be exposed to biological responses to different
environments, experimental design, and hypothesis testing. At each participating
university, the project team will also provide interdisciplinary training to the
next generation of scientists, spanning field ecology, genomics, and
computational biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Natural Populus hybrid zones provide
a 'living laboratory' in which there has been a long history of natural
selection testing the genomic and phenotypic outcomes of hybridization. This
project will sample across replicated Populus hybrid zones to capture the
history of Genome x Genome x Environment interactions along environmental
gradients, and couple this sampling with genome-wide re-sequencing and
computational approaches to address the following questions: (i) How is
introgression arrayed across the genome and landscape? (ii) What genomic regions
control hybrid fitness and what are their environmental drivers? (iii) Can
adaptive introgression be recapitulated using controlled crosses? Extensive
short and long-read genome resequencing will be combined to characterize genomic
variation across the hybrid zones. The team will then use admixture mapping to
associate genomic ancestry with climate gradients and adaptive phenotypes,
predict hybrid performance across a range of field test sites, and evaluate the
contributions of environment and space in explaining patterns of hybridization.
Finally, the project will test the repeatability of hybrid outcomes using
controlled crosses among Populus species, assessing the predictive value of loci
identified as being involved in hybrid vigor/heterosis, and the role of allele-
specific expression in generating hybrid phenotypes. This project will provide
the most comprehensive picture to date of the genomics of hybridization and
heterosis in a tree species and enhance our understanding of the relationship
between introgression and fitness across environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.