* 1856750
* De Novo Melatonin Synthesis in the Brain
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2024
* George Bentley, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Lynch
* 08/31/2024
* USD 800,000.00

All vertebrates synthesize the hormone melatonin in their pineal gland at night.
This nocturnal signal helps to synchronize aspects of circadian biology;
signaling to the various organs of the body what time of day it is and, given
that day length in non-equatorial zones changes over the annual cycle, what
season it is. Thus, a vertebrate's physiology adjusts appropriately to the time
of day or year. In many vertebrates, the melatonin signal is used to time the
onset of reproductive activity. If there is no synchronization of the various
tissues in the body, then serious behavioral and physiological disruption can
occur. A uniquely human example of this is jet-lag; after flying across
different time zones rapidly, there is asynchrony in the timing of activity in
different internal organs. As a result, in the short-term there is a general
feeling of morbidity, but constant jet-lag can have seriously detrimental health
effects; including deficiencies in brain functions like cognition. This proposal
builds on preliminary data supporting the novel idea that the brain itself can
synthesize melatonin independently of the pineal gland, and explores novel
pathways in the brain via which this brain-derived melatonin might be acting,
especially as relates to seasonal reproduction. Resulting data will expand our
understanding of how the vertebrate brain works in general, and how circadian
biology and reproduction are regulated by this novel pathway. The findings will
have broad implications for basic biology, conservation biology, animal
husbandry and human health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Photoperiodism in all
vertebrates tested involves integration of the circadian system with the
reproductive system. As a result, it is not surprising that mammals use the
melatonin signal to decode the length of the day, along with its direction of
change, and regulate their reproductive responses. What is surprising is that
birds possess this elegant time-keeping system and yet are thought not to use it
to regulate the timing of their reproductive photoperiodic responses. Thus, the
function of the nightly release of melatonin in birds is unknown with respect to
reproduction. The problem with the above dogma in birds is that all studies have
focused on traditional sources of melatonin, the pineal gland and the retina.
What if the avian hypothalamus itself is responsive to light and can synthesize
melatonin according to the prevailing day length? This proposal provides strong
preliminary data indicating that the avian brain can synthesize melatonin de
novo, and does so independently of sensory organs such as the eyes or pineal
gland. Thus, neurally-derived melatonin, and not melatonin from other sources,
may well be a key component of the photoperiodic machinery in birds.
Specifically, we aim to demonstrate de novo melatonin synthesis by the avian
brain, explore its regulation, identify neural pathways that neurally-derived
melatonin interacts with, and eventually determine its role in reproduction and
other aspects of physiology. Demonstration that the brain can synthesize
melatonin de novo is entirely novel and has implications for all vertebrate
neuroendocrine processes, including in humans. This work is funded by the Neural
Systems Cluster (NSC) with support from the Behavioral Systems Cluster (BSC), in
the Integrative Organismal Systems in the Directorate for Biological
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.