* 1856589
* Microscopic Charge Transport in Molecularly Doped Organic Materials
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Aaron Massari, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 07/31/2023
* USD 460,002.00

Next generation electronics require materials that can transport electricity
like metals but also offer new properties such as being flexible, light weight,
low-cost, and recyclable. In this regard, all-carbon materials such as plastics
are attractive, but they lack the electrical transport ability of traditional
metals. Unlike metals, carbon-based plastics are rarely perfectly structured
(crystalline). Their disorder makes it difficult to determine how electricity
flows through them, a necessary first step in improving their electrical
performance. In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and
Mechanisms (CSDM-A) program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Aaron Massari
of the University of Minnesota-Twin Cities is using sophisticated laser
techniques to study the movement of electrical charges through complex molecular
materials that could act as future electrical conductors. The interdisciplinary
nature of the project supports a training environment for undergraduate and
graduate students that produces next-generation scientists who are skilled in
benchtop chemistry, but also electrical, microscopic, and spectroscopic
techniques. Ultimately, the research may not only lead to new perspectives on
existing problems, but also inform the rational design of electrical materials
leading to devices that are less toxic and require less energy to produce.
Professor Massari serves as the Director of the Energy and U Show, which brings
science to over 10,000 3rd-6th graders each year. The show is filled with
vibrant scientific demonstrations and the First Law of Thermodynamics. For many,
the event introduces the idea of attending college for the first time as more
than half of the attendees are members of underrepresented groups. Professor
Massari also directs the chemistry portion of the University on the Prairie
program, where he and his research group travel to work with 60 students in
grades 7-12 and their teachers from rural, geographically isolated portions of
the state. These outreach and educational activities encourage STEM careers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on the roles of structural parameters,
such as polymorphism, donor-acceptor spacing, partial charge transfer, and
covalent attachment of molecular dopants, in the transport of charge through
ground-state doped molecular thin films. The measurements leverage the ability
of two-dimensional infrared (2D-IR) spectroscopy to isolate the rates of charge
transfer within specific molecular geometries from highly heterogeneous chemical
environments. Short pulses of infrared light excite molecular vibrations on
neutral and charge (doped) molecules in a film and then a second pair of pulses
probe the evolution of that excitation as a marker for the location of the
charge as a function of time. Resolving the vibrational spectrum into a second
dimension allows one to monitor the kinetics of charge transfer for specific
molecular configurations independent of the others so that the transport
kinetics can themselves be resolved. The work systematically tests the impact of
microscopic molecular spacing and order on macroscopic electrical transport by
using molecules with particular structural modifications that affect their
packing in known ways. Electrical transport is also driven in-situ in samples
while they are characterized by 2D-IR spectroscopy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.