* 1856032
* INFEWS/T3 RCN: City-as-Lab: A Research Coordination Network for the Study of the Food, Energy, and Water Nexus for Sustainable and Resilient Urban Development
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2024
* Masoud Ghandehari, New York Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 06/30/2024
* USD 896,486.00

This award supports a Research Coordination Network (RCN) to address the
challenges associated with the Food, Energy, and Water (FEW) nexus for
sustainable and resilient urban development. The RCN team will tackle key
questions regarding the use of these vital resources, and the interconnectedness
of urban FEW infrastructure for the sustained delivery of goods and services.
The RCN will carry out these inquiries with particular consideration of the
effects of population growth, urbanization, aging infrastructure, and weather
extremes. Through science and engineering principles and tools, stakeholder
engagement, and the utilization of the City-as-Lab concept, the RCN will
facilitate scenario driven scientific advancements that will contribute to a
healthy, prosperous, equitable, sustainable, and resilient urban future. The RCN
will help foster networks and partnerships at the forefront of urban systems
research, advancing integrated FEW systems and planning in cities, and elevating
understanding of interdependencies, constraints, and trade-offs associated with
resource allocation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The City-as-Lab RCN will carry out
the following: 1. Develop research directions for the areas where current
knowledge gaps exist; 2. Develop consensus on a framework for integrated urban
FEW infrastructure research; 3. Create a networking consortium to deepen
existing early-stage collaborations; 4. Develop a dynamic education program for
students with diverse backgrounds; 5. Expand the network and evaluate the
success of the network activities. The RCN will be managed by a team of five
principal investigators, coordinating a network of academic and nonacademic
institutions in the U.S. and abroad. The RCN's academic consortium will be
joined by city agency, nongovernmental and other partners representing industry
and community stakeholders, united to address technological, social, and
economic attributes of the urban FEW infrastructure of the future. The RCN will
launch a multidisciplinary consortium to advance knowledge and insights on the
following: 1) multiscale approaches to modeling urban systems' development and
operations, ranging from high fidelity (spatially and temporally resolved) to
aggregated models; 2) modeling framework capable of capturing current and future
system dynamics to simulate the impacts of land use, extreme weather, and
decentralization to urban FEW supply infrastructure, so as to ensure adequate
FEW distribution and storage capacity; 3) enhancing sensing and controls for
monitoring, analysis, and predictive modeling of critical infrastructure
systems; 4) innovations in education and lifelong learning of the study of FEW,
and 5) best practices for stakeholder engagement, co-identifying and coproducing
knowledge and solutions related to critical urban infrastructure systems,
bridging science to practical implementation. The RCN will enhance scientific
cooperation among NYIT, NYU, and CUNY in New York City as the coordination team,
with the partner universities including Arizona State University, New Jersey
Institute of Technology, Rochester Institute of Technology, Stanford University,
the Illinois Institute of Technology, Texas A&amp;M University, Louisiana State
University, Georgia Institute of Technology, and the University of Michigan,
strengthened through international collaborating partners from McGill University
in Canada, HFT Stuttgart in Germany, and the Chinese University of Finance and
Economics in China. The City-as-Lab RCN will have industry and utilities partner
stakeholders including Consolidated Edison Company and National Grid, as well as
NYC agency partners including the Office of Long-Term Planning, Department of
Health, Department of Sanitation, Department of Environmental Protection, and
the New York City Housing Authority, among others. A significant and long-
lasting impact is that the RCN will engage junior scholars and students from
across the network and mentor them to become global sustainability scholars
knowledgeable about the FEW nexus through a lens shaped by data, field
experiences, and engagement with stakeholders. The RCN will also provide
opportunities for strong cultural diversity, leadership of women in engineering
and other STEM fields, and students from underrepresented groups, and for
training the next generation of researchers and urban designers with the
necessary multidisciplinary background to build a healthy, prosperous, and
resilient future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.