* 1856525
* Mechanochemical Processes dictating Calcite's Frictional Characteristics
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2024
* Rosa Espinosa-Marzal, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Hearn
* 06/30/2024
* USD 347,808.00

Earthquakes are recurring and devastating events. To predict accurately their
occurrence and magnitude remains, however, difficult. This is because the
mechanisms underlying the rupture of earthquake-generating faults are not fully
understood. Water plays an important role in fault dynamics; yet, the complexity
of fault interfaces has hindered identifying the specific mechanisms influencing
fault behaviors. Here, the researchers investigate the frictional strength of
calcite - a mineral found in fault gouges - in aqueous environment. To study the
effects of water-rich fluids, they use an idealized grain interface consisting
of two 1-mm single crystals sliding against each other, with or without fluids
in between them. The interface contains asperity contacts characterized at the
microscale by atomic force microscopy. The study is relevant to natural faults
because the stresses and slip rates applied to the interface are comparable to
those of geological settings. Frictional characteristics are quantified using a
new technique which measures displacements with an accuracy of 1 angstrom (0.1
millionth of a mm). This allows investigating the involved mechanisms, such as
crystal dissolution/recrystallization on contacts. The project's results improve
models of fault friction, which contributes improving the assessment of seismic
hazards in the presence of reactive fluids. This project promotes support for a
graduate student, training for undergraduate students and outreach to K-12
students, notably from groups underrepresented in Science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team follows two main lines of research. At the
experimental level, the project advances the knowledge of mechano-chemical
interfacial reactions and their influence on calcite's frictional
characteristics. It informs the mechanisms underlying pressure-solution at grain
boundaries. The influence of different factors is evaluated: fluid chemistry,
surface electric potential, the presence of phyllosilicates or confined fluid
films. The effects of sliding velocity, stress, temperature, contact time and
topography, on friction and adhesion are also quantified. Essential to this work
is a modification of the Surface Forces Apparatus. The new development allows
measuring creep deformation at wet calcite contacts with a precision of 0.1 nm,
as well as interfacial forces (disjoining pressure, adhesion and friction). This
provides insight on the relationship between pressure-solution creep and static
and dynamic friction over a wide range of conditions. The simple geometry of the
experiments allows to investigate the microscopic mechanisms responsible for
macroscopic friction, and to test the theories that describe them. At the
theoretical level, friction at single- and multi-asperity contacts are modeled
based on the shear-assisted thermally activated slip theory, accounting for
contact aging due to pressure-solution creep. The new model parameters are
compared to and tested against the rate-and-state friction constitutive
equations and their empirical parameters. The project, thus, fills the gap
between the microscopic and the macroscopic scales in the understanding of fault
friction in aqueous environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-funded by
the Prediction of and Resilience against Extreme Events (PREEVENTS)
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.