* 1856645
* Variational Problems in Analysis and Physics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Michael Loss, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2023
* USD 286,999.00

The aim of mathematical physics is to provide a well reasoned connection between
the world around us and the laws of physics. We understand why matter is
extended on the basis of non-relativistic quantum mechanics. We are able to
explain why certain materials change their quality when the temperature is
lowered, as for example, when water turns to ice. There are, however, many
phenomena that are not understood in a rigorous way. It is an everyday
experience that physical systems tend towards equilibrium: Hot coffee cools by
giving up energy to the environment until the temperatures are the same.
Symmetry can be broken; for instance matter that appears to be homogeneous at
high temperature tends to loose its homogeneity, that is, it forms clumps when
cooled down. Physical systems try to achieve a state of lowest energy. Central
questions are how to describe this state and how the system makes the
transition. How does hot coffee approach an equilibrium with its environment by
cooling down? How can matter lower its energy by transitioning to a less
homogeneous shape? Another example, maybe less obvious, is a heat-conducting rod
with one end held at a high temperature and the other at low temperature. This
system is not in equilibrium but in a steady state; heat keeps flowing from hot
to cold. Although a very old problem, there is no satisfactory mathematically-
rigorous microscopic explanation for this observation. The aim of this proposal
is to study these questions in specific mathematical and physical models. Some
of these are large physical systems with many interacting agents. Others are,
from a superficial perspective, quite simple, such as a single charged particle
in a magnet. Finding answers to these questions requires new mathematical
insights. An important feature of the project is to exploit the interaction of
physical insight and mathematical techniques. This interdisciplinary quality
makes it an ideal training ground for students at all
levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project interweaves several strands of
mathematical physics: non-equilibrium statistical mechanics through classical
and quantum mechanical master equations, variational problems involving magnetic
fields and more general vector fields as well as charged systems interacting
with a classical radiation field. The investigation has variational inequalities
as a common theme. One endeavor is to carry over recent robust advances
concerning approach to equilibrium to other problems, both in the classical and
quantum mechanical realm. Likewise, the gap for Kac type master equations for
realistic models is now within reach. The Kac master equation is ideal for
approximating thermostats by finite reservoirs. The PI will investigate the
properties of the non-equilibrium steady state (NESS) for a system of two
thermostats at different temperatures. The next step is to study the
approximation of such systems by finite reservoirs, in particular determining
the various time scales over which these approximations hold. A wide open area
is the calculus of variations involving vector fields. This project will
investigate a class of conformally invariant inequalities that includes the
computation of the sharp constants. The goal is to use these insights to shed
some light on systems with magnetic fields where the wave function is complex. A
different but closely related problem is the analysis of the Maxwell-Pauli-
Coulomb equations for supercritical charges. The focus of this inquiry will be
on the question of whether there is blow up of
solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.