* 1856722
* Transient heat transfer and droplet dynamics during dropwise condensation on lubricant-infused surfaces
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2019,05/31/2023
* Patricia Weisensee, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 05/31/2023
* USD 330,221.00

Vapor condensation is ubiquitous in nature and in many industrial applications,
including power generation, air conditioning, and water harvesting. Commonly
water condenses as a thick (~mm) film, acting as a thermal barrier to heat
transfer. In contrast, dropwise condensation, in which the condensate forms
discrete droplets, can lead to an order-of-magnitude improvement in heat
transfer performance compared to the filmwise mode. So-called lubricant-infused
surfaces (LIS), which consist of a microporous surface infused with a thin oil
layer, promote dropwise condensation, and can consequently lead to smaller and
more efficient energy and water harvesting systems. However, the widespread
implementation of LIS in commercial applications is limited due an incomplete
understanding of droplet-lubricant interactions, droplet nucleation and growth,
and lubricant drainage. This project elucidates these dynamics, and studies
their influence on condensation heat transfer rates. Furthermore, this project
fosters interest in science and help overcome the barriers for women and
underrepresented minorities entering the field of engineering via outreach
programs at a local girls-only middle school and summer research internships for
talented high school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This integrated experimental
and mathematical research project provides a comprehensive understanding of the
relationship of heat transfer, phase change, and fluid dynamics during
condensation on lubricant-infused surfaces. It overcomes previous limitations
that hindered the direct observation and quantification of nucleation and heat
transfer during dropwise condensation by combining high-speed imaging with high-
resolution microscopy. Mathematical modeling complements experiments to develop
predictive tools and design criteria for condensation heat transfer enhancement.
Specifically, the three main research aims are: (1) Determine the nucleation
rate density on lubricant-infused surfaces, (2) Measure the contributions of
phase change and forced convection from sweeping droplets on overall heat
transfer rates using high-speed infrared imaging, and (3) Quantify the effect of
cloaking on droplet growth via direct accretion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.