* 1856726
* Workshop: Progress and Prospects of Single Molecule Force Spectroscopy in Biological and Chemical Sciences Workshop; May 30 - June 2, 2019; Durham, North Carolina
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2020
* Piotr Marszalek, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 01/31/2020
* USD 74,036.00

The invention of the Atomic Force Microscope and Optical Traps about 30 years
ago started a revolution in many branches of science by realizing an
unprecedented possibility to visualize and mechanically manipulate individual
molecules under ambient conditions including water, which is critical for most
studies involving bio-molecules and living cells. These inventions created a new
and rapidly growing field of single-molecule force spectroscopy that over the
years has produced many seminal discoveries about how biological macromolecules
respond to mechanical forces and how external forces may alter the course of
biochemical reactions. Thus, a review of these major accomplishments, as well as
identifying most promising new research objectives while discussing current
methodological limitations and weaknesses in the form of a scientific workshop
is long overdue. The purpose of this conference is to bring together about 40-50
participants including leading force spectroscopy experts. The organizers plan
to include as participants postdoctoral, graduate and undergraduate students to
collectively work on needed methodological improvements and to identify the most
promising and exciting research opportunities and to initiate collaborative
endeavors in the single-molecule force spectroscopy field.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop will put strong emphasis on the synergy
between multiple single molecule experimental and computational techniques. In
addition to the comprehensive discussions of variety of single molecule
experimental techniques and current roadblocks, the workshop will also emphasize
on prospects of measurements in situ and in vivo for all the techniques. The
workshop will include two round table discussions on technical aspects of the
methodologies that involve discussion of current attachments methods to surfaces
and sensors as well as discussion of resolution limits, precision of
measurements and fore sensor fabrication and calibration issues. This project is
jointly funded by the Molecular Biophysics Cluster in the Division of Molecular
and Cellular Biosciences and the Physics of Living Systems Program in the
Division of Physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.