* 1856683
* Non-Tracial Derivations and Distributions
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Brent Nelson, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 08/31/2023
* USD 185,000.00

Von Neumann algebras are mathematical objects that offer a rigorous framework
for the study of quantum physics, and can be thought of as infinite-dimensional
generalizations of matrix algebras. The theory was initiated by Francis J.
Murray and John von Neumann in the 1930s, and since then researchers have
discovered a vast number of applications to mathematics as well as biology,
physics, and engineering. In particular, one of the modern fields that studies
von Neumann algebras is free probability, wherein one views the theory of von
Neumann algebras as a generalization of probability theory. This perspective
yields connections to random matrix theory, allows one to model the statistical
behavior of large-scale data sets, and notably has been used to understand the
fundamental limits of wireless communications. Furthermore, connections with the
mathematical disciplines of complex analysis, dynamical systems, group theory,
and harmonic analysis arise from the study of derivations on von Neumann
algebras, which are analogues of the derivative in Leibniz and Newton's theory
of calculus. The so-called "non-tracial" von Neumann algebras admit additional
connections to physics: they have an inherit dynamical system that satisfies the
Kubo-Martin-Schwinger condition from quantum statistical mechanics; and they
arise naturally in conformal field theory. This project is part of the principal
investigator's research efforts to better understand non-tracial von Neumann
algebras through the use of free probability and an analysis of
derivations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to
study the structure of non-tracial (type III) von Neumann algebras through three
approaches, which are interconnected via free probabilistic distributions and
derivations. The first approach concerns derivations on a von Neumann algebra,
which lie within the scope of two major methodologies: Voiculescu's free
probability theory, and Popa's deformation/rigidity theory. The former through
free Fisher information and non-microstates free entropy, and the latter through
deformations arising from the completely positive semigroups associated to
closable derivations. The principal investigator seeks to show that derivations
on non-tracial von Neumann algebras give rise to completely positive semigroups,
and then use free probability and deformation/rigidity to extract structural
information in the spirit of Peterson as well as Dabrowski and Ioana. The second
approach concerns non-microstates regularity conditions on finite generating
sets of von Neumann algebras equipped with non-tracial states, which can be
regarded as non-commutative probability distributions and therefore analyzed
with free probability. The principal investigator has shown that when these
generators have finite free Fisher information and are well-behaved under the
modular automorphism group associated to the state, then the von Neumann algebra
they generate is a full factor. In recent work with Charlesworth on free Stein
information, the principal investigator has found a weaker regularity condition
than having finite free Fisher information that is more easily adapted to the
non-tracial case. He will explore the structural consequences of this regularity
condition for non-tracial von Neumann algebras, and attempt to adapt other
existing regularity conditions to the non-tracial case. The third approach
concerns random matrix models for non-tracial von Neumann algebras. In the
tracial case, understanding the connection between the Gaussian Unitary Ensemble
(GUE) and the free group factors has benefited random matrix theory by providing
a clear picture of the large N limit, and has benefited free probability theory
by providing finite dimensional approximations and informing the definition of
microstates free entropy. The principal investigator has found a non-tracial
version of the Dyson-Schwinger equation, which is a non-commutative PDE that (in
the tracial case) makes explicit the connection between the GUE and the free
group factors. A non-tracial Dyson-Schwinger equation gives rise to a free
Araki-Woods factor, which were defined by Shlyakhtenko as the non-tracial
analogue of the free group factors. The principal investigator aims to use non-
tracial Dyson-Schwinger equations to develop random matrix models for free
Araki-Woods factors, and more generally to develop microstates free entropy for
non-tracial von Neumann algebras.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.