* 1856469
* Testing genetic and evolutionary mechanisms of gamete signal divergence in Solanum
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2024
* Leonie Moyle, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 04/30/2024
* USD 949,383.00

Differences between males and females in mating opportunities can result in
unequal evolutionary pressures that are termed "sexual selection." While sexual
selection is well studied in animals, its existence and evolution in plants is
not well known. Understanding this process in plants can contribute to methods
for crossing crops with their wild relatives, thereby allowing the transfer of
useful wild traits into agricultural species. This research examines variation
in chemical signals between male and female gametes (pollen and ovules) in
several species in the genus Solanum, a group that includes important crop
species: tomato, potato and eggplant. Chemical attraction between gametes is
essential for reproduction in most plants and animals. The project will measure
the effectiveness of gamete signals within and between species, identify the
genetic and chemical causes of variation in signal attractiveness, and the
consequences of this variation for patterns of fertilization success. These
findings will generate new information about which signaling interactions are
essential for fertilization, and greater understanding of why and how
differences in male-female signaling interactions evolve. In addition, the
project will involve graduate students, undergraduates, and high school
students, including women and individuals from groups that are underrepresented
in the sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project addresses the mechanistic
basis of divergence in gamete chemoattraction, including the specific causal
molecular changes, the role of this divergence in reproductive barriers (gamete
isolation) between species, and the ecological and reproductive conditions that
influence rates of change in the attraction signal. Preliminary research in the
wild tomato group (Solanum) shows that gamete recognition occurs via an ovule-
secreted chemoattractant that causes growing pollen tubes to reorient towards
conspecific female gametes. Specific combinations of heterospecific gametes show
significantly reduced attraction, indicating divergence between some species in
this ovule-secreted (female) signal. The proposed work will: quantify the
association between divergence in ovule gene expression and gamete
chemoattraction within and between a group of closely related species; identify
the underlying molecular loci, characterize their patterns of molecular
evolution across the clade, and associate sequence changes with functional
behavioral divergence in gamete attraction; and, evaluate evidence that
selection in general, and sexual selection specifically, is a driver of gamete
signal evolution and therefore divergence in chemoattraction between species.
The research uses a combination of semi in vivo behavioral assays that
manipulate the identity of interacting gametic partners, targeted transgenic
markers, functional manipulation, and molecular evolutionary analysis, each of
which has already been developed or applied in this experimental system. The
findings will provide a comprehensive empirical assessment of the relationship
between molecular and functional divergence in gamete recognition molecules,
across multiple closely related species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.