* 1856442
* Earth Abundant Metal-Doped Covalent Organic Frameworks for Heterogeneous Catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Psaras McGrier, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 06/30/2023
* USD 450,000.00

Developing sustainable catalysts is an important research subject in chemistry.
Sustainable catalysts speed up the conversion of raw materials to valuable
chemicals while they improve the safety of chemical reactions and minimize
negative impacts to the environment. In this project, Professor Psaras McGrier
of The Ohio State University (OSU) is preparing sustainable catalysts using an
advanced class of crystalline porous polymers. These catalysts are used to
convert plant materials (biomass) to chemical fuels as well as to remove sulfur
from petroleum feedstocks to minimize the emission of pollution-causing by-
products. Professor McGrier is utilizing several education and outreach programs
at OSU to help increase the participation of young, underrepresented minorities
in the STEM fields. These activities include participation in the Breakfast of
Science Champions (BoSC), an OSU program that allows underrepresented middle
school students from Columbus City Schools the opportunity to visit and learn
more about various cutting edge research projects. Professor McGrier is also
organizing a research internship program for high school students from Columbus,
OH.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project funded by the Chemical Catalysis
program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Psaras McGrier of The Ohio State
University (OSU) is developing sustainable catalysts that perform cross-coupling
reactions and activate inert carbon-heteroatom bonds using covalent organic
frameworks (COFs). Benzobisoxazole (BBO)-linked COF-based catalysts that contain
triangularly-shaped, pi-electron conjugated, dehydrobenzoannulene (DBA) metal
sites are being studied. The goal is to obtain BBO-COFs that can be utilized to
activate inert carbon-oxygen (C-O) and carbon-sulfur (C-S) bonds. The activation
of aryl C-O bonds offers an opportunity to not only use aryl ethers to improve
the atom-efficiency and safety of orthogonal cross-coupling reactions, but also
to convert lignin-based biomass to deoxygenated chemical fuels. The activation
and reduction of C-S bonds is useful for the desulfurization of petroleum
feedstocks to minimize the emission of harmful sulfur oxide by-products. This
proposal includes several education and outreach programs to help increase the
participation of young underrepresented minorities in the STEM fields. These
activities include the participation in the Breakfast of Science Champions
(BoSC), an OSU STEM program that allows underrepresented middle school students
from Columbus City Schools the opportunity to visit and learn more about various
cutting edge research projects. Professor McGrier also organizes a research
internship program for high school students from Columbus,
OH.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.