* 1856776
* Fruit and seed secondary metabolites and animal seed handling: impacts on germination success and seedling survival
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Susan Whitehead, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Kari Segraves
* 07/31/2023
* USD 375,508.00

No species can survive in isolation. Even plants, which can make their own food,
depend on animals to pollinate their flowers and disperse their seeds to new
sites. As the biological diversity on our planet continues to decline, it is
becoming increasingly urgent to understand the interdependencies among the
species that we hope to protect. The aim of this research is to deepen our
understanding of interactions between plants and the seed-dispersing animals
that sustain the biodiversity of tropical forests. To attract animals, plants
produce fruits that are attractive and nutritious. However, fruits are much more
than tasty rewards. In addition to nutrients, fruits produce natural chemical
compounds that can influence the behavior and physiology of animals that consume
them. For example, certain compounds in fruits have a laxative effect on
animals, which could be a way for plants to influence how far the seed is
transported from the parent. This research will investigate the relationships
among fruit and seed chemistry, animal behavior and physiology, and seed
germination and survival. This information can help scientists better protect
the biodiversity of tropical forests and manage areas targeted for restoration
in a way that will maximize seed germination and survival. The project will
generate new educational resources on tropical forest ecology, which will be
shared broadly at a local nature center and through science festivals in
Virginia. Additionally, the diverse research activities in the field and lab
will help train the next generation of scientists, including Latino(a) students
who will be the future stewards of tropical forests in Central and South
America. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will focus on interactions between
one of the most abundant and diverse groups of tropical plants - pepper plants
in the genus Piper - and the animals they rely on to disperse their seeds. The
most conspicuous of these animals are fruit bats, which consume fruits (and the
seeds they contain) and later defecate the seeds in new sites. However, there is
another group of animals that are critical to dispersal - ants. Although small,
ants are the most abundant animals in tropical forests, and rapidly arrive at
partially consumed fruits that are dropped by bats, or at seeds that are
deposited in bat feces. Some seeds are consumed by ants, but many are removed
along with pulp, moved short distances, and discarded. To assess the role of
fruit and seed chemistry in determining the outcome of these interactions,
researchers will conduct three experiments at La Selva Biological Station in
Costa Rica. First, because nothing is known about the effects of fruit chemistry
on seed-dispersing ants, they will test how fruit chemistry affects the fate of
seeds removed by ants - that is, whether the seeds are consumed, cached, or
discarded. This will involve experiments with captive ant colonies in which
researchers can track the fate of individual seeds. Second, the researchers will
investigate how handling by bats, ants, or the combination of bats and ants
influences the chemistry of seeds. Third, the researchers will use seeds that
have been differentially handled by bats and ants in a final experiment to
determine how chemistry and animal handling influence the ultimate probability
of seed germination and survival.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.