* 1856665
* Collaborative Research: RoL: Deep-learning framework to quantify emergent phenotypes for functional gene annotation
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Roy Welch, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Anna Allen
* 06/30/2024
* USD 541,613.00

The goal of this work is to leverage recent advantages in machine learning to
connect the collective behavior of cells in a bacterial biofilm to their
underlying genetic networks. How cells self-organize into complex tissues is one
of the greatest puzzles in modern developmental biology and a hallmark example
of emergent behavior - complex patterns arising from simpler interacting
components. Despite tremendous progress, even the best-studied model systems
lack an understanding of the emergent properties that bridge developmental
phenomena from molecules to cells, tissues, and eventually complete organisms.
Biofilms formed by the soil bacterium Myxococcus xanthus are a great model
system to study emergent behavior. Under starvation, an M. xanthus biofilm
initiates a developmental program during which cells aggregate into mounds and
then differentiate into distinct cell types. Many of the genes that influence M.
xanthus development have been identified, but researchers lack metrics to
systematically understand their role in coordinating self-organization dynamics.
This project aims to link genes and emergent behavior through machine-learning-
based quantification of the developmental impact of gene disruptions. The
methodology developed in this project is expected to be broadly applicable.
Broader impacts of the proposal will be further enhanced by training
opportunities for students for all participating laboratories, facilitated by
close interactions such as joint meetings and trainee collaborations.
Furthermore, project outreach will include collaborative efforts to bring
3D-printed microscopes into AP Biology high school classrooms.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Connecting genotypes to emergent multicellular phenotypes
is one of the grand challenges of 21st century biology. The lack of robust
metrics that quantify the effects of genetic perturbations on emergent patterns
significantly impedes our ability to make progress even for relatively simple
model systems such as Myxococcus xanthus. Three major problems exist: (1)
individual cell movements are inherently stochastic, and their collective
emergent patterns display significant variations between experimental
replicates; (2) emergent patterns displayed during development are unpredictable
and extremely sensitivity to changes in environmental conditions; (3)
developmental phenotypes of mutant strains are often subtle and difficult to
characterize and quantify. Until these problems are addressed, it may be
difficult to separate the phenotypic impact of mutation from the effects of
stochasticity and environmental sensitivity. Notably, these problems are not
unique to M. xanthus, and therefore their solution has the potential to be
transformative across many different biological systems that display emergent
multicellular behaviors. Recent advances in application of deep learning in
computer vision have demonstrated the power of these approaches to deal with
similar problems. Therefore, developed approaches are expected to apply to a
wide range of model systems, just as deep-learning-based image quantification
methods are being applied to a vast array of images from a variety of
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work is jointly funded by Integrated
Organismal Systems (IOS), Molecular Cell Biology (MCB) and the Rules of Life
(RoL) venture fund.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.