* 1856084
* INFEWS/T2 FEWtures: Innovation Analysis Framework for Resilient Futures, with Application to the Central Arkansas River Basin
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2024
* Mary Hill, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Brandi Schottel
* 07/31/2024
* USD 2,500,000.00

This project is jointly funded by the INFEWS Initiative and the Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR). The Food-Energy-Water (FEW)
Nexus, from a global perspective, includes the closely interconnected resource
systems of food, energy, and water. As the world's population expands to an
expected 9 billion by 2050, there will be an urgent demand to balance different
resources, such as hydrocarbon and/or renewable energy sources, agricultural
products, and fresh water, across these three systems to achieve different user
goals without putting undue strain on the ecosystems that provide these
resources. Agricultural regions across the U.S. face challenges such as low
agricultural prices, high energy and fertilizer costs, pollution from
agricultural runoff and waste, and depleting water supplies that threaten the
existence of local communities. For these mainly Small Town and Rural (STAR)
communities, adaptation pathways to a resilient future are unclear, and delayed
action is reducing possible alternatives and increasing eventual adaptation
costs. However, these STAR communities also represent an entry point to
revitalize the sustainability of the U.S. agriculture system, providing unique
opportunities for technological advancement to stabilize the FEW Nexus. The
FEWtures project will develop a decision-support system based on engineering and
economic research and design and stakeholder-driven analysis of conditions
needed for system change. The decision-support system will be used to evaluate
the viability of new, integrated, renewable-energy-powered solutions.
Fortunately, many of these regions also have large renewable energy resources,
and the solutions considered will leverage existing and emerging technologies in
water treatment, ammonia synthesis, and electric microgrid planning. Goals
include increasing usable water resource availability, mitigating agricultural
runoff and waste, and promoting resilience in agricultural systems, while
diversifying and stimulating STAR-community economies. The decision support
system will be developed and tested in the Central Arkansas River Basin (CARB),
a region that covers the middle third of the Arkansas River Basin (ARB). The
CARB includes the arid agricultural center of this basin, covering parts of
Colorado, Kansas, New Mexico, Oklahoma, and Texas. The project will engage
farming, livestock, water, and energy organizations in the region, such as the
Future Farmers of America, the Kansas Livestock Association Environmental
Services Inc, the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) Ogallala
Program, and electric cooperatives. The FEWtures project will educate 5 PhD
students and at least 10 undergraduate students. A 3-credit, on-line, active
learning course on food, energy, and water will be developed and taught, and
materials will be made freely available. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent advances
in energy efficient small-scale and modular water-treatment systems, ammonia
synthesis adaptation to intermittent renewable energy supplies, and synergies
between renewable energy supply variability and load flexibility provide
opportunities to balance the FEW Nexus. These advances suggest that renewable-
energy powered local-scale water treatment and ammonia production can offer
transformative opportunities to drive environmental and economic resilience in
STAR communities. Four key scientific challenges are addressed in this
collaborative research project that involves the University of Kansas, Kansas
State University, Washington State University, and Western New England
University. The first challenge is the use of water treatment to reduce
salinization of water and soils, making poor quality sources like saline and
produced waters usable, and managing nitrates to protect human and ecological
health. However, the economic viability of small-scale water treatment
facilities depends on membrane separation selectivities and productivities for
source and product water characteristics. This research will identify viability
thresholds for typical water sources and uses and identify the characteristics
needed to meet them. The second challenge is to evaluate the viability
thresholds of small-scale ammonia production adapted to intermittent energy
availability. The goal is to identify how provided energy storage and vectoring
and produced nitrogen fertilizer could benefit agricultural economies using
conceptual and quantitative models. The third challenge is to develop an
electric microgrid planning process suitable for such renewably powered local-
scale water treatment and ammonia production. The fourth challenge will be to
integrate the advances in the first three challenges with decision and exogenous
variables to evaluate effects on local and global systems' resilience. New
metrics, conceptualizations, and a techno-economic model will be developed and
implemented with scientific and stakeholder advisory group
participation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.