* 1856513
* Signal Integration of the Ethylene and Cytokinin Hormonal Pathways
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/2019,04/30/2024
* George Schaller, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Aruna Kilaru
* 04/30/2024
* USD 820,525.00

Ethylene and cytokinins are plant hormones that regulate many agronomically
important traits, including fruit ripening, grain yield, shoot and root
architecture, senescence, disease resistance, and drought resistance. Although
these two hormones often antagonize the actions of each other, ethylene
generally being considered a hormone that promotes aging of plant tissues while
cytokinin promotes greening, these same two hormones sometimes act in a
cooperative manner. The goal of this project is to uncover how these two
hormones interact in the regulation of plant growth and development. A better
understanding of plant hormone signaling will enable optimization of crops to
improve their performance in various agricultural settings. The research project
will provide excellent training opportunities for graduate students and
postdoctoral fellows. In addition, through a local partnership, the project will
establish a summer program aimed at developing education and science awareness
through participatory activities that integrate science with
art.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project presents an integrated set of
experiments to elucidate mechanisms of transcriptional crosstalk between the
ethylene and cytokinin signaling pathways, building toward a systems level
understanding of this process. The focus of the research is on the EIN3 and
type-B ARR families of transcription factors that regulate the primary
transcriptional responses to ethylene and cytokinin, respectively. The first
objective is to characterize the role of combinatorial interactions between EIN3
and the type-B ARR transcription factors in the regulation of gene expression,
initial results supporting both cooperative and antagonistic interactions. The
second objective of this project is to characterize the role that physical
interactions between EIN3 and the type-A ARRs, a family of negative regulators
whose expression is strongly induced by cytokinin, play in modulating the
activity of EIN3 and ethylene signaling. The third objective is to characterize
the role that ethylene plays in activating the type-B ARRs independently of
their activation by the cytokinin signaling pathway, this serving as an
alternative pathway by which to regulate a subset of the ethylene responses.
These studies will incorporate global analyses of gene expression and target
binding by the transcription factors, using RNA-Seq and ChIP-Seq approaches.
Models for interaction derived from these studies will be tested by mechanistic,
transcriptomic, and genetic approaches, and placed within the context of the
roles of ethylene and cytokinin in seedling growth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award was co-funded by the Physiological Mechanisms and Biomechanics Program in
the Division of Integrative Organismal Systems and the Cellular Dynamics and
Function Cluster in the Division of Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.