* 1856052
* INFEWS/T2: Improving crop yield and soil salinity by cost-effective integration of microbial community, hydrology, desalination, and renewable power
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Miguel Acevedo, University of North Texas
* Continuing Grant
* Brandi Schottel
* 07/31/2024
* USD 2,499,328.00

This project contributes new solutions to the problem of high salinity in
agricultural soil and irrigation water that affect food production in water-
limited areas of the western United States and in other countries. Major project
goals are to increase crop yields in areas with high salinity soils by improving
irrigation water quality through desalination powered by renewable energy,
restoring soil fertility, and reducing fertilizer applications through
regeneration of the soil microbial community. In addition to reducing fossil
fuel use, the proposed system will increase soil fertility and soil carbon
retention, thereby decreasing carbon dioxide emissions to the atmosphere and
reducing the use of energy to produce fertilizers. Socio-economic analyses will
evaluate potential adoption of the technologies as well as estimate long-term
benefits on food and energy security, soil and water quality, and atmospheric
carbon reductions. The project offers opportunities for students of various
disciplines to work together on a challenging problem, thus preparing them for
diverse professional positions. Results will be demonstrated for agricultural
communities in the New Mexico and Colorado study areas to help increase producer
understanding and adoption of the newly-developed technologies and
practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall project goal is to improve crop
yields in areas with excess soil and water salinity by using high-quality
irrigation water produced by solar-powered desalination and to enhance soil
microbial communities. The project seeks long-term improvements of soil,
reductions in atmospheric CO2, and increases in surface and ground water
quality. The research will evaluate costs and benefits of improving crop yields
while reducing carbon-based energy usage, improving the soil microbiome and
irrigation water, reducing use of fertilizers and associated energy
requirements, increasing soil carbon sequestration, and improving aquifer water
quality. The project will develop off-grid brackish water desalination
facilities and use desalinized water in agronomic experiments in two contrasting
areas in the western United States. These areas are the Tularosa basin in New
Mexico where water is brackish and the Lower Arkansas River Valley in Colorado
where there are increased salinization problems that reducedcrop yields. A
systems approach will be used to integrate food production with desalination and
renewable energy. This approach includes: 1) Off-grid brackish water
desalination pilots; 2) Multi-year agricultural trials; 3) Hydrological and crop
models; 4) Assessment of impacts on atmospheric CO2; 5) Cyberinfrastructure for
real-time monitoring of field trials; and 6) Socio-economic analyses to assess
potential adoption technologies and implications for guiding policy. The project
will lead to increased understanding of the soil microbiome and its influence on
crop yield and to new developments in cyberinfrastructure for this type of
integrated systems research. While none of the individual food, energy, and
water components provide a complete solution, their integration has the
potential to considerably increase food security and environmental quality,
particularly in water-limited areas of the United
States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.