* 1856614
* Molecular Spintronics:  Building the better Molecular Multiferroic from the Interface Outwards
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2020
* Peter Dowben, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 06/30/2020
* USD 184,616.00

The Chemical Structure, Dynamic &amp; Mechanism B Program of the Chemistry
Division supports Professor Peter Dowben of the Department of Physics and
Astronomy at the University of Nebraska and Professor Ruihua Cheng of the
Physics Department at Indiana University Purdue University-Indianapolis working
together on a research project described here. This project focuses on combining
molecules, whose dominant characteristic is a large magnetic moment, with
molecules with large electric dipoles. The research could enable the fabrication
of lightweight, high-speed, low-power non-volatile electronic devices for a
broad range of applications. This project brings together investigations of
fundamental interface chemistry, dipole coupling at heteromolecular interfaces,
the modeling of frontier orbitals, the fabrication of defined high-quality
organic multilayers, and characterization of magnetic induction with an applied
electric field. Student training includes international experience in science.
Other activities involve both undergraduate and graduate students, including
visiting undergraduates, in cutting edge research at the interface of chemistry
and physics and outreach activities where the students learn how to communicate
cutting edge research to a nontechnical audience. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project focuses on the interface between organic ferroelectric layers and spin
crossover molecule adsorbates, with a general goal of understanding the
mechanisms that dominate the voltage manipulation of the spin state of these
metal organic complexes. More specifically, the emphasis is on the investigation
of heteromolecular interactions, with spin-crossover molecules, to exploit the
molecule-to-molecule interface to create novel and better molecular multiferroic
devices. To accomplish this goal, research will center around several important
research objectives: (1) identify what determines the changes in spin crossover
phenomenology with molecular film thickness; (2) better understand the energy
barriers to molecular spin state switching; (3) learn how a heteromolecular
system, where the spin state of the molecular overlayer is controlled by an
applied electric field, reacts to competing processes; (4) identify the smallest
controllable domain size within a continuous film; and (5) identify whether or
not a spin orientation anisotropy barrier exists in a molecular spin crossover
thin film.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.