* 1856228
* Sequential Coupling/Pericyclic Reactions of a Dihalogenated Pyrone for Complex Molecule Synthesis
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Richmond Sarpong, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Jon Rainier
* 05/31/2024
* USD 835,000.00

With this Award, the Chemical Synthesis Program of the NSF Division of Chemistry
is supporting the research of Professor Richmond Sarpong of the University of
California, Berkeley who is pursuing specific (selective) ways to modify
molecules known as pyrones. The modifications produce new compounds that have
important chemical properties. The research group is particularly interested in
the synthesis of complex molecules found in small quantities in nature (natural
products). The modification of pryones is conducted using metal catalysts but
when there are multiple choices for modification, achieving a single, preferred
option is challenging. Through the careful choice of chemical reagents and
conditions, Professor Sarpong and coworkers strategically design specific
changes in the starting molecules, setting the stage for the synthesis of
compounds of potential pharmaceutical relevance. Professor Sarpong and his
coworkers serve as mentors to under-represented minority students in the greater
Oakland, CA area. They also visit classrooms and conduct demonstrations at area
science festivals. Professor Sarpong continues to inspire students worldwide
through TED-style talks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Sarpong and his
coworkers use 3,5-dibromo-2-pyrone for the synthesis of various classes of
natural products. Key to this approach is site-selective cross-couplings to a
dihalogenated pyrone, which sets the stage for sequential pericyclic processes
resulting in a rapid increase in target-relevant complexity. Through this
combination of controlled peripheral functionalization and rearrangements of the
core structure (framework reconstruction), the synthesis of complex natural
products such as secondary metabolites isolated from Incarvillea delavayi,
Cephalotaxus sinensis and decahydroazulenes is studied. These advances provide
complementary approaches to complex molecules of biological relevance starting
from a relatively simple starting input, 3,5-dibromo-pyrone. As a part of this
project, Professor Sarpong is training his coworkers and preparing them for
careers in chemical industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.