* 1856273
* New Reactions for Targeting the Akuammiline Alkaloids
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2022
* Jimmy Wu, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Paul Blakemore
* 06/30/2022
* USD 450,000.00

This project is jointly funded by the Chemical Synthesis program and the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research to support the research of
Professor Jimmy Wu of Dartmouth College. Dr. Wu is developing new chemical
synthesis of organic compounds with unique chemical structures. This research is
leading to the discovery of molecules with important physical and/or biological
properties. To accomplish these goals, Prof. Wu invents new reactions that can
be applied to the synthesis of a class of anti-diabetic compounds that are found
in the seeds of the Akuamma trees which grow in western Africa. In collaboration
with Professor Lori Loeb of the Department of Computer Science at Dartmouth,
Professor Wu is also producing a series of short, animated films focused on
important concepts in organic chemistry and other STEM topics. The target
audience is middle school, high school, and college students, as well as the
general public. The fourth animation in this series is currently in production
and tells the story of exenatide, an FDA-approved drug for type 2 diabetes that
was first discovered in the saliva of the Gila monster.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Wu is actively pursuing advances in heterocyclic
chemistry within the context of the total synthesis of complex natural products
from the akuamma family of indoline alkaloids. His strategy makes use of
reactions recently developed in his research group as key steps in the
synthesis. These reactions include the dearomative indole 3+2 annulation
reaction and nucleophile-intercepted Beckmann fragmentation, among others. At
least one member of these compounds possesses anti-diabetic properties and is
thought to work by dual inhibition of the sodium/glucose co-transporters SGLT1
and SGLT2. Additionally, Professor Wu is using fundamental knowledge gleaned
from these syntheses as the basis for preparing complex heterocyclic scaffolds
that populate novel chemical space. The broader scientific impacts of this award
are multi-fold, with the most obvious being advances in understanding both type
1 and type 2 diabetes. In addition, benefits arise from the use of these newly
invented reactions by others in the chemical community in synthetic endeavors
unrelated to the akuammilines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.