* 1856595
* Phase behavior of complex coacervates
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2019,01/31/2024
* Arun Yethiraj, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 01/31/2024
* USD 506,918.00

Arun Yethiraj of the University of Wisconsin-Madison is supported by an award
from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the
Division of Chemistry and the Condensed Matter and Materials Theory program in
the Division of Materials Research to study the phase behavior of complex
coacervates. Polymers are long chain like molecules that are ubiquitous in
applications, e.g., plastics, and in biology, e.g., DNA and proteins. Mixtures
of positively and negatively charged polymers, called coacervates, can form
"droplets" of a separate dense liquid phase. An example is micron-sized
assemblies composed of RNA and proteins in living cells that are implicated in
many biological processes. They might also play a role in the origin of life,
because these droplets can form in the absence of lipids, and the nucleic acids
could have promoted catalysis in the early universe. These mixtures are also of
interest in materials science where they find applications in drug delivery
agents, coatings, and adhesives. They are of fundamental interest because of
their fascinating properties, and obtaining relationships between the chemistry,
structure, and property is a challenging task. Professor Yethiraj and his group
are studying the mechanism of this phase behavior using an array of theoretical
and computational methods, with the aim of understanding the principles of this
phase separation and how it might be controlled. His group is involved in
coaching middle and high school science Olympiad teams, and involving them in
modern computational methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Yethiraj
and his group are working on two parallel approaches for the study of complex
coacervates. In the first they are developing atomistic, fully polarizable
force-fields from first-principles, and using these to bench-mark coarse-grained
models. They are using these to study the conformational and structural
properties using computer simulations. In the second they are developing and
implementing molecular classical density functional theory which can be tested
against simulations and then used to obtain the phase behavior. The outcome will
be a set of efficient tools that can used to study any complex polymer solution
and an understanding of the mechanism of coacervation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.