* 1856245
* PurSUiT:  Diversity and endemism across a steep biogeographic cline:  marine invertebrates of Oman
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Catherine McFadden, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 09/30/2023
* USD 844,085.00

Among coral reefs of the world, few are as diverse, poorly known,
environmentally variable, and threatened by global climate change as those of
the Indo-West Pacific marine region near Oman. Reef communities in this region
survive or thrive across extremes of temperatures, salinities, pH, and oxygen,
and thus offer a glimpse of biological adaptations to future global ocean
conditions. This study will document the diversity of marine invertebrate
animals in reefs near Oman as part of a large-scale survey utilizing an
integrated set of collecting, imaging, genetic, and informatics tools.
Researchers will focus on the discovery, description and analysis of
understudied invertebrate phyla, which will include a high proportion of species
new to science or endemic to waters around the Arabian Peninsula. Graduate and
undergraduate students will be trained in the systematics and biogeography of
selected groups and will develop a range of skills including field and genomic
techniques. Researchers will create a training workshop, a graduate course, and
a massive open online course to educate the next generation about biodiversity
survey methods of poorly sampled marine environments. Outreach and educational
initiatives will leverage institutional capacities at the Florida Museum of
Natural History, Smithsonian, and California Academy of Sciences to engage
diverse public audiences in understanding the value of threatened coral reef
environments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers will survey marine invertebrate
phyla within coastal reef habitats of the Arabian Sea, Gulf of Oman, and the
Arabian/Persian Gulf using targeted and broad-spectrum methods. Researchers will
further document diversity through community DNA sequencing of plankton, benthic
assemblages, and recruited biota on autonomous reef monitoring structures.
Approximately 20,000 lots of specimens will be preserved for study in museum
collections, imaged, and sequenced, and distributed to a network of
collaborating taxonomists for analysis. An estimated 3000 species will be fully
characterized as a consequence. Researchers will describe new species where
warranted and will assess the relative roles of relictualism, basinal isolation,
ecological speciation, and long-distance colonization as sources of diversity,
endemism, and evolutionary novelty in the Arabian Peninsula reef communities.
These data, which will be shared in public repositories, will provide baseline
information regarding marine biodiversity for monitoring purposes and for
comparison to other areas of the Indo-West Pacific marine
region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.