* 1856416
* Dynamic Effects on Fates of Reactive Intermediates in Synthesis and Biosynthesis
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2022
* Dean Tantillo, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 06/30/2022
* USD 500,000.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics &amp; Mechanism B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Dean J. Tantillo of the Department
of Chemistry at the University of California, Davis is using modern
computational chemistry methods to explore new aspects of the reactivity of
organic molecules. The goal of this research is to construct new mechanistic
models to help understand the behavior of reactive species. The principles
uncovered may transform how organic chemists predict how reactions occur and
which products form for reactions of structurally complex organic molecules. In
addition to the fundamental importance of the mechanistic models , the project
will train students (graduate and undergraduate, several from underrepresented
groups) in multidisciplinary approaches to mechanistic chemistry and expose them
to careers that employ such techniques. In addition, new methods for making
applied computational chemistry accessible to blind and visually impaired
students will be developed as part of an effort to encourage these students to
pursue careers in STEM fields. Finally, an online resource for teachers who wish
to provide physically sound depictions of molecules reacting will be
established.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will focus on unusual potential
energy surfaces for synthetically relevant rearrangements. Non-statistical
dynamic effects will be analyzed and predicted, and general models of reactivity
and selectivity will be constructed. In particular, the origins of selectivity
for reactions in which pathways to products bifurcate after transition states
will be interrogated. The researchers will also examine the influence and
utility of particular electrostatic effects on controlling rates for reactions
subject to non-statistical dynamic effects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.