* 1856103
* Complex Dynamics and Diophantine Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2019,09/30/2020
* Laura DeMarco, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 09/30/2020
* USD 295,000.00

The primary goal of this project is to explore connections between the dynamical
theory of polynomials and rational functions of one variable and the theory of
Diophantine geometry which studies arithmetic features of solutions to
polynomial equations. Specifically, the principal investigator studies
bifurcations and stability within algebraic families of these dynamical systems
defined over the field of complex numbers and uses the results to address
questions about height functions and rational points on arithmetic varieties,
focused on intersection theory and counting problems. Even the simplest families
of examples, such as the well-studied family of quadratic polynomials, exhibit
complicated dynamical features that we have yet to understand. Similarly, there
remain deep unanswered questions about the seemingly simple structure of torsion
points on elliptic curves. This research combines methods from both complex
analysis and arithmetic geometry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal
investigator with her collaborators has developed new methods of proof
incorporating tools from complex dynamics and non-archimedean analysis. The main
objective of this project is to exploit these combined methods to address
problems about height functions and some new problems about the dynamics of maps
on the Riemann sphere, inspired by the arithmetic questions. The principal
investigator is working towards: (1) uniform versions of Unlikely Intersection
problems about algebraic dynamical systems; (2) a study of torsion points within
a family of abelian varieties, to characterize which curves can intersect many
points of ''small'' canonical height; (3) the Critical Orbit Conjecture, about
the geometry of postcritically finite maps within the moduli space of rational
maps; (4) the conjectured rationality of canonical heights for dynamical systems
over function fields in characteristic zero, and connections to transcendence
problems; and (5) equidistribution statements for families of maps and for
families of elliptic curves. This research should have impact on multiple areas
of mathematics, including number theory, geometry, and
dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.