* 1856359
* CyberSEES: Type 2: A Coastal Resilience Collaboratory: Cyber-enabled Discoveries for Sustainable Deltaic Coasts
* CSE,CCF
* 04/19/2018,09/30/2021
* Qin Chen, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 09/30/2021
* USD 866,033.00

Communities on modern river deltas with total populations greater than 500
million people face threats from global reductions in river sediment, land
subsidence and rising sea level. Risk mitigation efforts may require intensive
computer simulations that are integrated with data collection and engineering
analytics for guidance. This project establishes a Coastal Resilience
Collaboratory with a three-fold mission: 1) enhance the collaboration among
earth scientists, computer scientists, cyberinfrastructure specialists and
coastal engineers tasked with solving the sustainability issues of deltaic
coasts; 2) identify risk mitigation for coastal communities subject to flooding
hazards using approaches that integrate restoration and protection; and 3)
leverage NSF investments in cyberinfrastructure to address problems of major
national importance involving engineering design guided by coastal system
responses to specific hazard mitigation projects. Effective linkages of
cyberinfrastructure that enables rapid sharing and integration of available data
resources and computational tools will be evaluated. The project will also
evaluate how effectively these cyberinfrastructure products promote the wider
use of high-performance computing and data analytics in the coastal engineering
and science research community. The proposed project has a wide range of broader
impacts, ranging from education and workforce development, to dissemination of
research results to the general public, K-12 students, and coastal managers and
decision makers.

The Coastal Resilience Collaboratory core research program builds on a recently
funded Coastal SEES project (EAR-1427389), which serves as the science driver
for the cyberinfrastructre development and its enabled simulation experiments.
One of the grand challenges for earth system science is to characterize dynamic
environmental processes at appropriate space and time scales with integrated
observation networks and models. The project advances four elements: 1) A
simulation management system for a high-level web-based interface, improving
multiphysics model usability for coastal scientists/engineers not familiar with
advanced computing resources; 2) Application packaging for cloud-computing using
Docker container technology to facilitate prototype simulation experiments in
two large river deltas to test a range of hypotheses; 3) Accelerator technology
to achieve high performance levels aimed at making a GPU- accelerated Boussinesq
code base available to coastal engineers for the design of sustainable
infrastructure; and 4)Aapplications for visualization and access to toolkits on
mobile devices to support decision-making and educational activities. The three
simulation experiments that test system interactions in the modeling framework
proposed is expected to produce foundational knowledge that can evaluate
potential impacts of deltaic landscape change on coasts around the world and
suggest mitigation solutions.