* 1856430
* 2nd International Conference on Plant Synthetic Biology, Bioengineering, and Biotechnology Conference
* BIO,MCB
* 12/01/2018,11/30/2019
* Henrik V Scheller, American Institute of Chemical Engineers
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 11/30/2019
* USD 10,000.00

Plant synthetic biology is becoming a field of great economic importance in a
broad variety of industries, including medical, energy, and agriculture. The
rapidly advancing field requires the expertise of scientists, chemical and
biological engineers, and mathematicians to develop accurate modeling systems,
optimize high value chemical production, and ultimately manufacture essential
feedstock and precursors on an industrial scale in a manner which is both
sustainable and economically viable. Presented by the Society of Biological
Engineering (SBE), the 2nd International Conference on Plant Synthetic Biology
and Biotechnology brings together scientists and engineers from universities,
industry and government working in all aspects of Plant Synthetic Biology, Plant
Bioengineering and Plant Biotechnology. The conference focuses on exhibiting
advances made in scientific knowledge regarding plant genomes, revolutionary
gene editing tools and techniques, as well as mathematical models that advance
understanding and the prediction of the engineered biological processes. The
conference gathers scientists and engineers to provide an atmosphere and venue
amenable to discussing various principles and approaches and to motivate new
research into barriers that limit the development of plant synthetic biology.
The scientific presentations are from a diverse group of researchers and there
will be active participation by graduate and undergraduate researchers. The
conference is inclusive of female scientists and those that are members of
underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 2nd International Conference
on Plant Synthetic Biology, Bioengineering, and Biotechnology Conference is the
first instance of its kind, designed to bring together researchers from academia
and industry to a highly-interactive and engaging meeting, enabling
professionals and young researchers to hear from one another through organized
talks, panel and question and answer discussions and poster sessions. The topics
of this conference are expected to have a high impact across several fields in
biology, as well as applications to a myriad of various industries. The
conference will focus on exhibiting advances made in scientific knowledge
regarding plant genomes, revolutionary gene editing tools and techniques, as
well as mathematical models that advance understanding and the prediction of the
engineered biological processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.