* 1856329
* Excellence in Research: The Visible Ape Project
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Rui Diogo, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Robin Bernstein
* 08/31/2024
* USD 484,607.00

One of the major questions in biology is how small genotypic differences can
underpin striking phenotypic differences in anatomy, physiology, development,
and behavior, like those seen between humans and apes. Indeed, we share nearly
99% of our DNA with chimpanzees, our closest living ape relatives, despite
having substantially different appearances and behaviors. In order to study
these genotype-phenotype relationships across humans and apes, detailed
phenotypic data, including anatomical data, are needed. However, despite a
fascination about apes that is shared by many scientists and the broader public,
there are very limited resources for accessing and exploring ape anatomy. This
project will develop a comprehensive, user-friendly and freely available
resource on ape anatomy, the Visible Ape Project (VAP). This website and
mobile/tablet app anatomical resource will be hosted at Howard University, to
assure long-term availability and visibility of the data and support STEM
research and scientific dissemination at a Historically Black University (HBCU).
The VAP will serve as a valuable cross-disciplinary resource and create
interdisciplinary connections between medical/veterinary education and
biological anthropology. The VAP will also support public interest in science,
drawing further attention to and awareness of apes, whose continued existence in
the wild is seriously threatened. A number of outreach activities, including US
and internationally-collaborative workshops, educational, and conservation
activities, will reach the public, students from the high school level through
graduate levels, and researchers and medical/veterinary practitioners.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the way that GenBank has been
transformative for genetic research, the VAP is a major step towards
transforming the 'phenome' in terms of providing a resource with comprehensive
image data of ape anatomy directly comparable to human anatomy. In particular,
the VAP and its comparisons with the Visible Human Project will allow
researchers to address fundamental questions about the genomic, developmental,
evolutionary and functional bases of human and ape anatomy and development, the
origin and variations of the human body, and the features that make humans
unique. Specifically, the VAP will include about 1,050 labeled images
(dissection photographs, 3D photogrammetry, anatomical illustrations, CT/MRI
scans) and 3D models of neonates and adults of each major ape group, as well as
more than 250 labeled and 10,000 unlabeled full body and brain serial sections
of both neonatal and adult chimps.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.