* 1856210
* Manifestation of Magnetic Field Effects in Electronic Dynamics and Spectroscopies
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2022
* Xiaosong Li, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 06/30/2022
* USD 480,000.00

Professor Xiaosong Li of the University of Washington is supported by an award
from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the
Division of Chemistry. Dr. Li studies the characteristic properties of
molecules, solids and materials in the presence of magnetic fields. When atoms
bond to form molecules and solids their electrons rearrange and, because the
moving electrons are charged particles, their motion generates magnetic fields.
Consequently, such molecular systems possess both electrical (due to the
electron's charge) and magnetic properties. These systems are studied using
experiments that observe changes when light is directed on the molecule in the
presence of a magnetic field. The results of this experiment are complicated due
to many contributing factors. A specific goal of Dr. Li's research is to use
computational methods known as real-time time-dependent density functional
theory to help to interpret the experimental results. Understanding these
experiments can advance new technologies relevant to sustainable energy,
catalysis, quantum computing, and other applications that benefit society. New
computational advances are distributed to the community. These new tools also
provide advanced interdisciplinary education and training in the areas of
inorganic, theoretical, physical, and materials chemistry. The research prepares
undergraduate and graduate students for future STEM careers. Students also have
unique opportunities to gain experience in software development for high-
performance computing applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
project is to develop quantum magneto-electronic dynamic methods within the
real-time time-dependent density functional theory (RT-TDDFT) formulation and to
model magneto-optical spectroscopies of importance in chemical and materials
research. This research project includes new method development to enable the
RT-TDDFT method to model magneto-electronic dynamics and characteristics of
electronic structure when perturbed by a finite magnetic field and probed by
optical pulses. By providing a time-dependent interpretation for the chemical
dynamics encoded in magneto-optical spectra, the theory can aid in the design of
new catalysts and quantum materials that exhibit desirable magnetic and optical
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.