* 1856040
* INFEWS/T3 RCN: Cultivating a National Collaborative for Research on Food, Energy, and Water Education (NC-FEW)
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2019,09/30/2022
* Cory Forbes, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Tom Evans
* 09/30/2022
* USD 749,964.00

Societies today face global sustainability challenges related to meeting growing
needs at the Food-Energy-Water-Nexus (FEW-Nexus). Conceptualizing complex Food,
Energy, and Water (FEW) interactions as a nexus provides a holistic way to
account for and balance tradeoffs within and across FEW components. In order to
foster scientific literacy, meet workforce demands in science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) and food, agriculture, natural resources,
and human sciences (FANH), there is a need for a sustained and systematic effort
focused on education and education research grounded in the FEW-Nexus. The
investigators will cultivate a new, transdisciplinary community, the National
Collaborative for Research on Food, Energy, and Water Education (NC-FEW), which
will serve as a hub of innovation for education research on FEW-Nexus
educational programs at many levels (K-12, postsecondary, adults) and settings
(formal and informal). The project will directly impact an estimated 600
educators and education researchers (postsecondary faculty, K-12 teachers,
informal educators) from diverse institutions, as well as a variety of learners
in an array of educational settings. This Research Coordination Network (RCN)
will enhance educational programs grounded in the FEW-Nexus. The RCN will
benefit society by improving STEM/FANH science literacy through educational
innovation and capacity building around an important sustainability challenge.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The greatest sustainability challenges of the 21st Century
and beyond are defined by complex interactions between natural and human
systems. The Food-Energy-Water-Nexus (FEW-Nexus) provides one framework for
understanding such interactions. While the FEW-Nexus has received increasing
attention in scientific research, educational programming and research on
teaching and learning grounded in the FEW-Nexus has been underemphasized. There
is a need to build upon past work to advance FEW-Nexus-based educational efforts
in a transdisciplinary manner. This Research Coordination Network (RCN) will
cultivate a community of educators and education researchers whose work focuses
on teaching and learning about the FEW-Nexus. The National Collaborative for
Research on Food, Energy, and Water Education (NC-FEW) will involve invited
meetings, informational webinars, science communication, and development of
instructional resources, as well as education and training opportunities for
educators and education researchers. It will leverage existing efforts to help
build capacity of a new transdisciplinary community of educators and scholars
with a shared focus on educational research and programming. Through systemic
capacity-building activities and collaboration, project activities will advance
knowledge and practice about teaching and learning in the FEW-Nexus, including
pedagogical practices, student learning, and evaluation and assessment, with a
novel focus on the FEW-Nexus and mobilization of transdisciplinary expertise to
catalyze education research around innovative educational
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.