* 1856302
* IGE: Enhancing imaginative and collaborative STEM capacity through creative inquiry
* EDU,DGE
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Mark Callahan, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Denecke
* 03/31/2024
* USD 499,835.00

Advanced scientific and technical training is insufficient to position the
leaders of tomorrow to solve the complex problems we face. They must also be
able to think creatively, to collaborate across disciplines, and to work with
people with different perspectives, knowledge, and values. There is compelling
evidence that creativity training can stimulate both scientific creativity and
interdisciplinary collaboration, but to date, little attention has been given to
creativity training in STEM graduate education. This National Science Foundation
Innovations of Graduate Education (IGE) award to the University of Georgia will
bring a diverse group of graduate students together from STEM and arts
disciplines to address issues in the local watershed using creativity-based
training methods from the arts. This project will investigate the impact of
targeted creativity training on the ability of STEM students to frame problems
in new ways and help diverse teams solve complex problems. If successful,
widespread adoption of these methods will contribute to equipping STEM graduates
across the country with communication and collaboration skills and ultimately
increase creative and innovative solutions to complex global environmental
challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over each of five semesters, this project will
recruit a cohort of ten students in the early stages of graduate study, five
from STEM disciplines who self-identify as interested in environmental science,
and five from arts disciplines. Cohorts will meet for six workshops facilitated
by two faculty members from STEM and arts disciplines. Workshops are designed to
build core creative competencies and develop skills for collaborative
interdisciplinary practice. Students will gain practical experience sharing
disciplinary viewpoints, creating analogies from scientific concepts, and
developing collaborative frameworks for complex problem solving. The final
workshop will result in a set of proposed solutions to a local watershed
problem, collaboratively identified by students and stakeholders. Complementary
quantitative and qualitative methods will be used to examine students' abilities
to shift thinking (increase "cognitive flexibility"), generate novel ideas, and
effectively communicate and collaborate with one another. This project seeks to
fundamentally enhance how STEM students are educated by engaging them in
creative processes related to their research topics. Successful elements will be
incorporated into a scalable training model that will be widely disseminated and
available for adoption at other institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Innovations in Graduate Education (IGE) program is focused on research in
graduate education. The goals of IGE are to pilot, test and validate innovative
approaches to graduate education and to generate the knowledge required to move
these approaches into the broader community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.