* 1856556
* How a phage-derived weapon system shapes interbacterial interactions within and across species
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* David Baltrus, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Shisler
* 08/31/2023
* USD 550,458.00

Bacteria produce many different products to outcompete other organisms in
nature. One subset of these products was developed successfully into medically
relevant antibiotics. However, many of these antibiotics target broad classes of
bacteria. Thus, their use to treat harmful infections may also be detrimental
because they eliminate beneficial bacteria. It is therefore critical to find and
develop new antibiotics that precisely target bacterial strains of interest and
avoid detrimental off-target effects. The Baltrus lab discovered and
characterized a class of potential antibiotics (tailocins) produced by the plant
pathogen Pseudomonas syringae. Tailocins appear to be very powerful. It is
thought that just one molecule is sufficient to kill a bacterium on contact.
Tailocins also are highly specific for killing of bacterial strains. The goal of
this award is to identify how tailocins bind to and kill other bacteria, and how
bacteria can develop resistance to tailocin. This information can be used to
engineer a new class of antibiotics. An additional goal of this award is to
identify the potential for another bacterium (Pantoea) to produce similar
molecules through genetic characterization of new pathways. There also will be
the development of an open access computational pipeline that can be used to
screen bacterial genome sequences for additional tailocin-like molecules.
Undergraduate students will also have the opportunity to work in the laboratory,
providing a platform to develop the next generation of scientists. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Bacteriocins produced by bacterial cells, and are thought to
specifically target and kill different strains of the same species, or closely
related bacterial species. This relatively specific killing spectrum of
bacteriocins could provide a powerful means to precisely manipulate microbiomes
while avoiding off-target effects associated with broad spectrum antibiotics.
The Baltrus lab recently characterized a class of phage-derived bacteriocins
(R-type syringacins or tailocins) produced by the plant pathogen Pseudomonas
syringae. Contrary to dogma, tailocins can kill a variety of different bacterial
species naturally encountered by P. syringae. Goals of this grant are to
pinpoint the genetic basis for this broader activity, and to identify the
molecular basis of tailocin sensitivity. This information will allow scientists
to better predict the outcomes of bacteriocin killing across strains. This award
will develop freely-accessible computational tools that will enable discovery of
new phage-derived bacteriocins across diverse bacterial taxa. Overall, this
research will increase the ability to manipulate microbial communities with
great precision, and will enable the discovery of new tailocin-like systems to
be developed and mined for interactions in the future. In addition,
undergraduate students will have the opportunity to work in the laboratory,
providing a platform to teach the next generation of
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.