* 1856490
* Characterizing Bond Activation in Alkanes and Alkyl Halides by Metal and Metal Cluster Cations using Spectroscopy and Photofragment Imaging
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2022
* Ricardo Metz, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 06/30/2022
* USD 500,000.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms-A
program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Ricardo Metz and his students at
the University of Massachusetts Amherst are studying how alkanes and alkyl
halides can be converted to more industrially useful chemicals. Although natural
gas is mostly methane (CH4), it also has up to 6% ethane and 4% propane. Ethane
and propane are extremely useful, as they can be converted into ethylene and
propylene, which are then used to produce plastics like polyethylene and
polypropylene, or other higher value chemicals. Industrially, the production of
ethylene and propylene require a great deal of energy and they produce over a
pound of carbon dioxide for every pound of ethylene produced. The Metz group
uses specialized instruments in which streams of molecules under high vacuum
interact with laser light to produce products like ethylene or propylene. Both
graduate and undergraduate students are involved in this research project. In
addition to gaining and disseminating knowledge about the chemistry of molecular
systems, the students are receiving training in advanced laser techniques and
vacuum technologies, as well as computational chemistry, which is used to help
interpret the experimental results. Professor Metz is also helping to introduce
eighth-grade girls to research in STEM fields through the Eureka!
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Complexes of metal ions and metal cluster ions
with ethane and propane are produced in a laser ablation/flow reactor source,
cooled via supersonic expansion, mass selected in a mass spectrometer and their
structure and bonding is characterized using vibrational and electronic
spectroscopy. Interaction with the metal weakens the carbon-hydrogen (C-H bonds)
in the ethane or propane ligand; this weakening is key to the subsequent
catalytic activation of the bond. The experiments measure the extent of C-H bond
weakening and polarization by the metal, as they lead to lower frequencies for
the corresponding C-H stretch vibrations. These experiments also reveal the
identity of reaction intermediates and products in cases where several isomers
could be involved, as in competitive C-H and C-C bond insertion. These studies
are being carried out for several metals and for clusters with differing numbers
of metal atoms to determine the electronic and structural factors that lead to
size-dependent reactivity. Complementary velocity map imaging studies of metal
halide, sulfide and carbene cation photodissociation measure kinetic energy
release and fragment anisotropy, determining accurate bond strengths and probing
the couplings between excited electronic states. Photodissociation of a metal
halide are also being used to initiate a bimolecular reaction between a metal
cation and an alkane, allowing the team to study reaction dynamics with
controlled impact parameter and orientation, as a function of translational
energy. The broader impacts of this work include potential benefits from
improved catalysts as well as training undergraduate and graduate students in
mass spectrometry and laser spectroscopy and in broader skills such as problem
solving, experimental design, data acquisition and analysis and communication of
their results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.