* 1856132
* Collaborative Research: Data-driven integration of biological with in-silico experiments to determine mechanistic effects of N-glycosylation on cellular electromechanical functions
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Hui Yang, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Charles Cunningham
* 07/31/2024
* USD 320,625.00

Completion of this research will describe the fundamental roles for
N-glycosylation and its regulation on muscle cell function using a repetitive
process blending experimental, statistical, and computational methods.
Glycosylation - the process of covalent addition of sugar residues to proteins -
is a common modification to proteins involved in cellular communication.
Physiological cues regulate the glycosylation process and protein glycosylation
impacts electrical and contractile functions of cardiac muscle cells, thereby
suggesting a fundamental and dynamic role for glycosylation in muscle cell
physiology. The new knowledge gained through this research will be integrated
into an interdisciplinary education program at the intersection of experimental
and computational muscle cell biology that is aimed at engaging and retaining
student scientists, focusing on students/trainees from underrepresented groups.
To do so, the following will be developed: 1) A massive open online course on
experimental and computational muscle cell biology, 2) Web-based user-friendly
myocyte models and analytical algorithms, 3) Initial work on a prototype VR
system of myocyte models that enable researchers and students to actively
practice, feel, and interact with cellular electromechanical function in real
time, and 4) An interactive laboratory experience in cardiovascular physiology
for high school students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent data suggest a link among
regulated glycosylation, electrical signaling, and myocyte contraction. While
mechanisms for this putative link remain elusive due to a lack of appropriate
models, here, the responsible cellular mechanisms will be determined using an
iterative process that combines established biophysical and biochemical
techniques with newly developed glycomic methods, rigorous in-silico modeling,
and statistical experimental design on a newly created and more appropriate
animal model to describe the functional impact of a changing glycome on
cardiomyocyte physiology. The impact and significance of describing such a
mechanism are broadened by the fact that the glycosylation machinery among
species is highly variable. Thus, the differential glycosylation that exists
among organisms likely results in modulated protein function that then
predictably alters cellular activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.