* 1856590
* 21st Century Opportunities in Biomedical Engineering; Impacting Healthcare from the Clinic to Industry
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/2019,03/31/2020
* Jeffrey Zahn, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 03/31/2020
* USD 17,830.00

This award supports the 45th Annual Northeast Bioengineering Conference (NEBEC)
which will be hosted by the Rutgers University Department of Biomedical
Engineering at the Rutgers University Livingston Campus Student Center, 84 Joyce
Kilmer Avenue, Piscataway, NJ, 08854, on March 27 - 29, 2019. The funds
requested will primarily be used to subsidize undergraduate and graduate student
registration fees and cover website and publication costs associated with the
conference venue.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL
MERIT:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the 45th NEBEC is to
showcase biomedical engineering research and education programs while
stimulating inter-university collaborations within the Northeast U.S. Because of
the large number of Biomedical Engineering programs within the Northeast United
States and their proximity to a high concentration of leading medical centers as
well as pharmaceutical, biopharmaceutical and medical device industries the
NEBEC offers numerous opportunities for student, faculty, clinical, and
industrial interactions in order to strengthen research, educational, clinical,
and industrial impacts of biomedical engineering. We wish to present the
conference through a lens focused on specific initiatives and centers at Rutgers
University as well as offering industrial opportunities due to Rutgers? unique
location at the center of the NJ "cure corridor" being within 50 miles of
numerous fortune 500 health care companies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER
IMPACTS:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this support are to promote
student participation in the NEBEC to allow interaction opportunities for
undergraduate, graduate, and post-doctoral students enrolled in
bioengineering/biomedical engineering programs in the Northeastern U.S. We hope
to promote opportunities for undergraduates to present their research to a
diverse audience. In particular, efforts will be made to recruit early career
investigators, female investigators, and investigators from underrepresented
groups to participate in the conference. We will ensure that woman and
minorities have opportunities to present and attend the meeting. By subsidizing
registration costs, we hope to reduce registration fees for all participants
compared to the fees charged from other NEBEC venues in recent years. This will
help us recruit young investigators and students from underrepresented groups to
broaden the participation of a diverse group of investigators who may otherwise
not be able to attending the workshop. This conference will provide a venue for
biomedical engineering programs located in the Northeast U.S. to present
research, while promoting the exchange of ideas and technologies in order to
expand research and educational collaborations as well as providing interaction
with representatives from the pharmaceutical, biopharmaceutical and medical
device industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.