* 1856516
* Collaborative Research: Analysis of rapidly evolving potassium channels in electric fish
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2022
* Amanda Masino, Huston-Tillotson University
* Standard Grant
* Quentin Gaudry
* 08/31/2022
* USD 90,000.00

The purpose of this project is to understand how genetic changes contribute to
the evolution of new animal signaling behaviors. The investigators of this
collaborative project will study this question in weakly electric fishes from
Africa, known as mormyrids. The team has previously discovered a protein,
encoded by the gene kcna7a that has undergone intense natural selection
mormyrids, which allows mormyrids to produce extremely short electric signals
called an electric organ discharge (EOD). Despite the strong selection on
mormyrids for brief EOD pulses, the evolution of pulse duration varies
dramatically across the more than 200 species of mormyrids, and long duration
EOD pulses have evolved at least three times from short-duration EOD pulse
ancestors. The underlying hypothesis of this project is that the long-duration
EODs are the result of selection acting on amino acid substitutions in the
kcna7a gene. In this project, the investigators will test this hypothesis by
examining the biophysical properties of kcna7a in species that secondarily
evolved long duration EODs, and conduct field-based behavioral studies to
determine the selective factors that lead to the evolution of long duration
EODs. This project will enhance infrastructure for research by adding data
products, refined functionality, and tools to the broadly utilized EFISH
Genomics Web Portal, promote teaching and learning by ongoing mentorship of
undergraduates, graduate students and postdoctoral associates associated and
broaden participation by continuing the productive relationship with a network
of institutional partners to recruit talented personnel from underrepresented
groups, working with Huston-Tillotson University, a HBCU in Austin,
TX.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A major goal of 21st century biology is to understand
how changes at the molecular level result in phenotypic changes at the
organismal level. Despite the growing progress in unraveling the "molecular
basis of phenotype" in a wide variety of taxa, it is important to maintain the
view that forces at higher levels of biological organization shape phenotypes
from the "top down". In many systems, these factors are well known, but their
precise connection to identified genetic variants is still poorly understood. In
electric fish, the selective forces that influence electric phenotype are known,
the loci that produce them are identified, the specific nucleotides within these
loci that affect function are characterized, and these loci are known to be
targets of selection on macroevolutionary scales. In Specific Aim 1, this
project will: determine the biophysical basis of secondary evolution of long EOD
pulses by sequencing kcna7a in species that secondarily evolved long duration
EODs and their congeners with short duration EODs, measuring their biophysical
properties, examining the role of specific sites using site-directed
mutagenesis, and determining whether secondarily derived long-duration EODs
evolved once or multiple times in parallel. In Specific Aim 2, the investigators
will determine whether species that produce long duration EODs have long-
duration APs and, and whether properties of kcna7a currents are sufficient to
lengthen them, using a combination of electrophysiology and computational
modeling. In Specific Aim 3, the investigators will determine the selective
factors that lead to the evolution of long duration EODs using by performing
field studies in Gabon West-Central Africa. A investigators will continue their
efforts to broaden participation of underrepresented groups in partnership with
an HBCU.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.