* 1856335
* Point-to-Axial Chirality Transfer: Enabling Stereochemical Determinations and Enantioselective Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Babak Borhan, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 07/31/2022
* USD 480,000.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms-B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Babak Borhan of the Chemistry
Department at Michigan State University (MSU) is developing new methods to
identify the chirality of organic molecules. Chirality, also referred to as
handedness, is an important property of molecules. Human hands are not
identical, but mirror images of each other (the two hands are not
superimposable). The relationship between two objects that are mirror images of
each other, have a center of chirality, and are referred to as enantiomers.
There are numerous examples of enantiomers in biology and medicine. For example,
Thalidomide, a drug that was used in the late 1960s and early 1970s, led to the
embryonic mis-development of a number of babies is an example of a mixture of
enantiomers. One of the enantiomers was biologically active as an anti-nausea
agent to treat morning sickness in pregnant women. The other enantiomer was
teratogenic, which interfered with the correct embryonic development. The drug
was given as a mixture of the two enantiomers, causing tragedy. From this
experience, scientists have learned that the ability to identify the chirality
of a molecule is of utmost importance. The Borhan group is developing new
methods to rapidly identify the chirality of organic molecules to ensure the
safety of drugs such as Thalidomide. Professor Borhan organizes and leads
Project SEED activities at MSU. Project SEED is a ten-week summer program funded
in part through the American Chemical Society and various organizations at MSU,
to support the research of high school students from financially-disadvantaged
families. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of the project are to provide simple,
rapid, efficient, and non-ambiguous procedures for the absolute stereochemical
determination of chiral organic molecules, many of which are synthetic
intermediates of bioactive compounds or newly isolated pharmacologically-active
metabolites. The project relies heavily on Circular Dichroism (CD) as the tool
for observing the host-guest interactions between the chiral compounds and the
receptors. The functionalities of interest include chiral epoxides, phosphines,
phosphine oxides, boranes, alkenes, alkynes, and alkyl arenes. In addition, the
endowed helicity of the supramolecular complexes, induced through interactions
with the bound asymmetric guest molecules, will be used towards asymmetric
catalysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.