* 1856250
* Theory for dynamic matter: designing mechanisms for dissipative nanomaterials
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2019,05/31/2023
* Jason Green, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 05/31/2023
* USD 435,001.00

Professor Jason R. Green of the University of Massachusetts Boston is supported
by an award from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods Program
in the Chemistry Division to advance our fundamental understanding of how
chemistry controls the form and the function of active materials. Active
materials are materials designed to have one or more properties that can be
significantly changed in a controlled fashion by external stimuli such as
temperature, light, or chemical reactions. In the laboratory, chemical reactions
are used to assemble, sustain, regulate, and destroy the structure of materials
made from active, responsive molecules. By manipulating the chemical reactions,
one can tune their properties. Such materials have many potential applications,
for example in drug delivery and biosensing. However, the properties of these
materials depend on the history and the details of how the structure was formed.
As a result, it is a challenge to predict the yield and mechanical behavior from
the properties of the constituent molecular building blocks. Professor Green and
coworkers are developing theoretical frameworks to overcome this challenge.
Their goal is to provide insight into the dynamic ability of matter to find
alternative routes to stable, functional structures when fueled by chemical
energy. Professor Green is also creating open-science computational notebooks
that contain accessible, computationally tractable, and experimentally-relevant
models for self-assembly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Self-assembly has practical
promise as a simple technique to synthesize complex materials. Molecular
components organize into active materials that can only sustain structure
transiently as they dissipate energy. The principal challenges are understanding
the time dependence of material properties and the effect of changing reaction
conditions. This project is developing appropriate theoretical frameworks for
understanding how non-equilibrium forces collectively drive structure formation
and sculpt the vast space of assembly pathways. The goal is to predict which
pathways are typical and which are rare at the macroscopic scale from stochastic
chemical-kinetics that accurately model experiments. This research is making
three major contributions: advancing in the modeling and simulation of the
nonequilibrium assembly of active materials, advancing in the theory and
practice for identifying the assembly patterns and causal mechanisms of
structure formation, and collecting the stochastic-thermodynamics for a database
of self-assembly models at and evolving away from
equilibrium.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.