* 1856091
* INFEWS/T3 RCN: Brazil, Argentina, Colombia and United States Energy-Food Biotech Innovations Network (BACUS)
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Michelle Evans-White, University of Arkansas
* Continuing Grant
* Anne Emig
* 08/31/2023
* USD 749,993.00

The Innovations at the Nexus of Food, Energy, and Water Systems Track 3 Research
Coordination Network (INFEWS/T3 RCN): Brazil, Argentina, Colombia, Chile, and
the United States (BACCUS) Energy-Food Biotech Innovations project is focused on
facilitating and coordinating research between: (a) U.S. faculty-scientists
affiliated with the Minority Institution Research Collaborative (MIRC); and, (b)
MIRC affiliates and collaborating scientists from partner institutions in South
America (and beyond). The project supports the integration of research and
technologies related to feedstock/crop sciences (food), biofuels (energy) as
well as bioremediation and availability of water for food-energy systems. The
overarching goal of the BACUS INFEWS RCN project is to develop long-lasting and
impactful collaborations in FEWS research between faculty at U.S. minority-
serving institutions (MSIs) and those at international partner institutions. The
BACUS network is based on emerging collaborations between U.S. scientists and
scientists at key research institutions, government labs, and private
corporations in Brazil, Argentina, Colombia, and Chile. The network also
includes U.S. corporate partners and collaborations with the World Trade Center
Arkansas/Arkansas Economic Development Commission. Project activities are guided
by input from the U.S. Department of State to ensure that research objectives,
technology transfer, and data sharing activities are aligned with federal
policies and initiatives regarding international exchange and science
diplomacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Four NSF INFEWS BACUS network project themes are
identified: (1) Food vs. Energy Feedstocks; (2) Emergent Biofuels Technologies;
(3) Food and Energy Models and FEWS Model Coupling; and, (4) Energy Impacts on
Water Systems. Coordination of collaborative projects under these themes will be
pursued with the goal of determining whether select prototype FEWS technologies
can be implemented in a manner that yields significant impact on local,
national, and regional economies. Small and medium scale systems will be studied
as part of the scope of this work and data emanating from these efforts will be
used to develop mathematical models that estimate FEWS technology impact on
larger scale markets. Fundamental methods in natural sciences and engineering
will be employed and complemented by economic forecasting methods, modeling, and
other analytical approaches. This project addresses a critical need to determine
the potential impact of emerging technologies on food, energy, and water systems
from a national and international perspective.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.