* 1856710
* BEE:  Evolutionary rescue in response to infectious disease: when will populations be rescued from pathogens?
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Mark Christie, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 05/31/2024
* USD 435,720.00

Many species and populations are threatened by rapidly changing environmental
conditions, including the introduction of novel infectious diseases. As
outbreaks of infectious diseases get more common and severe, understanding how
populations can survive when faced with deadly pathogens is increasingly
important. Evolutionary rescue, which happens when a population evolves to
survive environmental change that would otherwise cause extinction, may provide
a way for some populations to persist in a changing world. Most studies of
evolutionary rescue have focused on non-living drivers of environmental change
(e.g., pollution, extreme temperatures), with little known regarding the role
that evolutionary rescue plays in response to disease. In this project
researchers will study a species of water flea (Daphnia) whose populations'
challenges due to both non-living environmental change and pathogen infection
are well known. By identifying the conditions that allow a population of water
fleas to experience evolutionary rescue in response to disease the researchers
will gain knowledge that will help in management and control of infectious
diseases in many other systems. This project will also train graduate and
undergraduate students with a focus on those from underrepresented groups.
Additionally, the investigators will develop interactive classroom activities
for undergraduate biology courses and organize a workshop to train early-career
scientists in methods of modeling infectious disease. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
investigators will combine experimental manipulations, genotyping,
transcriptomics, and modeling to study evolutionary rescue in response to the
introduction of a pathogen. They will address the following complementary
questions: (1) How does evolutionary rescue in response to a pathogen differ
from evolutionary rescue in response to an abiotic stressor? (2) Can abiotic
stress facilitate evolutionary rescue from disease? and (3) What are the effects
of community diversity on a population's evolutionary response to a pathogen?
The proposed work will address these questions by utilizing a highly tractable
Daphnia-pathogen system to perform experimental manipulations of populations at
multiple scales (laboratory to outdoor mesocosm) while tracking demographic and
genetic changes through time. Experimental manipulations will be paired with
modeling efforts to identify mechanisms and generalize the results to additional
host-pathogen systems. This approach will provide novel insight into how
populations can respond and recover from outbreaks of infectious
disease.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.