* 1856419
* New methods for linear and nonlinear Spectroscopy in inhomogeneous electromagnetic fields
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Lasse Jensen, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 06/30/2023
* USD 456,714.00

Lasse Jensen of the Pennsylvania State University is supported by an award from
the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the Division of
Chemistry to develop theoretical tools for describing molecules situated in very
small gaps between metal nanoparticles. Under these conditions the interactions
between light and the molecule is complicated due to the strong confinement of
light in the gap. The emphasis of this project is to understand how molecules
are altered due to the confinement of light. The studies may provide an
understanding of how molecules organize at metallic interfaces with applications
in catalysis, energy conversion and trace molecule detection. Professor Jensen
develops new computational tools to describe techniques that measure molecular
interactions with light. These tools are disseminated to the broad scientific
community through incorporation into available computational chemistry software
packages. Using interactive nano-optics simulators, Professor Jensen educates
high school, undergraduate and graduate students on the differences between our
macroscopic world and the nanoscale. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Jensen is
developing a multiscale model to describe the spectroscopy of molecules in
highly inhomogeneous electromagnetic fields in plasmonic junctions. His goal is
to understand the spectroscopy of molecules in highly confined fields where the
selection rules known from traditional far-field spectroscopy breaks down. Such
computational tools provide the microscopic understanding of how these highly
confined fields modify the molecular response and how fluctuations in the local
environment influences the response. Using this multiscale model, Professor
Jensen and coworkers investigate how the response properties of molecules are
affected by a spatially confined electromagnetic fields, the specific details of
the junction, and the coupling to nearby molecules. This is essential for
understanding how the confined electromagnetic fields influence the molecular
properties and ultimately its chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.