* 1856765
* Multiphase-Separation and Control of Serially Produced Reactive Oxygen
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2023
* Alexander Greer, CUNY Brooklyn College
* Standard Grant
* Richard Johnson
* 05/31/2023
* USD 440,000.00

The Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms-B Program supports the
fundamental research by Professor Alexander Greer at the City University of New
York, Brooklyn College. Professor Greer develops techniques for accurately
studying the chemistry of reactive oxygen-containing species, often called
reactive oxygen intermediates (ROIs). ROIs are important in synthetic chemistry
and are critical to understanding the aging processes in biology and in the
environment. This research seeks to resolve mechanistic questions in ROI
chemistry by using newly synthesized micro- and nanoparticles. Further
scientific impact comes from designing materials which are resistant to aging
caused by exposure to light and oxygen. The project supports training of
research students. Professor Greer cultivates STEM talent and enthusiasm for the
sciences within a wider and younger audience by expanding the American Society
of Photobiology's program "Photobiology for Kids", among other educational
efforts in collaboration with Brooklyn College?s Annual High School Chemistry
Day. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Reactive oxygen intermediates (ROIs; oxygen radicals
and singlet oxygen) are prevalent in the field of aerobic photochemistry, but
they have proven extremely difficult to study. Many primary light-dependent and
secondary ROIs generation events remain undefined. At present,
photosensitization has been used with conventional methods of production, such
as homogeneous solution, which leads to complex mixtures of ROIs. This research
seeks to understand the downstream reactions that follow initial photooxidation
events and to control the oxidation of natural and synthetic molecules, to
reduce toxicity to organisms and damage to materials, and to develop new methods
for disinfection of water supplies. This fundamental research may also lead to
new processes for the rapid photodegradation of plastics in landfills and
oceans. New heterogeneous methods for the photogeneration of reactive oxygen
intermediates are investigated, allowing the ROIs to be rationally manipulated
with effective tuning of reactivity. The research provides a method for phase
separation that facilitates the deconvolution of complex photochemical
processes. One key feature of studying downstream reactions of primarily formed
peroxides is the ability to gain insight into multistage oxidative
events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.