* 1856654
* Systems-level measurements of biophysical parameters in the Dorsal/NF-kappaB pathway
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2019,12/31/2020
* Cranos Williams, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Elebeoba May
* 12/31/2020
* USD 731,943.00

The complexity of an embryo is staggering: it begins as a single cell, but over
time becomes populated with tens of thousands of cells or more. To begin to
decipher the complexity of development and the role of molecules that help to
determine cell fate during embryonic development, scientists and engineers have
constructed mathematical models that describe developmental processes. However,
as these mathematical systems biology models become more detailed, in order to
describe the mechanistic complexity of development, they also become more
uncertain. To overcome this uncertainty associated with mechanistic systems
biology models, using the fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster as a model organism,
the investigator will conduct carefully-designed experiments to measure
molecular and tissue scale properties in live embryos. The project will result
in a detailed understanding of how cells in the Drosophila embryo acquire their
fate, increasing our insight into developmental processes in non-mamalian and
ultimately mammalian systems. In addition to training graduate students, the
broader impacts of the project include the expansion and online dissemination of
a graduate course on systems biology and engineering, and further cultivation of
academic programs at the K-12 level that synergistically combine biological and
engineering principles as part of a multi-day summer camp for high school
students, which is held in partnership with NC State University's Science House.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the past decade and a half, our understanding of
developmental biology has been revolutionized by live, real-time, image-based
experimental platforms, which enable the acquisition of vast quantitative
datasets and provide novel views of tissue patterning during embryogenesis.
Integrating experimental and computational advances, the overall objective of
this project is to perform detailed measurements of individual biophysical
parameters and tissue-level behavior to constrain a predictive, computational
model of the Dorsal/NF-&amp;#954;B signaling module in the early Drosophila
embryo. The Dorsal signaling module consists of spatially graded concentration
of a transcription factor, Dorsal, throughout the dorsal-ventral axis of the
embryo. The cells in the embryo respond to Dorsal in a concentration-dependent
fashion, so that the spatial gradient of Dorsal patterns the dorsal-ventral axis
into distinct sub-domains. The project will conduct measurements of individual
biophysical parameters and global gradients that control embryonic protein
concentrations, including nuclear import/export rates, embryo-level movement of
Dorsal, and binding and dissociation rates of Dorsal with its cytoplasmic
inhibitor Cactus. The experimental data will be used as model constraints for
parameter optimization, and integrated to generate a predictive systems biology
model for accurate prediction of the Dorsal activity gradient in wildtype and
mutant Drosophila embryos. The project will advance our understanding of the
dynamics of Dorsal gradient formation during embryogenesis, and provide a
valuable prototype that demonstrates the use of experimental design to constrain
systems biology models through the concurrent integration of locally
(measurements of individual parameters) and globally (full-model constraint)
generated measures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.