* 1856438
* RUI:  Reductive Activation of Carbon Dioxide by Binuclear Copper Complexes with a Copper-Copper Unit
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2019,05/31/2024
* Lei Yang, University of Central Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 05/31/2024
* USD 139,848.00

Dr. Lei Yang at the University of Central Arkansas is leading a program aimed at
converting carbon dioxide into useful chemicals. This theme is attractive
because carbon dioxide is abundant. To accelerate the reactions of carbon
dioxide, metal-based catalysts are often used. The way by which these catalysts
operate is still not well understood, which slows commercial applications. To
address this gap, detailed studies are required for known catalysts to
understand how they operation. This will help in the design of new catalysts.
Dr. Yang's project emphasizes both directions - building understanding and new
design. In this project, Dr. Yang's group is making special ligands that hold
pairs of copper atoms together. Preliminary tests show that these di-copper
catalysts are promising for conversions of carbon dioxide. These activities are
well suited for training students. Under the guidance of Dr. Yang, undergraduate
students gain hands-on experience in both organic and inorganic chemistry.
Additionally, students receive training with state-of-the-art instrumentation.
This training is designed to spark their interest in technology careers. This
project is jointly funded by CHE and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To convert carbon dioxide
(CO2) to value-added chemicals for industry, Dr. Lei Yang's group at the
University of Central Arkansas is focusing on the development of new binuclear
copper catalysts featuring pairs of CuI centers. The metals are held in close
proximity by special binucleating ligands that enforce close Cu-Cu interaction.
The functions of the Cu-Cu unit are to reduce CO2 in a cooperative fashion
through one electron transfer process and to stabilize the reduction
intermediates and products. The distinctive ligand design promises high
catalytic efficiency and product selectivity. The structures of the catalysts
are characterized by X-ray crystallography. Additional spectroscopic
characterization is provided by ultraviolet-visible (UV-vis), Fourier-transform
infrared (FT-IR), electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR), and X-ray photoelectron
(XPS) spectroscopies. The goal is to obtain fundamental insights into the
mechanisms of CO2 reduction. Density functional theory (DFT) computational
studies are conducted to predict intermediate structures and interpret
spectroscopic data. Dr. Yang supervises undergraduate students in this research
program to enhance their understanding of chemical sciences and improve their
experimental and teamwork skills. This project serves as a way to inspire and
prepare students for successful careers in STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.