* 1856224
* SG:  The ecosystem ecology of lake ice loss in north-temperate lakes
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Noah Lottig, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Kendra McLauchlan
* 06/30/2023
* USD 199,945.00

The field of limnology is the study of inland waters. Historically, limnologists
have dedicated their efforts to studying lakes in the summer, while overlooking
winter. Winter field work is challenging. Most lakes in the United States,
however, freeze over for at least part of the winter. A bias for summer research
has left gaps in knowledge on lake chemistry and biology under ice. More
pressingly, with anticipated changes in environmental conditions, there is a
need for information on how lakes and reservoirs function in the winter for a
more complete understanding of lakes. This knowledge is also critical to future
management of freshwater resources in a future with shorter winters and less
lake ice. The project advances the growing field of winter limnology by using
long-term data collected on northern lakes in Wisconsin in conjunction with a
snow-removal experiment to look at under-ice algae and the implications for ice-
loss on spring algae blooms. This research will also provide hands-on research
experience for students, including K-12, undergraduates, and graduate students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will advance the understanding of under-ice
ecology by leveraging the rich winter limnology datasets of the North Temperate
Lakes Long Term Ecological Research (NTL-LTER) site, high-frequency sensors, and
the resources of a year-round limnological field station. To address the
overarching question of how lake ice loss will impact lake productivity, this
project focuses on three questions: is there a seasonal succession of planktonic
events under lake ice; what are the major drivers of winter productivity; and
how do seasons with less ice, or early-ice off, alter spring phytoplankton
blooms? These three questions will be addressed through a combination of long-
term data analysis, comparative and experimental studies, and modeling. The
seven study lakes are in Northern Wisconsin and have been routinely monitored
since 1981. Additionally, a bog lake will be the site of a snow manipulation
experiment. This project will produce multiple outcomes, including insight into
under-ice community dynamics and productivity, the dynamic nature of chlorophyll
and oxygen production under ice, and the role of light availability in under-ice
productivity. All of these analyses will further our ability to predict how a
future with less lake ice will alter lake ecosystem
dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.