* 1856112
* INFEWS:T2: Saltwater Greenhouse System for Agricultural Drainage Treatment and Food Production
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Gene Giacomelli, University of California - Merced
* Continuing Grant
* Brandi Schottel
* 08/31/2024
* USD 2,500,000.00

The Food-Energy-Water (FEW) Nexus includes the closely interconnected resource
systems of food, energy, and water. As the world's population expands to an
expected 9 billion by 2050, there will be an urgent demand to balance different
resources, such as renewable energy sources, agricultural products, and fresh
water, across these three systems to achieve different user goals without
putting undue strain on the ecosystems that provide these resources. The Central
Valley of California has some of the most productive agricultural lands in the
world, but salt accumulation in this farming area has already plagued its crop
productivity and threatened its long-term agricultural sustainability due to
current agricultural production practices and poor subsurface drainage
conditions. Since 1984, there have been combined federal and state efforts to
investigate the longstanding irrigation drainage issues in the Valley, but there
is still a lack of economically feasible solutions due to the complex
environmental and food-energy-water (FEW) nexus issues. However, these coupled
issues present an opportunity for technological innovation that can not only
solve FEW nexus issues, but also provide an economic boost. One reason for the
economic infeasibility of current agricultural drainage water treatment methods
is the detachment of the desalination process without considering the food-
energy-water (FEW) nexus issues. Therefore, this collaborative project will
study the FEW nexus issues in a tractable saltwater greenhouse system (SGS)
using irrigation drainage waste water for sustainable food production.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research goal of this project is to systematically
investigate the complex FEW nexus issues in a tractable saltwater greenhouse
system (SGS) for an innovative, environment-friendly, and economically feasible
system solution to reuse agricultural drainage for sustainable food production
in the Central Valley of California. This goal will be achieved through the
following six specific research objectives: 1) develop a cost-effective
evaporator using agricultural drainage water to cool down the SGS with zero-
liquid discharge, recover minerals, and minimize the environmental impact; 2)
develop a cost-effective condenser to recover water from both evaporative
cooling and crop transpiration; 3) demonstrate efficient solar heating during
daytime and radiative cooling during nighttime with a cold water storage tank to
enable significant energy reduction in the humidification and dehumidification
(HDH) desalination process; 4) develop a SGS through engineering and
agricultural co-design and find the optimal operating conditions in terms of
temperature and relative humidity for both the HDH process and crops grown in
the SGS; 5) test the performance and study the FEW nexus issues in the SGS,
including measuring water and energy use efficiency, crop yield and quality; and
6) conduct a cost and performance analysis and demonstrate technical and
economic feasibility of the application of the SGS in agricultural drainage
treatment for water reuse and food production. These objectives will be achieved
through collaboration with an integrated team from three universities and one
research center of the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA), including
the University of California at Merced, the University of California Santa Cruz,
the University of Arizona, and Agriculture Research Service of USDA at Parlier.
The success of this project to integrate the drainage water treatment process
with the irrigation application process will provide an innovative system
solution to solve the longstanding challenge of the agriculture salinity problem
resulting from irrigation of field crops with saline water. This solution will
slow the reduction of land productivity through the use of saline water
irrigation and protect land arability from long-term accumulated salinity. The
SGS technology can also be extended to secure sustainable greenhouse food
production through the application of seawater and brackish water for crop
irrigation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.