* 1856667
* Collaborative Research:  Convergent evolution and diversification of the crab body plan over 200 million years
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Heather Bracken-Grissom, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Fujita
* 08/31/2024
* USD 547,243.00

This project addresses a fundamental question in the study of life: can we
predict the evolutionary success of animals based on their forms? Crabs are one
of the most iconic groups of invertebrates, playing an integral role in aquarium
trade, fisheries, and aquaculture, and are celebrated in cultures around the
world through festivals and parades. This research aims to build the tree of
life for all known living and fossil crab families, to investigate how these
animals have changed over 200 million years of history. The typical body form
that characterizes crabs has evolved separately several times from lobster-like
ancestors, and also has been lost several times in different groups of crabs.
The new crab tree of life will reveal whether the independent gains and losses
of the crab shape predict the immense biodiversity and ecological versatility of
the group. The inspiring diversity of crab form and function will engage high
school students through museum activities, and undergraduate students in primary
research and classroom modules incentivizing critical thinking. Fieldwork will
be conducted in Panama, where a training course in tropical crab taxonomy will
immerse US and Latin American scientists in the techniques used to expand and
investigate the crab tree of life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The acquisition of a
crab-like body form has evolved four to five times among decapod crustaceans,
and has been proposed as a contributing factor to the immense diversification
and ecological success within the infraorders Brachyura (&gt;7000 species of
true crabs), and Anomura (&gt;2500 species including porcelain crabs, hermit
crabs, and king crabs). The objectives of this project are: (1) To construct a
well-supported backbone phylogeny for false and true crabs using genomic
(extant) and morphological (extant and fossil) data. (2) To employ fossils as
age calibrations to construct an evolutionary timeline; this will serve as the
foundation for inferring the pattern and geological timing of crab body plan
evolution. (3) To test if the rate of diversification has increased in crab-like
lineages relative to their sister groups, and likewise has decreased when the
crab-like body was secondarily lost. The researchers hypothesize that at least
some traits comprise a possible key innovation. These objectives will be
achieved by sequencing 500 crab species using target enrichment methods,
morphological coding and imaging of living and fossil taxa (including
representatives of all crab families), and the deployment of cutting-edge
strategies for divergence time analysis and phylogenetic comparative
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.