* 1856181
* Social networks in wild resident social species in different environments: causes, function and consequences
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2025
* Vladimir Pravosudov, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Continuing Grant
* Susan Renn
* 03/31/2025
* USD 982,335.00

Many animal species live in social groups, yet biologists don't fully understand
why social behavior has evolved, how social structure is determined and how
social structure functions to affect survival and reproduction. To study social
behavior in nature, the investigators will use microchipped individuals of the
well-studied food-storing bird species, the mountain chickadee, and Radio
Frequency Identification (RFID)-technology in feeders that can provide different
resources to each individual bird. The researchers will test whether differences
in winter environmental conditions at higher and lower elevations in the
mountains are associated with differences in social organization and information
sharing; whether variation in learning and memory used in finding stored food is
associated with differences in social behavior; whether reliability of
information that individual birds provide to other birds affects their social
status and social organization; and how changes in social groups to affect
social group structure and function. This project will provide training to a
postdoctoral researcher and numerous graduate and undergraduate students,
collaborating with the UNR Biology Undergraduate Research Program and the Center
for Student Cultural Diversity to recruit students from under-represented
groups. The investigators will also create scientific displays for the members
of the public and students from local schools at the University of Nevada Reno
Museum of Natural History and at the local field research station. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The evolution of sociality has been a topic of major interest in
biology for decades. Questions about the causes and functions of social group
structure have recently received a resurgence with the rapid development of
social network analyses. Major challenges in collecting social network data lie
in the reliable detection of social contacts, especially in highly mobile, free-
living animals. The use of Radio Frequency Identification (RFID) technology has
enabled automated detection of individual movements and contacts and allows a
rather unprecedented avenue for investigating social behavior, notably by
manipulating individual access to resources and hence the ability to
experimentally re-structure who individuals interact with. This project will use
comparative and experimental approaches to investigate structure, function and
fitness consequences of social networks in environments that differ in winter
climate severity in a highly social, resident, food-caching species that uses
spatial cognition to find numerous food caches for overwinter survival, the
mountain chickadee. Using a well-established field system in the Sierra Nevada
mountains and RFID-based feeders this project will test whether (a) there are
environment-related differences in social network structure and function; (b)
variation in spatial cognitive ability is associated with differences in network
position and function; (c) reliability of information and distribution of food
resources affect social network structure and individual network positions; and
(d) experimental, food-related reassignment of birds into different social
groups are temporally stable and have fitness
consequences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.