* 1856050
* Understanding the Structure and Dynamics of Solvated Electrons Using Ultrafast Spectroscopy and Quantum Simulation Methods
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Benjamin Schwartz, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2023
* USD 542,507.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms-A
Program (CSDM-A) of the Chemistry Division, Professor Benjamin J. Schwartz and
his students at the University of California-Los Angeles are using a combination
of experimental and theoretical techniques to unravel the structure and behavior
of solvated electrons. Salt water is a common example of an electrolyte, which
contains dissolved positively charged cations (sodium, Na+) and negatively
anions (chloride, Cl-). Under certain circumstances, it is possible for
electrons (e-) to be dissolved in a liquid. Such solutions are more difficult to
understand and predict, because electrons are thousands of times less massive
than atoms and molecules, and are much more mobile. The Schwartz group is using
lasers which produce extremely short pulses of light (30 - 40 quadrillionths of
a second) to capture the motions and energies of these fast moving electrons.
The experimental results are being compared with quantum mechanical calculations
(quantum mechanics is a type of math that deals with extremely small objects
like electrons, atoms, and molecules), and computer simulations of the motions
of the liquid molecules that "solvate" the electron. The broader impacts of this
work include a better understanding of radiation chemistry (reactions with
solvated electrons make high energy radiation dangerous to living organisms) and
electron transfer reactions (such as those in both biology and batteries).
Because this project combines experiment and theory, undergraduate and graduate
student researchers receive a rich experience in experimental chemistry, laser
technology, and computer programming, all of which are increasingly valuable for
the modern science workforce. The Schwartz group also works with high school
teachers in the Los Angeles area to enrich their science classes through
lectures and the development of experimental lesson
kits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The experimental focus of the project uses ultrafast
spectroscopy to study the properties of solvated electrons. Ultrafast
spectroscopy takes advantages of pulses of light that are extremely short (~tens
of femtoseconds), providing a means to "stop the motion" of the electrons on the
time scale with which molecules move in room temperature liquids. The
theoretical focus of the project is based on mixed quantum/classical
simulations. Here, quantum mechanics is used to describe the properties of the
solvated electrons, but the solvent molecules are treated classically. The
simulations can be used to calculate the results of the ultrafast spectroscopy
experiments, so that together, the combination of experiments and simulations
can provide new insights into the structure and reactivity of this interesting
and important chemical species. Because solvated electrons involve motions of
only a single electron, they also provide a test system to compare the
predictions of quantum mechanical simulations directly with the results of
laboratory experiments. In addition to the training of undergraduate and
graduate students, the Schwartz group also works with high school teachers in
the Los Angeles area to enrich their science classes, through lectures and the
development of experiment kits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.