* 1856662
* Impact Ionization Coefficients in Ga2O3
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Stephen Pearton, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Yaroslav Koshka
* 06/30/2023
* USD 331,242.00

Nontechnical description: The project is focused on fundamental materials
properties of wide bandgap semiconductor, gallium oxide, which shows promise in
a range of electrical and optical systems. Since this is a relatively unexplored
material, there is a need to establish its basic properties, including
parameters that are important for understanding how the material will behave
under high electric fields. The research is particularly addressing the impact
ionization coefficients, which are currently not established experimentally. The
proposed research plan is tackling these parameters at different electric fields
and temperatures and is comparing them to the established theory for high
voltage behavior in other semiconductor materials. The research, which combines
both experimental studies and advanced simulations, is aimed at developing a
fundamental understanding of the way in which electrons and holes behave in this
promising wide bandgap semiconductor. The role of defects and impurities on the
high voltage characteristics of this material impacts a range of technologies
including power control electronics in electric vehicles and associated charging
infrastructure, ultraviolet emitters and detectors and high frequency/high
temperature electronics. The activities provide collaborative research
opportunities for a graduate student and several undergraduate students and also
engages high school students from underrepresented groups and economically
disadvantaged backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description: The
research focuses on fundamental studies of the breakdown mechanism and the role
of common defect types and their density on carrier multiplication in gallium
oxide. This is a promising material for high power, high temperature systems
applications. This proposal will establish basic materials parameters and their
electric field and temperature dependence, which are needed to understand the
carrier transport and multiplication mechanisms in gallium oxide. The
fundamental relations governing the electron and hole transport at high electric
fields and over a range of temperatures in gallium oxide needs to be established
experimentally. More specifically, the experimental studies focus on examining
the temperature dependence of impact ionization coefficients using carrier
injection into structures which are biased at a variety of voltages to establish
an electric field. The carrier multiplication anticipated under such conditions
effect can also be affected by the type and density of defects in the material
and this needs to be quantified by examining samples with different defect
densities. The research employs electrical characterization techniques,
including temperature-dependent current-voltage and diffusion length
measurements, with structural analysis using transmission electron microscopy
with chemical analysis to provide detailed insights on how defects affect the
breakdown characteristics of gallium oxide at high voltages. The experiments are
supported by advanced electrical simulations as a function of temperature and
voltage, which are used to study the expected influence of these parameters on
impact ionization of carriers and transport through the gallium oxide layers.
The studies are establishing the transport parameters, which are relevant not
only for the basic materials science but also for understanding high temperature
operation of gallium oxide based power electronics and solar-blind
photodetectors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.