* 1856560
* Collaborative Research: Hydrologic Connectivity and Water Storage as Drivers of Carbon Export and Emissions from Wetland-Dominated Catchments
* BIO,DEB
* 10/15/2019,09/30/2023
* Durelle Scott, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 09/30/2023
* USD 489,106.00

Worldwide, rich forested wetlands have been converted to agriculture through
ditching and draining. These wetlands are important for regional water and
carbon cycles. They reduce downstream flooding through water storage, providing
dissolved organic carbon to downstream ecosystems, and contributing to carbon
storage. While efforts are being made to restore drained wetlands, recovery of
ecosystem services has lagged. Research is urgently needed to understand how
hydrology influences delivery of wetland ecosystem services to guide future
restoration and management. This project will investigate water movement and
carbon cycling in wetland-rich Delmarva Bay. Research will focus on freshwater
wetlands that are often isolated from adjacent rivers. These small wetlands are
vulnerable to land-use change, and their impact on regional water and carbon
cycling is poorly understood. This research will inform management, contribute
to meeting national research priorities, and build capacity in the scientific
workforce. Students will be engaged in all aspects of the research, as well as
in interactive meetings with managers and training workshops on actionable
science. This project will also provide data on carbon budgets and in advancing
next-generation models to estimate carbon dynamics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research will test the hypothesis that water storage capacity (WSC), or the
amount of water a single wetland or group of wetlands can store, is a principal
driver of wetland- and catchment-scale hydrology, carbon emissions, and
downstream carbon export. Using coupled empirical and modeling components, this
project will quantify: (1) WSC at wetland and catchment scales and resulting
variation in water levels, residence time, and water export; and (2) consequent
influences to carbon dynamics at both wetland (DOC concentration and
composition, CH4 and CO2 emissions) and catchment scales (DOC export and
composition, CH4 and CO2 export). Linked hydrologic and biogeochemical data will
be collected in 18 wetlands across six study catchments that vary in WSC, with
more intensive data collection (e.g., in situ, high temporal resolution) within
one wetland per catchment. At the catchment scale, each catchment outlet will be
monitored for time series of water discharge and carbon composition and export.
Derived empirical relationships and calibrated process-based hydrologic models
will advance predictive understanding of wetland carbon emissions and the
shunting of DOC, CO2, and CH4 from upstream wetlands to catchment outlets.
Expected outcomes linking WSC and associated hydrologic controls on carbon
biogeochemistry are required to inform restoration practice and global carbon
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.