* 1856124
* Harmonic Analysis, Structure Theory of Measures, and Properties of Hamiltonian Dynamical Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Bobby Wilson, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2024
* USD 196,383.00

Harmonic analysis and geometric measure theory are important and fundamental
mathematical disciplines to the study of partial differential equations and
dynamical systems that arise from differential equations. The aim of this
project is to add to the literature of these foundational subjects as well as to
the study of a class of partial differential equations that are very important
to modeling interaction of particles. Many types of physical phenomena,
including the behavior of lasers through various types of media, thermalization
of crystals, and optimal control, can be modeled by interacting particles or
variational problems -- the two areas of research that benefit most from
advances in geometric measure theory and harmonic
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scope of this research project includes the
study of structures of measures via the examination of quantitative estimates of
geometry, including measures of projections and point-wise densities. At the
same time, this project entails the study of Hamiltonian dynamical systems as
they relate to nonlinear dispersive PDEs, including nonlinear Schrodinger
equations and various water wave equations. Specifically, we will study the
question of stability of special solutions and integrability for the cubic
nonlinear Schrodinger equation with data defined on compact domains of dimension
greater than one. In addition, we will study the decay of the Favard length of
neighborhoods of purely unrectifiable sets as well as Besicovitch's one-half
problem and Falconer's distance set conjecture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.