* 1856279
* Collaborative Research:  Uncovering the population and community level consequences of phenotypic plasticity
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* David Vasseur, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Kari Segraves
* 05/31/2024
* USD 392,228.00

Changes in the environment that affect organisms, such as in temperature, may
occur slowly (over years to decades) or may occur more rapidly (over a day or
season). This study uses several types of single celled algae to understand how
organisms adjust to rapid changes in their environment and to examine how the
ability to do so may influence their growth, survival, and abundance. This study
also explores how changes in the ability to adjust to sudden environmental
change can influence the relationships among organisms in an area. This work has
implications for conservation, management, and theory because it will improve
our ability to predict the consequences of environmental change at both short
and longer time scales. This study will train graduate and undergraduate
students through their participation in research and the development of a
complimentary teaching module. Outreach opportunities include the development of
interactive 'science kits' for elementary students and Museum oriented
activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Gradual plasticity, the non-genetic changes to
an organism that influence its performance following its exposure to
environmental change, is an overlooked but important process that may determine
an organism's success and the outcomes of their ecological interactions. This
study will use laboratory and field-based experiments, and several species of
phytoplankton, to develop an integrative empirical and theoretical framework to
explore the ecological implications of gradual plasticity. This work will i)
characterize the features of acclimation associated with individuals within and
across species, ii) examine how acclimation rates influence population dynamics
and the shape of reaction norms, and iii) develop models that explore how
gradual acclimation affects the invasion, competition, and coexistence of
species in the face of variable environmental change. This work will provide a
foundation for studying and forecasting changes in a wide variety of ecological
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.