* 1856707
* Theory and Application of Some New Approaches to Electronically Non-Adiabatic Dynamic
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2019,12/31/2023
* Stephen Cotton, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 12/31/2023
* USD 360,000.00

William H. Miller and Stephen J. Cotton of the University of California,
Berkeley are supported by an award from the Chemical Theory, Models and
Computational Chemistry Program in the Division of chemistry to develop
theoretical methods for simulating a variety of molecular processes that are
fundamental to many modern technologies. These processes involve coupled
electronic states. Such simulations allow researchers to understand these
processes more deeply and thus be able to modify them in useful ways. Examples
are biomolecular processes, photovoltaic behavior, and photo-catalysis. The
approach that Miller and Cotton is developing is characterized by its simplicity
and its efficiency. The goal is to have a reliable and easy to use approach for
simulating larger and more complex molecular systems than is what is currently
possible. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific focus of this research
is electronically non-adiabatic processes, i.e., those that involve transitions
between different electronic states. The challenge is to treat the electronic
degrees of freedom and the nuclear degrees of freedom, to which they are
coupled, in a consistent framework. The approach uses the Meyer-Miller (MM)
model for the electronic degrees of freedom, which shows how they can be
"mapped" onto harmonic oscillators, one for each electronic state. This then
allows the use of classical molecular dynamics for electronics as well as
nuclear degrees of freedom. The MM model would be exact if all the degrees of
freedom were treated quantum mechanically. Treating them all classically is an
approximation but can often be very accurate by using semiclassical ideas to
"re-quantize" the electronic degrees of freedom This has resulted in the
development of a striking simple symmetrical quasi-classical (SQC) windowing
procedure that provides a semiclassical-like "quantization" of the electronic
oscillator degrees-of- freedom (DOF) in classical Meyer-Miller (MM) vibronic
dynamics. Significant benchmarking of this SQC/MM approach has been seen to give
semiclassical-like (and therefore quantum-like) results, but to do so orders of
magnitude more efficiently than a true semiclassical calculation and, of course,
without the inherent exponentially scaling cost of a full quantum dynamics
simulation&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.