* 1856423
* Breed early, breed late? Molecular, neuroendocrine, and developmental mechanisms regulating timing of reproduction
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Ellen Ketterson, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,167,091.00

Change is and always has been constant in nature. The likelihood that species
will persist, expand, or go extinct depends on their ability to employ
environmental information to accurately time life-history transitions. To
succeed, species need to reproduce at times of the year that are favorable for
rearing offspring. In a rapidly changing environment, the level of flexibility
in the mechanisms that determine when animals reproduce will play a critical
role in determining population-level resilience. The research will employ
cutting edge technology and experimental approaches to identify the mechanisms
(molecular, neuroendocrine, and developmental) that determine when animals
breed. In addition, to understanding the mechanisms that determine when animals
breed in changing environments, the project will also provide education and
outreach opportunities to engage communities in the conservation of migratory
birds on a local to global scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research that integrates
mechanism and function in eco-evolutionary contexts holds great promise for
understanding the direction and dynamics of change in living systems. The
research will synthesize the mechanisms that lead to within- and among-
population differences in the timing of reproductive development. Basic insights
will be provided to the fields of seasonality, neuroendocrinology, and
phenotypic flexibility. The research will make use of striking differences in
timing of reproduction in closely related, seasonally sympatric populations of a
sparrow, the dark-eyed junco (Junco hyemalis). The junco is a species that
consists of an array of migratory and resident populations known to co-occur
during winter and early spring when they are exposed to the same environmental
cues (e.g., day length, temperature). Despite exposure to the same environmental
cues in winter and early spring, some populations delay reproduction to migrate,
while others do not. This project will use seasonally sympatric juncos to 1)
Achieve a deeper understanding of how genetic and epigenetic variation are
translated into phenotypic variation in reproductive timing by determining the
relative importance of variation in gene expression and gene sequences. 2) Test
the hypothesis that, contrary to traditional models of timing, dynamic feedback
from the reproductive axis plays a critical role in timing reproduction. 3) Test
experimentally the hypothesis that day length experienced during development
sets the day length at which reproduction begins in adults. In addition, to
understanding the mechanisms that determine the migratory and reproductive
timing of junco species, the project will also provide education and outreach
opportunities to engage communities in the conservation of migratory birds on a
local to global scale, by engaging the trainees on the project with citizen
scientists. The education and outreach opportunities will be accomplished in the
field and via established outreach activities with local
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.