* 1856684
* Fluorescence-Encoded Infrared Spectroscopy for Single-Molecule Chemical Dynamics
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2022
* Andrei Tokmakoff, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 06/30/2022
* USD 644,110.00

In this project supported by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms-A
Program of the Division of Chemistry, Professor Andrei Tokmakoff and his
research group at the University of Chicago are developing a new type of optical
spectroscopy that can detect single molecules, and provide information about
their structure (in other words, the geometric arrangement of atoms in the
molecule). Achieving both single molecule detection and structural information
in a single experiment is a long-sought-after, but very challenging goal.
Professor Tokmakoff's strategy involves the use of both the fluorescence and
vibrational properties of molecules. In fluorescence, a molecule exposed to
visible or ultraviolet light re-emits light of a specific wavelength range
(color). This emission can be very strong, even enough for a single molecule to
be detected. However, the emitted light does not tell us very much about the
structure of the molecule. On the other hand, molecules vibrate with frequencies
that correspond to infrared light ("IR"), what we feel as heat, and also exploit
in night vision goggles. Observing how molecules absorb IR light can tell us a
lot about their structure, but one needs a high concentration of molecules to
obtain sufficient signal. Tokmakoff uses laser pulses of visible and infrared
light, carefully sequenced in such a way the intense fluorescence emission
contains the information normally provided in an IR experiment, hence the name
Fluorescence-Encoded Infrared (FEIR) spectroscopy. The research is focusing the
FEIR technique on simple reactions like acid-dissociation, where a molecule
loses a proton (positively charged hydrogen atom), and bimolecular complex
formation, where two molecules stick to each other and undergo subtle structural
changes. FEIR represents an entirely new approach to understanding chemical
reactions, and has far -reaching implications not only in chemistry, but
materials science and biophysics. The graduate students engaged in this project
are experiencing a cross-disciplinary setting that includes design and
construction of advanced instrumentation, training in optics and spectroscopy,
methods in molecular biology, and molecular modeling and computer simulation.
For broad distribution of course materials, Professor Tokmakoff has also made
online instructional resources accessible by others in the field.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The method used in this project, fluorescence-encoded
infrared (FEIR) spectroscopy, combines structural specificity and SM sensitivity
by encoding the absorption of IR light onto a visible fluorescence signal. The
Tokmakoff group has demonstrated the principles and capabilities of FEIR, using
ensemble measurements of ultrafast Fourier-transform and multidimensional
spectroscopy, and developed the experimental capability for measuring FEIR
spectra and femtosecond transients at 10-100 nanomolar concentrations,
approaching the sensitivity regime of individual molecules. The objective of
this project is to develop the capabilities for performing an FEIR analog of
fluorescence correlation spectroscopy (FCS) experiments, in which the
vibrational spectrum is used to track the time-evolving state of molecules for
studies of chemical kinetics and dynamics. The Tokmakoff group will apply this
technique to the kinetics of proton transfer and bimolecular
association/dissociation equilibria, and study how FEIR spectra sense the
environment of the fluorescent probe. This is imagined as a first step in the
longer-term goal of realizing a method to track the time-evolving structures of
single molecules in solution by integrating vibrational information into the
real-time photon streams analyzed in SM fluorescence spectroscopy. In addition
to the aforementioned training of graduate students, this project supports the
continued development and distribution of educational material in the form of
continually updated online textbooks and related resources, in the areas of
quantum mechanics, spectroscopy, and molecular
biophysics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.