* 1856674
* Multi-anionic Pincer Ligand Catalysts and Ring Expansion Alkyne Metathesis Polymerization (REAMP)
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Adam Veige, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 07/31/2022
* USD 485,000.00

The Chemical Catalysis and the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry
Programs of the Chemistry Division support the project by Professor Adam Veige
of the University of Florida. Linear polymer are useful in numerous applications
due to their electrical conductivity, optical nonlinearity, photoconductivity,
gas permeability, and liquid-crystallinity. The Veige group seeks to discover
new catalysts that produce cyclic versions of these polymers in order to explore
new opportunities to further advance their materials properties. Because of
technical problems, cyclic polymers are not currently commercially available.
Professor Veige and his coworkers are focusing on making the catalysts for
cyclic polymerizations more rugged and efficient. This project is also providing
hands-on training for young aspiring chemists through the undergraduate research
program. The Veige group hosts the annual "Chemistry Day at the Mall" event,
which involves fifty graduate and undergraduate students exhibiting 25 chemistry
demonstrations to nearly 500 children and their parents annually.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on the synthesis and characterization
of catalysts for cyclic polymer synthesis. Ring expansion alkyne metathesis
polymerization (REAMP) is unknown. The Veige group aims to prepare a tethered
tungsten-alkylidyne capable of initiating the unprecedented ring expansion of
cyclic alkynes. Highly nucleophilic metal-carbon multiple bonds can ring open
cyclic alkenes to produce cyclic polymers. Two new pincer ligand designs may
provide access to nucleophilic tungsten-alkylidynes for REMP. Finally, current
catalyst synthesis routes are tedious and inefficient, so the research team
seeks to synthesize highly effective Mo-based catalysts for stereoselective
cyclic polymer synthesis from commercially available starting materials.
Elucidating efficient synthetic strategies for ring expansion catalysts may help
to realize the potential of cyclic polymers in advanced
manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.