* 1856304
* Excellence in Research: Attitudes, Motivations, and Justifications Surrounding Interpersonal Aggression
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Kelly Minor, Winston-Salem State University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 06/30/2023
* USD 499,847.00

Although interpersonal aggression affects all communities, Black men and women
experience a disproportionate amount of it when compared to other racial/ethnic
groups. The few available studies focused on Black college students (BCS) show
that they experience elevated levels of interpersonal aggression, which is
associated with numerous adverse psychological, physical, emotional, and
educational outcomes. The goal of this study is to understand perpetration and
victimization of aggression among BCS by testing a social psychologically
grounded conceptual model. The research will make important theoretical and
empirical contributions by providing a glimpse into the psychological and social
processes related to incidence and prevalence of aggression among students.
Additionally, findings may be used to help develop violence prevention and
intervention programs, and/or to inform campus policies and procedures. This
project will also provide undergraduate psychology students with hands-on
research opportunities. The integration of undergraduate students into this
project is designed to strengthen students' academic skills, and create a
culture of science and research with the aim of increasing student interest,
representation, and persistence in STEM fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
mixed-method study will test a conceptual model that incorporates empirical
findings from the existing interpersonal aggression literature, but also
includes social and cultural variables known to influence violence and
aggression among Black men and women. Specifically, the framework draws concepts
from social cognitive theory, social determination theory, and the social
justification model. The study will recruit a diverse sample of BCS. Data will
be collected from BCS on various campuses (e.g., Historically Black Colleges and
Universities, Minority Serving Institutions, and Predominantly White
Institutions) using focus groups, in-depth interviews, and an online
quantitative survey. The results of this study will not only contribute to the
scientific understanding of interpersonal aggression perpetration and
victimization in general, but will also emphasize the importance of
understanding the social and cultural proximal and distal factors that influence
engagement in interpersonal aggression, from the perspective of both
perpetrators and victims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.