* 1856630
* Excellence in Research: Wave Effects on the Dynamics of a Multiple-Inlet Bay System During Storms
* GEO,OCE
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2024
* Meng Xia, University of Maryland Eastern Shore
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 06/30/2024
* USD 596,775.00

Estuaries, such as the Maryland Coastal Bays (MCBs) are crucial to local
ecosystems and economies. However, like many estuaries on developed coasts, the
MCBs are experiencing degraded water quality, potentially due to changes in
exchange at the inlets. Interactions between the bay and ocean through inlets
are highly complex owing to feedbacks between tidal and subtidal processes and
bathymetry. Waves can significantly alter these inlet dynamics by driving
changes to local (inside the inlet) and far-field (inside the bay) water levels,
currents, and exchange, particularly during storms, but the mechanisms are
poorly understood. In addition, although there are two respected methods for
estimating wave forcing in a numerical model, there are few instances of
comparisons with field observations inside the inlet channels to determine the
merits and limitations of these methods. This study utilizes an existing three-
dimensional numerical model developed for the MCBs, along with existing field
observations from U. S. Army Corps of Engineers and new field observations, to:
(1) field-test and improve numerical parameterizations of wave forcing in the
model and (2) use the observations and field-tested simulations to study (a)
wave effects on water levels, currents, and water and salt exchange through an
inlet depend on inlet characteristics (i.e., shoal morphology, channel depth and
orientation relative to wave direction), and (b) wind and storm driven
modulations of wave effects at the inlet mouth, within the lagoon, and in the
case of a two-inlet system at the second inlet. In 2014, only 23% of B.S.
degrees in Earth/Atmospheric/Ocean Sciences were awarded to non-white students
(2% to African-American students). This project will help expand that small, but
valuable, pool of minority students in the Science, Technology, Engineering and
Mathematics (STEM) fields, by supporting a physical oceanography numerical
modeling laboratory within a Historically Black College/University (HBCU) and by
providing opportunities for undergraduate students and graduate students at an
HBCU to integrate research with their education through inquiry-based learning.
The study is in collaboration with the US Naval Academy (USNA) and it will
provide an avenue for a non-HBCU (USNA) to learn from an HBCU ways to improve
minority retention and promote an inclusive culture in STEM education. Results
from the proposed study will be presented at academic conferences as well as to
local stakeholders and in public outreach events and the scientific finding will
be published in peer-reviewed scientific journals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although
the study will focus on the MCBs, this project is expected to benefit the
broader field of physical oceanography by developing field-tested
parameterizations for the modeling of wave effects and by expanding knowledge of
wave effects to a new range of geometric scales and physical conditions. For
decades, scientists have debated the merits and limitations of wave-current
theories, with little consensus; field-testing these theories will provide
valuable insight into these discussions. In addition, wave effects on the
dynamics in a multiple-inlet system like the MCBs have received little
attention; this study will broaden understanding of wave effects to new
geometries. Feedbacks between waves and subtidal processes will also be examined
to quantify the change in overall storm effects, depending on the combination of
forcings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.