* 1856229
* Collaborative Proposal:  Linking process to pattern through an experimental network approach to identify the behavioral mechanisms of reproductive isolation
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2024
* Kayleigh Keller, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Colette St. Mary
* 08/31/2024
* USD 183,347.00

Animals frequently interact with members of their own and closely related
species in non-random ways that have profound implications for evolution within
and between populations, including the buildup or breakdown of genetic
differences. Closely related subspecies often come into contact and interbreed,
or, hybridize. This research will experimentally study how social interactions
(networks), morphological traits, genomic ancestry, and migratory behavior
explain the amount of interbreeding in two contact zones each consisting of two
pairs of barn swallow subspecies that differ in degree of hybridization. The
integration of observation and experiments in the wild with genomic analyses
will allow for a direct test of how individual behaviors impact hybridization.
The research uses miniaturized proximity loggers and network analytical methods
to measure the frequency of interactions between individual swallows. Data
collection will be accomplished through extensive student training and
international collaboration. The use, visualization, and interpretation of
social networks will be broadly disseminated through 1) conference
presentations, workshops, and publications, 2) integrated into courses, 3)
public release of code for new network analysis methods and 4) online dynamic
interactive visualizations of research data with exercises and assessment tools.
This work represents a highly novel and integrative approach to understanding
how closely related populations evolve into different species, with important
implications for biodiversity and conservation
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Assortative behaviors (non-random social
interactions) are thought to represent critical barriers to gene flow among
recently diverged animal taxa. However, direct measurement of assortative
behavior in nature is rarely possible. This research leverages the barn swallow
(Hirundo rustica) subspecies complex to experimentally examine the contribution
of assortative behavior to reproductive isolation in two hybrid zones between
subspecies pairs that differ in evolutionary history. The following will be
collected from each hybrid zone: 1) close-range social interactions from
proximity tags to construct social networks, 2) fine-scale genomic information
to measure individual ancestry, 3) wintering locations, migratory routes and
timing of arrival data from geolocators and stable isotopes, 4) measures of
morphological variation, and 5) data for molecular paternity analyses to
construct fertilization networks based on within- and extra-pair matings as a
direct measure of hybridization between subspecies. The construction of
fertilization networks will enable analyses about the degree to which
hybridization is mediated by social interactions, subspecific ancestry,
migratory behavior, or morphology. These features are likely correlated with one
another and their combined and relative importance in reproductive isolation
will be analyzed using matrix regression methods. After collecting correlative
data from each hybrid zone, experimental manipulations of phenotype and timing
of breeding will be conducted to test for causal relationships between these
traits and fertilizations, providing an extremely rare opportunity to
experimentally test and manipulate predictors of hybridization. These
comparisons offer the previously intractable opportunity to experimentally
analyze how individual-level variation predicts reproductive decisions and the
degree to which populations hybridize.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award was co-
funded by Behavioral Systems in the Division of Integrative Organismal Systems
and Evolutionary Processes in the Division of Environmental
Biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.