* 1856404
* Collaborative Research: Strike while the snake is hot: will increasing nighttime temperatures make an endothermic keystone species more susceptible to ectothermic predators?
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2023
* Rulon Clark, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 08/31/2023
* USD 445,297.00

The balance between predator and prey is a fundamental force shaping natural
populations. Increasing global temperatures could have major indirect effects on
ecosystems by disrupting the predator-prey relationships of keystone species.
The potential for such an impact is greatest when one of the two is an ectotherm
(such as a reptile) whose body largely conforms to the environmental
temperature, and the other is an endotherm (such as a mammal) that maintains a
fairly constant body temperature. Kangaroo rats are keystone species in North
American deserts, and alterations in their foraging behavior and population
ecology can cascade through the ecosystem. Rattlesnakes are major predators of
kangaroo rats whose daily and seasonal activity and predatory performance is
directly tied to the temperature of the environment. This proposal combines
laboratory and field experiments that comprehensively document the details of
the activity cycles, behaviors, and performance of rattlesnakes and kangaroo
rats in relation to temperature. This information will then be used to develop
computer simulation models of how temperature regulates equilibrium between
predator and prey populations through changes in their interaction dynamics.
These models will have broad conservation impacts by allowing researchers to
quantify and actually predict complex indirect effects of climate change on
natural ecosystems. This project will also have broad impacts on society by
training several dozen undergraduate and graduate students from diverse
backgrounds, and by inspiring high school students to pursue STEM careers
through the implementation of training modules using high-speed video and
biomechanics in schools that serve economically disadvantaged populations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Predation is a fundamental evolutionary force, shaping
many aspects of behavior and morphology of predators and prey. Because of the
centrality of predation in the lives of most organisms, predator-prey
interactions can directly affect ecosystem structure and stability. However, the
detailed mechanics of predator-prey interactions are rarely considered when
ecologists examine the role of predation in structuring communities. Those
details may be crucial in understanding how climate change will affect key
species interactions. The objective of this project is to comprehensively
evaluate the potential for increasing environmental temperature to disrupt
predator-prey interactions in keystone species (rattlesnakes and kangaroo rats)
across a naturally occurring thermal cline, and then use this data to
parameterize and test computational models examining how temperature changes
could alter predator-prey equilibria. Researchers will conduct a series of
hierarchical experiments and analyses that will: (1) Use in vivo and in vitro
laboratory analyses to quantify impacts of temperature on physiology and
function of the musculoskeletal system used to power predatory strikes in
snakes. (2) Combine laboratory and field experiments to examine the impact of
temperature on whole-animal predatory performance. (3) Use detailed direct
observation of kangaroo rats and rattlesnakes in nature at different latitudes
to establish baseline relationships between temperature and physical
performance, activity cycles, foraging behaviors, movement ecology, and
population demographics. (4) Use agent-based computational simulations
calibrated with observational and experimental data to predict focal population
dynamics s across different thermal regimes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.