* 1856515
* Excellence in Research: NSU-JSU Partnership in Nanophotonics Research
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Tigran Shahbazyan, Norfolk State University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 08/31/2024
* USD 599,999.00

Recent developments in nanotechnology have opened new possibilities for the
harvesting and emission of light, and transforming its energy to clean
electrical power and chemical reactions. This project is aimed at better
understanding the fundamental effects and new opportunities associated with
emission and transfer of light energy in ensembles of molecules that are
strongly coupled to specially designed nanoscale environments. Coupling of the
molecules with the nanoscale environment is expected to provide for
unprecedented control of light-matter interactions and improvement in the
efficiency of light technologies. The project educational component aims at
strengthening the graduate and undergraduate programs in STEM disciplines at two
Historically Black Universities (HBCUs) Norfolk State University and Jackson
State University via collaboration and student exchange. It is designed to
enrich education and training of graduate and undergraduate students from
traditionally underrepresented minority groups by involving them in cutting-edge
research in nanophotonics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Strong coupling of ensembles of
quantum emitters (e.g. dye-doped polymers) with plasmonic structures can cause
dramatic changes in the media's optical response and physical properties. The
effect of the strong coupling on the spontaneous emission, Forster energy
transfer, and material's nonlinearity, are of fundamental and practical
importance and are the subject of unsettled debates. Potential applications of
strongly coupled hybridized photonic materials can range from light harvesting
and nanocircuitry operating at optical frequencies to pulse-shaping and
directional emission sources. The proposed effort is aimed at (i) Transformative
research of hybrid photonic materials, whose optical properties are modified by
strong coupling of metallic (plasmonic) and dielectric components with optically
active dopants; (ii) Development of new concepts and designs employing
hybridized strongly coupled materials and components for new technologies; and
(iii) Expanding the research capacity at minority institutions through
enhancement of education and outreach programs. The knowledge gained in the
proposed research program will be transferred to a broad community of scientists
and engineers via publications, presentations and patents. It has a potential to
transform, among others, organic photovoltaics, opto-electronic nanocircuitry
and signal. Over a three-year span of the project, nearly a dozen graduate and
undergraduate students will be impacted by the program, directly or indirectly.
Based on the demographics of Norfolk State University and Jackson State
University, more than 60% of undergraduate students will be from minority groups
traditionally underrepresented in STEM disciplines and more than 50% of all
students will be females. The research synergistic with education and outreach
activities planned in this project would profoundly impact minority students at
participating institutions and provide an example of a partnership between HBCUs
in cutting-edge research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.