* 1856437
* Exploring Strong Field Electronic and Molecular Dynamics
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* H. Bernhard Schlegel, Wayne State University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 05/31/2024
* USD 510,000.00

Professor H. Bernhard Schlegel of Wayne State University is supported by an
award from the Theory, Models and Computational Methods program within the
Chemistry Division. He studies the interaction of intense laser light pulses
with molecules to investigate chemical reactions that occur over a very short
time scale (attoseconds, or quadrillionths of a second). The research is
theoretical and computational in nature and is being carried out in close
collaboration with experimental scientists who are testing the predictions of
these theories in laser laboratories. Dr. Schlegel's investigations are
revealing how light delivered in short, intense pulses can be used to follow the
movement of electrons in molecules during chemical reactions, called electron
dynamics. Results of this fundamental study can provide details about the
individual steps involved in a chemical reaction, its mechanism, which can aid
in making chemical processes more efficient. He conducts workshops to instruct
student researchers on how to utilize computational chemistry software. The
computer software developed during the project is available to the scientific
community through Dr. Schlegel's website and is incorporated into general-
purpose quantum chemistry computer codes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The response of
molecules to intense laser fields involves electron dynamics on a time scale as
short as few hundreds of attoseconds and molecular dynamics at times of a few
femtoseconds and longer. Methodologies to simulate these interactions are being
developed for both time scales. Time-dependent configuration interaction methods
with real space complex absorbing potentials (TDCI-CAP) and real-time
integration of time-dependent density functional theory (rt-TDDFT) are used to
investigate electron dynamics and ionization of molecules in strong laser
fields. Machine learning is being tested for predicting the angular dependence
of strong field ionization from orbital energies, ionization potentials and the
shapes of molecular orbitals, electrostatic potentials and electric field
gradients. Born-Oppenheimer, extended Lagrangian and Ehrenfest dynamics are
being used to simulate isomerization and fragmentation in cations by ultra-
short, intense mid-infrared laser pulses. The involvement of excited states in
strong field isomerization and fragmentation reactions is to be investigated
with non-adiabatic molecular dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.