* 1856125
* Theoretical Studies of Spectral Signatures of Large Amplitude Vibrational Motions
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Anne McCoy, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 08/31/2023
* USD 500,000.00

Anne B. McCoy of the University of Washington is supported by an award from the
Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods and the Chemical Structure,
Dynamics and Mechanisms-A programs in the Division of Chemistry to develop
theoretical and computational studies of the relationships between spectroscopic
measurements of water and its structure and other properties. Despite its
centrality to chemistry (and to life), there are many aspects of the structure
and properties of water that scientists do not understand. Dr. McCoy's research
focuses on small assemblies of water molecules, clusters, or water clusters that
include an ion. By focusing on smaller assemblies, Dr. McCoy can perform
detailed atomistic studies on the structures of the clusters and how they
interact with light, which includes important quantum mechanical effects. Her
work focuses on developing theoretical models and computational tools that
enable such investigations. By working closely with experimental groups at Yale
University, Pennsylvania State University and the University of Georgia, she is
able to test her models. Along with her collaborators, Dr. McCoy is able to
tease out insights into the structure and properties of these clusters from the
available measurements. Dr. McCoy engages in activities that focus on
development of the next generation of chemists. In addition to mentoring the
students in her research group who come from diverse backgrounds, she has been a
mentor to graduate students in each of the groups with whom her group
collaborates. She also organizes several symposia, workshops or conferences each
year, and uses these meetings as a forum to promote the development of early
career scientists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In this work, Professor
Anne McCoy is developing the theoretical and computational tools required to
understand connections between the spectral features of large amplitude
vibrational motions and the underlying inter- and intramolecular interactions,
with a focus on water clusters and ion-doped water clusters. These are systems
of considerable experimental interest, but the large amplitude motions make the
interpretation of the spectra challenging. Dr. McCoy's work focuses on
developing extensions to Diffusion Monte Carlo approaches to address challenges
related to the difference in the time scales for the inter- and intramolecular
motions. In addition, inspired by insights gained from the Diffusion Monte Carlo
simulations, Dr. McCoy is developing and applying reduced dimensional approaches
for interpreting vibrational spectra. A central theme of Dr. McCoy's work is in
providing insights into the spectral consequences of large amplitude vibrational
motions in water clusters as well as molecules, like the Criegee intermediate,
the properties of which are of interest in modeling atmospheric
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.