* 1856142
* Controlled Amplification of Photochemical Reactions in Conjugated Polymer Nanoparticles
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2024
* Elizabeth Harbron, College of William and Mary
* Standard Grant
* Richard Johnson
* 04/30/2024
* USD 340,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamic &amp; Mechanism B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Elizabeth J. Harbron of the
Department of Chemistry at the College of William and Mary prepares and studies
nanoparticles which act as amplifiers for photochemical (light-induced)
reactions. As one example, chemotherapy drugs can be attached to light-reactive
(photoreactive) molecules which release their drug only at the site of the tumor
instead of throughout the body. Photoreactive molecules must react efficiently
so that the dose of light is minimized, but not so efficiently that they react
when exposed to normal room light. In order to optimize this process, Professor
Harbron's research group synthesizes photoreactive nanoparticles by combining
fluorescent polymers with photoreactive molecules. In these new nanoparticles,
the polymer gathers light energy and delivers it to the attached photoreactive
molecules. The current project develops applications in the photorelease of
small molecules and in the production and detection of reactive oxygen species.
Applications are envisioned in photodynamic therapy and sensor development. This
project also serves as training for undergraduate and master's level research
students, who learn organic, physical, and analytical chemistry techniques while
receiving academic and career planning advise. Outside of the lab, Professor
Harbron continues to work as a mentor with the Chemistry Women Mentorship
Network and with the William and Mary Scholars Undergraduate Research Program,
which seeks to develop research skills in students from underrepresented groups.
Professor Harbron founded and chairs a new Diversity, Outreach, and Publicity
committee in her department that is working to broaden participation in science
and promote scientific dialogue on campus. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Light is an
appealing stimulus for molecular transformations because it can be delivered to
a sample with high spatiotemporal resolution and control of exposure energy and
intensity. In conjunction with light stimulation, photoresponsive molecules are
being used in an increasing number of exciting applications, from imaging to
catalysis. The ideal photoresponsive substance reacts efficiently with light and
yet not so efficiently that it responds to ambient light in an uncontrolled
fashion. Achieving this balance in reactivity is one of the major challenges in
the field. Other challenges include water solubility and tuning light
responsiveness into the visible to near-infrared region. To address these
challenges, the current project pairs photoresponsive dyes with conjugated
polymer nanoparticles (CPNs). These are exceptionally bright fluorophores that
absorb and emit in the visible to near-infrared. They can be suspended in water.
When doped with dyes, CPNs act as powerful light harvesters, funneling the
energy of hundreds of chromophores to a single dye molecule via fluorescence
resonance energy transfer (FRET). Pairing the CPNs' efficient excitation and
energy transfer processes with a dye's less efficient photochemical reaction
amplifies the reactivity of the dye in a controlled fashion. This project
optimizes the "controlled amplification" approach and extends it to address
photoreactivity challenges. The specific aims are: to develop CPNs doped with
photoremovable protecting groups to enhance and control photorelease, and to use
CPNs doped with photochromic dyes to quantify the CPN properties that maximize
photoreactivity. The research also seeks to develop CPNs that both generate
superoxide and report on its relative concentration via ratiometric
fluorescence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.