* 1856165
* Improving accuracy and applicability of density functional theory
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2019,12/31/2022
* Kieron Burke, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 12/31/2022
* USD 500,000.00

Professor Kieron J. Burke of the University of California, Irvine is supported
by an award from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program
in the Division of Chemistry to improve the accuracy and applicability of
density functional calculations of electronic structure. Density functional
theory (DFT) is a popular approach to computationally studying molecules and
materials, allowing the design of new pharmaceuticals and materials using
computers. The method has been used in more than 30,000 scientific papers each
year and has resulted some impressive successes in predicting useful molecules.
For example, it has been used to find a better catalyst for making ammonia, an
important starting material in chemical processes producing plastics, textiles,
fertilizers, dyes and other chemicals. DFT was also used to find the world's
hottest superconductor, hydrogen sulfide under pressure. DFT is also used in
many machine-learning applications in the physical sciences. However, even the
best approximate density functionals, the basic component of DFT, have limited
accuracy and ranges of applicability. Dr. Burke and his group are developing DFT
methods that use machine learning to create new approximations in order to
improve the computational results. He is also studying the origins of the
approximations that underly DFT. The resulting improvements in DFT may have
significant technological and economic impacts. Dr. Burke broadens understanding
of DFT by hosting schools around the world and by training both undergraduate
and graduate students in this important cross-disciplinary area of
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Burke plans to improve DFT calculations in
three distinct ways: One approach that is very novel (machine-learning), one
very pragmatic and simple (density-corrected DFT), and one very old and deep
(semiclassical approximations to functionals). Dr. Burke has pioneered the
creation of new functionals with machine learning (ML). These functionals depend
on the density everywhere in space, i.e., are radically different for the local
and semilocal approximations that form the heart of most modern DFT exchange-
correlation functionals. Dr. Burke is investigating approaches to broadening the
applicability of ML density functionals. Regarding density-corrected DFT, he is
evaluating functionals on Hartree-Fock densities. He uses a new method for the
so-called semiclassical approximations which may lead to much more accurate
kinetic energy and exchange energy functionals for realistic systems than any in
use today.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.