* 1856659
* International Conference on the Chemistry of the Organic Solid State (ICCOSS XXIV), June 2019 (New York)
* MPS,DMR
* 03/15/2019,02/29/2020
* Bart Kahr, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 02/29/2020
* USD 12,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: The 24th biennial International Conference on the
Chemistry of the Organic Solid State (ICCOSS XXIV) is a weeklong conference June
16-21, 2019, on the New York University campus in New York City. Inaugurated in
1968 at Brookhaven National Laboratory, the conference showcases frontier
research relating to various aspects of organic solid-state chemistry,
assembling both young and experienced scientists from around the world, from
academic, industrial and government sectors, for productive discourse and
dissemination of groundbreaking research pertaining to the chemistry and physics
of organic crystalline materials. Conference topics impact the commercial
sector, from pharmaceutical materials to organic electronics. The scientific
program includes invited lectures, contributed lectures and poster sessions, a
special session on ?Crystals and the Community? designed for graduate students
and postdoctoral scientists, a workshop on computational crystallography, and an
X-ray diffraction Master Class for student participants. The scope of the
conference is international, with forty-five session chairs and invited speakers
from five continents. The conference is dedicated to principals of inclusion,
with respect to international representation, women, underrepresented
minorities, and people with disabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
DETAILS: The 24th biennial International Conference on the Chemistry of the
Organic Solid State (ICCOSS XXIV) consists of eight technical sessions: (1)
Crystals that Move, (2) Crystals in Computers, (3) Crystals that Grow, (4)
Crystals in Devices, (5) Crystals in Nature and Medicine, (6) Crystals and
Light, (7) Crystals in 2D, (8) Crystals with Holes. These topics represent the
forefront of research in organic solid-state chemistry, from dynamics in
crystals to machine learning for crystal structure prediction to crystals in
medicine. The conference also hosts a special session, ?Crystals and the
Community,? for young emerging scientists, with presentations on (i) Crystals
and Employment, (ii) Crystals and the Law, (iii) The Future of Air Travel, and
(iv) The Future of the University. Additionally, several special sessions
celebrating the 100th birthday of Gerhard Martin Julius Schmidt (Aug. 21, 1919 -
July 12, 1971), and sessions on "Climate Change and Walking the Talk," which
will address approaches to reducing the carbon footprint of scientific
conferences, and "Organic Solid-State Chemistry in the Commercial Sector", which
will address intellectual property as well as industrial-academic interactions.
The conference concludes with computational crystallography workshops for
crystal structure prediction and solution, as well as an X-ray Diffraction
Master Class for student participants. To facilitate a bigger audience and to
test the waters for virtual conferencing (in line with carbon footprint
reduction session), ICCOSS XXIV will live stream the presentations on a private
YouTube channel for distant registrants, using a Twitter feed for
questions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.