* 1856394
* IGE: Graduate Opportunities to Learn Data Science (GOLD): Empowering female and underrepresented graduate students through inclusive data science training
* EDU,DGE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Kimberly Tanner, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* Dorian Davis
* 06/30/2024
* USD 499,957.00

The amount of data generated by modern scientific research is unprecedented.
While this leads to technological advances and scientific discoveries, it also
creates a dire need for a workforce with data science skills. In addition,
society needs a more diverse science workforce, as creative and robust
scientific and technological advances result from more diverse scientific teams.
With the right approach, we can train diverse basic science graduate students in
data science to fill these workforce needs. This National Science Foundation
Innovations of Graduate Education (IGE) award to San Francisco State University
will evaluate a novel, modular approach for inclusive graduate education to
advance data science skills in the basic sciences. The Graduate Opportunities to
Learn Data science (GOLD) strategy will support basic science Masters students,
focusing on women and students from historically underrepresented groups, to (1)
learn computational and statistical skills, (2) apply those skills to their
research projects, and (3) form strong learning and networking communities. This
new approach will create inclusive environments that prepare diverse students to
obtain the interdisciplinary skills necessary to boost their career development.
The GOLD program is modular, so successful components can easily be adopted at
other universities, creating the potential for a significant impact on graduate
education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Graduate Opportunities to Learn Data
science (GOLD) strategy will be implemented through a 12-unit interdisciplinary
certificate program. The program includes a 9-unit series of courses that will
teach programming and data science, using assignments and examples drawn from
biology and chemistry research. A 1-unit class taken twice will help students to
apply these skills to their own thesis research supported by peer-mentors. A
1-unit professional development class will connect students with local
computational biologists and chemists working in academia and industry, helping
the students network and contextualize their training. To ensure an inclusive
environment, GOLD will (1) use validated methods to mitigate well-known barriers
that alienate many women and underrepresented students entering high-tech fields
and (2) provide faculty professional development on inclusive teaching
strategies, active learning, and mentoring. The success of the GOLD strategy
will be assessed based on five student outcomes using a mixed methods approach:
acquisition of computational skills, application of computational skills, career
goals, perception of inclusive learning environments, and scientific identity.
Outcomes will contribute to the current state of pedagogy in graduate education
and enable successful implementation of similar programs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Innovations in Graduate Education (IGE) program is
focused on research in graduate education. The goals of IGE are to pilot, test
and validate innovative approaches to graduate education and to generate the
knowledge required to move these approaches into the broader
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.