* 1856059
* INFEWS/T3 RCN: EngageINFEWS - A Research Coordination Network for Community and Stakeholder Engagement Critical to Food, Energy, and Water Systems
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2024
* Anna-Maria Marshall, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Continuing Grant
* Tom Evans
* 07/31/2024
* USD 749,639.00

Scientific efforts that focus on innovations at the nexus of food, energy, and
water systems (INFEWS) necessarily require that scientists work closely with
non-scientists to produce beneficial, appropriate, and useable sustainability
outcomes. Scientific approaches that involve communities, industry, tribal
organizations, non-governmental organizations, government agencies, and other
stakeholders have been called "community-engaged research" or "stakeholder
engagement." The EngageINFEWS research coordination network (RCN) brings
together a diverse group of scientists and non-scientists to develop and
document a cohesive set of best practices for community engaged research at the
intersection of food, energy, and water systems (FEWS) science. EngageINFEWS
aims to advance knowledge of community-engaged research and to help food,
energy, and water systems (FEWS) science serve the needs of various stakeholders
interested in FEWS. Results of this RCN will serve to ensure that human
communities are equipped with the best possible tools to respond to both chronic
and acute social and environmental changes impacting food, energy, and water
systems (FEWS). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Community- and stakeholder-engaged
research seeks to create a productive and collaborative space for scholarship
that involves non-scientists in scientific work. The framework developed by the
EngageINFEWS research collaborative network (RCN) considers how principles of
collaborative governance may be useful in developing and understanding best
practices for working both in and with communities to improve FEWS research. The
overarching hypothesis of this RCN is that appropriate approaches to community
and stakeholder engagement are determined by the context of specific FEWS
projects and differ based on each context. EngageINFEWS is informed by two
framing questions: 1) How are community and stakeholder engagement best
integrated into interdisciplinary FEWS projects? 2) How can INFEWS teams conduct
productive community and stakeholder engagement to support research and
educational activities? The overarching goal of the EngageINFEWS RCN is to
develop a set of current and best practices across FEWS efforts. This goal is
being achieved using a framework co-created by EngageINFEWS network members that
is iterative, interdisciplinary, reflexive, and evaluative. This includes
creating a long term, sustainable effort which can work with and alongside
existing FEWS initiatives to ensure that research is responsive to the needs,
concerns, and priorities of the people and institutions that are most affected
by FEW system dynamics, vulnerabilities, and change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.