* 1856012
* INFEWS/T1: Climate-induced Extremes on the Food, Energy, Water Nexus (C-FEWS) and the Role of Engineered and Natural Infrastructure
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2024
* Jerry Melillo, Research Foundation CUNY - Advanced Science Research Center
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 06/30/2024
* USD 2,499,998.00

Understanding, mitigating, and adapting to physical climate change and extreme
weather have become a strategic imperative across the U.S. Owing to the
interwoven nature of the food-energy-water systems (FEWS), climate
vulnerabilities are likely to express themselves as major risks to the
environment and society well into the century. This study focuses on two
strategically important regions of the U.S., the Northeast and Midwest, which
together account for nearly half of the U.S. population and GDP. In these
regions, landscapes are intensively managed and transformed; and, major
decisions affecting global food production, biofuels, energy security and
pollution abatement require critical scientific support. To help meet these
challenges, this project will create a multi-regional analysis framework
designed to identify and evaluate response options to extreme weather in the
context of engineered (EI) and natural infrastructure (NI). The framework
enables a systematic assessment of future policy options that will define the
capacity of the regional FEWS to adapt to changing climate extremes and other
environmental stressors from present-day to 2100. The work unites an
interdisciplinary research team from academia and government that will link a
set of existing models to simulate climate dynamics, biogeochemistry, engineered
systems, and economics. The work is driven by a growing consensus on the limits
of traditional engineering to sustainably deliver food, energy, and water, a
situation that could potentially be improved by incorporating nature-based
solutions. Comprehensive frameworks are essential to reveal such opportunities,
especially in light of future climate extremes and their interaction with other
environmental stressors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two hypotheses guide this
research. The first is diagnostic and the second prognostic. Both address the
issue of climate trends and extremes and how these reverberate through the FEWS.
Hypothesis-1is retrospective (1950-present) and generates knowledge about how
the FEWS is "wired together" and how its sensitivity to climate shocks evolves
out of shorter-term events and longer-term trends. The prognostic work under
hypothesis-2 assesses potential interventions and climate adaptation strategies,
including alternate technology deployments, NI management, and economic and
regulatory policies over the next several decades. The work unites an
interdisciplinary team whose unique combination of existing models and data sets
will enable rapid progress in hypotheses testing, identifying causal links and
making projections into the future. This project is designed to quantify FEWS
thresholds, feedbacks and emergent properties as the system responds to climate
change and its extremes, to environmental stressors, and to shifting economics,
technologies and policy forcings. The project also analyzes short-term and
legacy effects over time scales from sub-annual to century and will integrate
FEWS dynamics across multiple disciplines as it considers physical, engineered,
food security and economic sub-systems. These multi-dimensional studies will be
executed using a customized version of an existing computational framework.
While the initial focus is on the Northeast and the Midwest, pilot modeling
experiments and workshops will develop a strategy to generalize this regional
work to the national scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.