* 1856496
* Collaborative Research: Fluid Polyamorphism: Theory, Experiment and Simulation
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* H. Eugene Stanley, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 07/31/2022
* USD 240,091.00

This project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms-A
(CSDM-A) program of the Chemistry Division, supports a collaboration between
scientists and engineers at the University of Maryland at College Park, Arizona
State University, Boston University, and Princeton University. The collaborative
team employs theoretical, computational, and experimental methods to investigate
the different types of molecular structures that can occur in liquids. The
molecules within a liquid, while not as ordered as they would be in a solid
crystal, may still form distinguishable types of structures. This phenomenon,
known as polyamorphism, has been predicted to occur in water at sub-freezing
temperatures and high pressures. The team is employing experimental techniques
such as calorimetry (to measure the flow of heat into and out of samples as they
undergo phase changes), infrared spectroscopy (to characterize the molecular
vibrations in the system), and computational tools (molecular dynamics
simulations) to characterize polyamorphic phases in water and other liquids. In
addition to gaining fundamental insights into the nature of matter, the results
of this investigation may have impacts in fields such as glass technology,
cryobiology, and atmospheric science. The graduate students involved in this
project are gaining experience in both experimental and computational chemistry,
They benefit from personnel exchanges among the different participating
institutions. The broader impacts of the project may include development of
computer hardware based on silicon alternatives, better pharmaceutical
formulations, new routes to low-temperature tissue preservation, computational
models for high school students, and more accurate weather predictions based on
an improved understanding of cloud microphysics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project involves the development and verification of a generic thermodynamic
approach to describe polyamorphism in single-component substances. The unifying
concept is that of equilibrium interconversion between competing molecular or
supramolecular structures. Simulations involve studies of chirality-driven,
liquid-liquid phase separations, critical behaviors and finite-size scaling
under deeply supercooled conditions, and the interplay between crystallization,
fluid phase separation, and fluid structural relaxation. Calorimetry, optical
microscopy, dynamic light scattering, infrared and Raman spectroscopies, and
transmission electron microscopy provide complementary experimental
characterization on polyamorphic systems, including non-crystallizing aqueous
solutions. The two-state thermodynamic formalism provides a unifying theoretical
perspective. The broader impacts of the project may include development of
computer hardware based on silicon alternatives, better pharmaceutical
formulations, new routes to low-temperature tissue preservation, computational
models for high school students, and more accurate weather prediction through
improved understanding of cloud microphysics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.