* 1856613
* New Concepts for Multifunctional Asymmetric Catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Daniel Seidel, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Jon Rainier
* 06/30/2023
* USD 485,000.00

With this Award, the Chemical Synthesis Program of the NSF Division of Chemistry
supports the research of Professor Daniel Seidel of the Department of Chemistry
at the University of Florida. The ability to prepare complex molecules in the
most cost-effective way possible is directly dependent on the availability of
sustainable synthetic methodologies. The new synthetic methods that emerge from
this work may provide novel ways to make biologically important compounds such
as polycyclic ethers, amines, and indole containing substances, which should, in
turn, help advance the chemical industry, which itself is linked to the US
economy. The research provides training for graduate and undergraduate student,
preparing them for future careers in industry and academia. Underrepresented
minority students are actively recruited to participate. Students working on
this project gain expertise in modern synthetic methods and laboratory
techniques while being exposed to an intellectually stimulating and challenging
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to advance the field of
asymmetric catalysis on a fundamental level through exploration of conceptually
new and underdeveloped methods of substrate activation. A major goal is the
development of reactions that produce enantiomerically enriched products through
intervention of chiral ion pairs. Novel Bronsted acids and hydrogen bond donor
catalysts are explored to facilitate enantioselective processes and address
challenging synthetic problems. A focus is on reactions that proceed via the
intermediacy of highly reactive oxocarbenium ions and related species.
Multifunctional catalysts are being developed with the goal of achieving enzyme-
like catalysis under mild reaction conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.