* 1856502
* Control of Sulfite Reductase Activity via Structural Flexibility and a Push-Pull Mechanism for Electron Transfer
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Elizabeth Stroupe, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 06/30/2024
* USD 800,000.00

This work aims to discover fundamental mechanisms for how bacteria metabolize
sulfur by exploring the structure and function of an enzyme known as sulfite
reductase. The topic is of particular importance owing to the rise of
environmental pollution in the form of toxic sulfur byproducts from commercial
pig farms that leech into the environment due to recent flooding in the southern
United States. The proposal will help train undergraduate and graduate-level
researchers in the scientific methods and techniques in which the laboratory
excels. The results from these experiments will inform our understanding of the
basic science of sulfur metabolism as well as provide insights into
technological advances in bioremediation of toxic sulfur compounds.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The experiments outlined in this proposal aim to answer
three questions: 1) how does sulfite reductase function as a macromolecular
oxidoreductase machine? 2) how do the two sulfite reductase subunits interact to
allow for efficient six electron transfers? 3) from where do the protons come to
balance the electron transfer reactions? The experiments will use a variety of
biophysical techniques, including small angle neutron scattering, neutron
diffraction, X-ray diffraction, and cryogenic electron microscopy to
comprehensively analyze the complex interactions and conformations this enzyme
adopts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.