* 1856241
* Coordinated eye growth in sophisticated arthropod visual systems
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Elke Buschbeck, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Anna Allen
* 07/31/2024
* USD 899,998.00

One of the most important features of any image-forming eye is correct focusing,
which relies on the precise spacing between the lens and retina. Substantial
data show how this coordination is established in vertebrates. However, some of
the most basic questions concerning how eye components are coordinated in
invertebrates remain unanswered. This project primarily focuses on Sunburst
Diving Beetles as a particularly valuable system for analyzing these key factors
because they can be manipulated on the molecular level and their larvae have
extremely sophisticated eyes, the focus of which can be quantified. To test for
the generality of the identified mechanisms, and in specific instances dissect
them further, synergistic experiments are performed on the genetically powerful
fly model Drosophila melanogaster. The eyes of both animals are evaluated using
a micro-ophthalmoscope that has recently been developed in the host laboratory.
Preliminary findings suggest that both beetle and fly eyes are able to develop
astonishingly precise focus in the absence of visual feedback. If confirmed,
invertebrate eyes could become an important general model for precisely tuned
organ development that is easily assessable and can be manipulated at the
molecular-genetic level. The execution of this project involves training of many
undergraduate and graduate students, who will also actively participate in
outreach activities. In addition, the project involves the development of
synergistic teaching modules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal eyes of diving
beetle larvae are sophisticated visual organs that rapidly grow to ~130% of
their original size at the second to third instar transition. It is likely that
such eye elongation involves changes in osmotic pressure. The lens also needs to
be reformed, which takes considerably longer (~8 h) and likely involves some of
the 10 lens proteins that have been identified through a previous collaboration
of the PI and Co-PI. Aim 1 of the project uses a unique live imaging technique
(the micro-ophthalmoscope) that allows direct visualization of the retina and
measurement of the refractive states (focusing into infinity or being near- or
far-sighted) of very small invertebrate eyes, including those of the diving
beetle larvae and individual D. melanogaster ommatidia. This technique is used
in combination with traditional optical methods and behavioral tests in diving
beetles to test if visual input is necessary for proper eye growth in these
animals. Aim 2 uses physical manipulations and pharmacology to evaluate the
contribution of osmotic pressure to eye-tube growth and aim 3 uses in situ
hybridization, immunostaining, and RNAi knockdowns of the identified lens
proteins to investigate how the complex Thermonectus lenses change focal
lengths. Targeted parallel experiments on D. melanogaster explore the generality
of specific findings. It is expected that this integrative approach will provide
some of the first data to address the long overdue question of how eye growth is
coordinated in arthropods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.