* 1856772
* Exploring and Understanding the Effect of Cation-Pi Interactions in Asymmetric Catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Sheryl Wiskur, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 06/30/2023
* USD 450,000.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms-B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Sheryl Wiskur of the Department of
Chemistry and Biochemistry at the University of South Carolina is attempting to
understand how intermolecular interactions control chemical reactions in order
to rationally design catalysts. Optically active intermediates are of increasing
in importance in the pharmaceutical and agrochemical industries. New approaches
to obtaining these commercially important compounds are constantly being
developed. It is important to understand the interactions that aid in achieving
selective product formation in order to rationally design catalysts. This
research investigates how the intermolecular interactions, termed a cation-pi
interactions, are involved in controlling selectivity. The research could aid
the development of more efficient asymmetric catalysts, which are needed in drug
development and the manufacture of many other chemicals. The project also takes
into account the valuable training graduate students receive while carrying out
the experiments to understand this supramolecular interaction. Broader impacts
include the mentoring of women scientists to aid in retaining women in
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Delocalized cations are often proposed to aid in
controlling asymmetric reactions through cation-pi interactions between the
substrate and catalyst, yet delocalized cations have not been as widely studied.
This project explores this supramolecular interaction in two ways. The
thermodynamics of binding of four common organocatalyst core structures will be
studied. The team will also investigate how the binding trends relate to the
rate and selectivity of a model reaction as electronics on the pi system are
altered. The electrostatics of binding are explored computationally to
understand binding orientations and localization of charge. The electronic
changes in the cation (i.e., substituted catalysts) are examined to understand
how those changes affect the same model reaction in terms of thermodynamics,
kinetics, and selectivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.