* 1856292
* Elucidating the Mechanisms of Intercellular Movement
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Aman Husbands, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 07/31/2024
* USD 899,997.00

Cells within both plants and animals must be able to communicate with each other
to coordinate growth, development and function. In plants, many proteins move
between cells via structures referred to as plasmodesmata - channels that link
neighboring cells and provide a direct pathway for the exchange of information
and materials. These same channels also serve as conduits for the movement of
viruses between plant cells and thus the systemic spread of disease throughout
the plants. In this project an important protein in root development and leaf
vein patterning in many different species of plants, termed SHORT-ROOT (SHR), is
examined. Loss of SHR movement results in abnormal development and stunting of
growth. Here SHR is used as a model for understanding how plant proteins move
between cells and coordinate development and as a potential tool for
understanding how economically important plant virus move between cells. This
research engages students from all levels and is used in the inspiration of art
exhibits produced by undergraduate students in the Philadelphia area.
Undergraduate students at the University of Pennsylvania are actively involved
in this research, as are art students from the Philadelphia Academy of Fine Arts
(PAFA) who draw inspiration from the research for science inspired
designs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cell-to-cell communication is essential for the
development and survival of multicellular organisms. In plants, such exchange of
information is frequently achieved by the intercellular trafficking of
transcription factors. It is now recognized that these proteins move via
plasmodesmata, highly specialized membrane-lined channels interconnecting
individual cells. However, the mechanisms by which proteins access plasmodesmata
remain unknown. The movement of the non-cell-autonomous transcription factor,
SHORT-ROOT (SHR) is highly regulated at the cellular level and requires an
active endomembrane system, intact microtubules and interaction with endosome-
associated proteins. Proteomic and ligand induced binding assay are used to
identify proteins that interact with SHR and promote the cell-to-cell movement
of SHR. Movement of SHR serves as a tractable entry point into understanding the
widespread movement of protein in plants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award was
co-funded by the Cellular Dynamics and Function Program and the Genetic
Mechanisms Program, both in the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences,
in the Directorate for Biological Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.