* 1856522
* Chirality-Driven Self-Assembly of Dual Catalytic Dendrimers: Application Toward One-Pot Tandem Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Hector Palencia, University of Missouri-Kansas City
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 07/31/2024
* USD 393,095.00

In living cells many simultaneous chemical transformations occur with no
interference between the enzymes that catalyze them. To accomplish this Nature
has evolved to incorporate catalyst sites within enzyme pockets or by physical
separation using membranes. The successful construction of artificial analogues
of such frameworks would reduce catalyst deactivation and eliminate undesirable
side reactions. These are important goals in catalysis with many potential
practical applications. With funding from the Chemical Catalysis Program of the
Chemistry Division, Dr. Moteki of the University of Missouri Kansas City is
developing synthetic materials possessing multiple types of incompatible
catalyst sites where the sites are spatially isolated. Together with Dr.
Palencia of the University of Nebraska Kearney, the catalytic efficiency and
reaction scope of these catalysts are being tested. Drs. Moteki and Palencia are
actively recruiting students from local high schools and community colleges,
targeting underrepresented minority students, and providing them with early
research experience. The research experience will increasing retention, and
enhancement of underserved populations in STEM field. Summer workshops for
community and small college faculty are also being conducted. Such efforts are
crucial in forming new generations of young research
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tandem-catalyzed reactions have been widely
recognized as one of the most efficient atom economical and environmentally
friendly processes, due to minimization of waste generation. In particular,
orthogonal tandem catalysis, which features two or more distinct catalysts with
differing mechanisms, offers potential for higher process efficiency. Over the
past few decades only a handful of successful examples have been reported
primarily due to the difficulty in creating compartmented macro-structures that
spatially separate incompatible catalysts. This proposal aims at building a
multi-component catalytic dendrimer complex via chiral self-discrimination,
which enables the in situ quantitative assembly of various multi-domain
dendrimers through metal-chiral ligand interactions. This allows tuning of the
microenvironment far easier than conventional covalently assembled systems,
making it a more attractive system for reaction screening targeting various
multi-step tandem chemical transformations. Our research team aims to understand
the underlying catalyst structure-function relationship of the dual catalytic
dendrimer by varying polarity as well as architectural design of each catalytic
domains. In addition, the efficiency and versatility of dual catalytic
dendrimers will be investigated, by using three different types of tandem
reactions as models; i) substrate-selective tandem catalysis, ii) tandem
reaction involving a catalytically reversible step, and iii) tandem reaction
involving competitive catalytic pathways. The operational simplicity in reaction
screening and the dendron preparation synthetic steps is ideal for training the
next generation of synthetic chemists. Dr. Moteki and Dr. Palencia are actively
engaged in outreach activity, they will host an annual workshop as means of
recruiting of underserved minority students from local high schools and
community colleges for summer research internship in their research
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.