* 1856547
* Developing Late Metal Catalytic Systems for Aerobic Partial Oxidation of Alkanes
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Karen Goldberg, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 08/31/2023
* USD 553,333.00

There is an urgent need for new technologies to enable the economically-viable
and environmentally-responsible use of the large amounts of natural gas
currently being accessed due to recent innovations in hydrolytic fracturing and
directional drilling. New methods to convert natural gas directly to higher
value fuels and chemicals would limit the current practice of flaring (direct
burning to carbon dioxide without energy capture). Currently, more than 140,500
million cubic meters of natural gas is wasted each year in the flaring process.
This research project seeks to convert hydrocarbons such as natural gas, to
higher value commodity chemicals by developing new catalysts that speed-up the
desired chemical transformation efficiently and effectively. Cost, availability,
and its benign nature, make oxygen/air the best choice of oxidant for large-
scale chemical oxidation. Professor Goldberg is committed to mentoring and
encouraging a diverse group of students to pursue careers in science. Her
students learn to develop and analyze chemical reactions and scientific
arguments, critically evaluate their data, use advanced laboratory techniques
and modern analytical and spectroscopic methods, search and manage the expansive
scientific literature, and communicate effectively with other scientists and lay
audiences. Through participation in science outreach events and programming at
the University of Pennsylvania and in the Philadelphia Public Schools, the
research team educates the general public about the important role that
catalysis plays in their lives. High school students in the greater Philadelphia
area learn that scientists come from all backgrounds, and that this diversity is
crucial in the sciences as it spurs innovation and accelerates the finding of
new knowledge and solutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project
targets the development of robust catalysts that can selectively activate and
functionalize carbon-hydrogen (C-H) bonds using air or oxygen as the oxidant.
New technologies are needed to enable the economically viable and responsible
use of the large amounts of natural gas that are currently being accessed due to
the recent innovations in hydrolytic fracturing and directional drilling
methods. To this end, the research team on this project is investigating new
mechanisms for the activation of alkane C-H bonds. Detailed studies of the
reactions of organometallic alkyl compounds (the metal products of C-H
activation) with oxygen are carried out to gain the mechanistic understanding
that is needed for the design and development of methods to use oxygen as the
oxidant in selective partial oxidations of natural gas. In parallel with the
laboratory research, the project trains a workforce of scientists who is needed
to address the many future technological challenges. This project is providing
the next generation of scientists with important training and skills to allow
them to be creative and effective in solving global
challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.