* 1856746
* RUI: Bimolecular Collisions in Ionic Liquids
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Miroslav Peric, The University Corporation, Northridge
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 06/30/2023
* USD 390,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms-A
(CSDM-A) program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Miroslav Peric and his
students at the California State University (CSU) Northridge are studying the
collisions between molecules dissolved in room temperature ionic liquids (ILs).
ILs are a class of liquids which are being used as environmentally-friendlier
substitutes for volatile organic solvents. The frequency of molecular collisions
in a liquid can provide an idea of how quickly chemical reactions can take place
in that liquid. ILs are different from other liquids because they are composed
of positively and negatively charged molecules (charged atoms or molecules are
called "ions", hence the name ionic liquid). The current understanding of
molecular collisions in IL liquids is limited. Water, alcohol, and gasoline are
common examples of liquids composed of neutral (non-charged) molecules.
Professor Peric dissolves "probe" molecules that have magnetic properties into
the ILs. He then uses Electron Paramagnetic Resonance (EPR) spectroscopy to
detect changes in the probe molecule's magnetic properties as the probe collides
with the IL. EPR measures the magnetic properties of electrons in atoms or
molecules. A detailed understanding of collision events in ILs, and how these
relate to the structure of the ILs may ultimately allow us to design ILs for
specific technological applications. The undergraduate and graduate students
working on this research project are gaining valuable exposure to a wide range
of disciplines, from solution chemistry to physics and quantum mechanics to
complex data analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is based on the EPR
Heisenberg Spin Exchange (HSE) technique that can separate the effects of
dipole-dipole and spin exchange interactions in viscous media. This separation
enables the measurement of the bimolecular collisions of neutral and charged
nitroxides in viscous liquids such as ILs. The translational and rotational
diffusion of neutral, singly-charged and doubly-charged nitroxide spin probes in
ILs composed of cations and anions of variable sizes is measured as a function
of temperature. The choice of the nitroxide spin probes allows for an
understanding of the effect of charge on bimolecular collisions of spin probes
in ILs. The cations are of a homologous series of substituted imidazoles (ethyl
to octyl). This series of cations allows the Peric team to clarify the role of
the hydrophobic part of ILs in solution phase dynamics. Similarly, the anions
are of two different sizes (single atom anions and large multi-atom anions) in
order to understand the influence of the anion on the translation of solute
molecules in ILs. The results are interpreted in terms of the fractional Stokes-
Einstein relation and the Cohen-Turnbull free volume equation. The broader
impacts of this project include an understanding of transport properties and the
kinetics of chemical reactions in ILs, as well as an opportunity for the CSU
Northridge students to gain experience in experimental research, cutting-edge
instrumentation, and theory, all of which are valuable as the students enter the
modern chemical sciences workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.