* 1856484
* Nonlinear Chemical Dynamics
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Irving Epstein, Brandeis University
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 06/30/2023
* USD 540,000.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms-A
(CSDM-A) program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Irving R. Epstein and his
research group at Brandeis University are studying the properties of chemical
reactions that are far from equilibrium. Chemical equilibrium is a condition
where a chemical reaction has not ceased, but the forward reaction to produce
products and the backward reactions to produce reactants balance each other such
that the concentration of reactants and products do not change. Chemical
reactions that have not achieved equilibrium shift to reach this condition, and
interesting things can result in the process. The Epstein group is conducting
experiments wherein complex three-dimensional patterns of chemicals form in
solution. Epstein is also developing theoretical models to explain the emergence
and evolution of these structures. Such work may provide insights into how
structures form in biological systems. The research group is also employing 3D
printing technologies to study patterns on three-dimensional surfaces. They
investigate patterns that grow on expanding domains, analogous to the situation
in developing embryos and organisms. Finally, the Epstein group is also
investigating how chemical reactions may be used to drive the motion of certain
materials, a concept that could lead to primitive "soft robots." The post-
doctoral and graduate student researchers involved in this project are gaining
experience in experimental laboratory techniques and computer simulation of
complex chemical reactions. In addition to the training and professional
development, the educational impacts of the project include continued work by
Professor Epstein and his students to incorporate nonlinear chemical dynamics
into the undergraduate curriculum. They also conduct STEM outreach to
underrepresented minorities and generally disadvantaged communities via the
Brandeis Science Posse, a program founded by Epstein.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project explores macroscopic pattern formation originating in reaction-diffusion
and related processes involving oscillating chemical reactions. The chemical
systems include the Belousov-Zhabotinsky reaction (BZ), the chlorite-iodide-
malonic acid (CIMA) system, and the chlorine dioxide-iodine-malonic acid
(CDIMA). The Epstein group is engaging five general areas of investigation: the
characterization turing patterns formed in three dimensions, pattern formation
in growing domains; patterns arising from differential growth (as opposed to
simple reaction-diffusion); coupled oscillators, and locomotion and chemo-
mechanical transduction in BZ-gel systems. All experimental work is supported by
model simulations. In addition to the training and professional development of a
post-doctoral fellow and a graduate student, the educational impacts of the
project include continued work by Professor Epstein and his students to
incorporate nonlinear chemical dynamics into the undergraduate curriculum. They
also conduct STEM outreach to underrepresented minorities and generally
disadvantaged communities via the Brandeis Science Posse, a program founded by
Epstein.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.