* 1856421
* Collaborative Research:  ARTS:  Understanding Tropical Invertebrate Diversity Through Integrative Revisionary Systematics and Training
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2024
* Kristine White, Georgia College
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Fujita
* 06/30/2024
* USD 99,686.00

The goal of this project is to document the biodiversity of marine organisms of
the southern Caribbean and to train the next generation of researchers working
on ecologically and economically important, but under-studied marine
invertebrates (clams, sea slugs, flatworms, ribbon worms, seed shrimp, and
scuds). Conceptually, this project focuses on three major challenges in
understanding biodiversity: (1) documenting global biodiversity and its
importance to the well-being of the nation, (2) identifying and describing new
species, and (3) determining the relationships within and among animal groups.
Taxonomy, the science of finding, describing and naming organisms, is vital to
all biological research and to understanding and conserving biodiversity. The
on-going effort to survey, inventory, and preserve the ocean's biological
diversity is threatened by a shortage of taxonomic expertise. This project will
train the next generation of young US STEM researchers to become experts who can
document biodiversity in these groups of animals, apply novel methods to help
resolve the relationships between these groups, and ultimately understand the
origins of animal life. This effort will also promote conservation of marine
animals, which are economically important, but are poorly documented compared to
terrestrial organisms. It will also aid in the detection of invasive species.
This project will produce new species descriptions for animals in the focal
groups, generate species lists for Panama and the southern Caribbean, and will
contribute data to an online biodiversity website and field guide.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The activities fall into three parts with complementary
aims. (1) Taxonomic research will include species descriptions, taxonomic
revisions, and development of regional check-lists and keys within the six
taxonomic groups. This work will emphasize the integration of conventional
morphological and molecular characters with non-traditional characters such as
type and morphology of larvae or gametes, novel anatomical details, and 3D
imaging. Established experts will work closely with experts-in-training to
review and revise these animals from the Caribbean, which are in particular need
of taxonomic attention. (2) The project will support six 14-day workshops mixing
US and international experts and trainees at the Smithsonian Tropical Research
Institute tropical field station in Panama. These workshops will train
participants in methods for identification, improve understanding of
relationships among the groups, provide hands-on experience with tropical
diversity, and build lasting international collaborations to promote US
biodiversity research and improve accessibility to international field
locations. (3) Informatics resources will be developed to make the basic skills
and vocabulary involved in taxonomy of the six groups globally accessible to
expert and non-specialist workers in biodiversity and conservation. This work
will involve the development of a package of online tools for each group,
including a set of "how-to" videos, illustrated glossaries of anatomical terms,
and checklists and digital keys of local species. This toolkit will be designed
to facilitate rapid taxonomic documentation and to increase the precision of
field identifications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.