* 1856467
* International Conference on Mathematical Relativity
* MPS,DMS
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2019
* Pengzi Miao, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Krishnan Shankar
* 12/31/2019
* USD 29,902.00

This award supports participation in the conference "A Celebration of
Mathematical Relativity in Miami" held in Coral Gables, Florida, during December
14 - 16, 2018. The Einstein equations, which are the field equations of general
relativity, describe how spacetime universe curves in the presence of matter; it
is this curvature that is responsible for the effects of gravity. General
relativity is a remarkably accurate theory, which describes the formation of
black holes, predicts the existence of gravitational waves (now famously
detected by LIGO), and governs the large-scale behavior of the entire cosmos.
The aim of this conference is to gather together leading experts at the
intersection of mathematical general relativity and geometric analysis to
discuss recent advances and new directions of research in this area, and to
expose graduate students and young mathematicians to these developments.

Mathematical general relativity is a very rapidly developing area of research.
Geometric analysis has played a remarkable role in this development, beginning
with the singularity theorems of Hawking and Penrose. Many advances have ensued
in both the elliptic and hyperbolic aspects of the theory, including
developments in the theory of black holes, in understanding of Penrose's cosmic
censorship conjecture, and in the study of manifolds of nonnegative scalar
curvature. Geometric inequalities, such as the positive mass theorem and the
Riemannian Penrose inequality, play a deep and fundamental role in general
relativity. In recent years new geometric inequalities, involving physical
quantities such as mass, angular momentum, charge, etc., have given rise to many
interesting open questions. Studies of initial data sets for gravitational
fields have proven to be fruitful areas of research. The initial data for the
Cauchy problem associated to the Einstein field equations are required to
satisfy the so-called constraint equations, a system of nonlinear partial
differential equations, the geometric origin of which are the Gauss-Codazzi
equations. Great progress has been made in developing techniques for solving the
constraint equations, both by the conformal method and by gluing methods. The
development of the theory of marginally outer trapped surfaces, which are
general initial data versions of minimal surfaces, has led to results concerning
the topology of black holes (and the region exterior to black holes), and has
made possible a direct proof of the spacetime positive mass theorem in
dimensions less than eight. The recent proof of the (Riemannian) positive mass
theorem (in all dimensions and without spin assumption) has greatly advanced
knowledge about geometric singularities and their roles in initial data sets.
Efforts to obtain a localized measure of mass, which includes a contribution
from the gravitational field, have led to various notions of quasi-local mass,
and continues to be a very active area of research. Geometric flows have played
a fundamental role in many of these developments. The conference will address
all these topics. Details of the program are available at the program webpage:
http://www.math.miami.edu/gg70

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.