* 1856342
* New coupled-cluster methods for linear and non-linear core-level spectroscopies in gas and condensed phases
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2022
* Anna Krylov, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 04/30/2022
* USD 510,000.00

Professor Anna Krylov of the University of Southern California (USC) is
supported by an award from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods
program in the Division of Chemistry. Chemists use light to look at molecules
and materials. The use of light can help unravel how chemical reactions occur,
the structure of molecules, and how these structures influence the properties of
materials and biological molecules. Professor Krylov uses highly accurate
theoretical tools to model what happens when molecules interact with very
intense and high energy light. Her research has important applications in
understanding photosynthesis and solar energy conversions, among other areas.
This project includes training and mentoring graduate students and postdocs for
careers in academia and industry. The project also makes contributions to the
research infrastructure by integrating new computer codes into widely used
programs (Q-CHEM and SPARTAN) and making them available to the broad chemistry
community. The Q-CHEM software is given free of charge to major high-performance
computing facilities in the U.S.A. and abroad. Professor Krylov is an active
contributor to the Women in Science and Engineering program at USC. She
maintains the "Women in Theoretical and Computational Chemistry, Material
Science, and Biochemistry" webpage and Google group, promoting research by
women.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Krylov and her research group are extending highly
reliable coupled-cluster and equation-of-motion coupled-cluster methods to the
domain of core-level ionized and excited states by exploiting core-valence
separation and damped response theory (or complex polarization propagator)
approaches. They are developing theoretical framework and efficient computer
codes for modeling XES (X-ray emission), RIXS (resonant inelastic X-ray
scattering), X2PA (X-ray 2-photon absorption), and XSFG (X-ray sum-frequency
generation) spectra. The new theoretical methods and software aid both
fundamental and applied research using advanced light sources by allowing first-
principles atomic-level modeling of optical properties such as X2PA, XSFG, and
RIXS cross sections, XES spectra, and more. Professor Krylov is continuing her
close collaborations with experimentalists to guide and calibrate theoretical
developments, as well as help to design new experiments and interpret the
experimental results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.