* 1856587
* The hydraulic legacy of C4 evolution in the grasses: Phylogenetic, physiological and genetic controls on water transport
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/2019,04/30/2024
* Brent Helliker, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 04/30/2024
* USD 858,571.00

Grasslands, savannas and croplands cover about 40% of the terrestrial biosphere
and grasses represent all major grain crops, yet little is known about how
anatomy affects water movement through grasses. The evolution and expansion of
grassland biomes 20-30 million years ago was due to an increase in aridity;
therefore, grass evolution, physiology and ecology are inextricably linked to
the acquisition, use and movement of water. Research into the evolution of the
C4 photosynthetic pathway from the C3 photosynthetic pathway has forged
collaborations across evolutionary biologists, physiologists, paleo-ecologists
and plant geneticists who are attempting to engineer C4 photosynthesis into
rice, yet comparatively little of this research has been focused on the
hydraulic side of C4 evolution. The aim of this research is for a better
understanding of how grass leaf anatomy, in concert with the evolution of C4
photosynthesis, controls water transport through a leaf. This research will
provide a better physiological, theoretical and genetic understanding of
hydraulic controls and limits in grasses. Targets for improving crop performance
will be identified, while adding insight into the importance of leaf hydraulics
in the evolution of C4 photosynthesis. Additionally, new research-related
teaching modules will be developed for the University of Pennsylvania's Biology
Professional Development Program. The program increases the biology knowledge of
high school teachers in the Philadelphia School district, a heavily-underfunded
school system. This project will also train a postdoc, a graduate student, and
several undergraduates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;C4 grasses evolved from C3 grasses
more than 20 times independently over tens of millions of years within the
PACMAD clade of grasses. By allowing phylogeny to guide the examination of
function, and using a combination of theory and experimentation, the following
hypotheses will be addressed in this project: 1. The primary selective pressures
for the evolution of C4 changed (e.g. CO2 vs. water availability) depending on
when C4 evolved within a lineage, the effects of which are still measurable
today. 2. Upon the evolution of C4 within a grass lineage, there was selection
for hydraulic reorganization within the leaf, notably a decrease in leaf
hydraulic conductance with no decrease in vein density. 3. By examining
hydraulic and anatomical differences within a phylogenetic context, insight can
be gained on the controls of water flux in the within-xylem (liquid water) and
outside-xylem (both liquid and vapor) components of the flux pathway in relation
to photosynthetic variation. 4. Genome-level mapping of recombinant inbred lines
of a Setaria viridis x S. italica cross will (i) give mechanistic insight into
how changes in hydraulic architecture affect water flux through leaves, and (ii)
identify targets for crop improvement. An integrative approach using
physiological measurements of hydraulic conductance in concert with leaf-water
enrichment of heavy stable isotopes will be used in an iterative fashion with
fine-scale, physical modeling of water flux through leaves to determine the
anatomical controls on leaf hydraulics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.