* 1856518
* Nanophotonic Strategies for Making Molecular Movies of Catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Randall Goldsmith, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 06/30/2024
* USD 464,663.00

In this study, supported by the Chemical Structure Dynamics and Mechanism
(CSDM-A), Chemical Catalysis (CAT) and Chemical Measurement and Imaging (CMI)
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Randall Goldsmith and his research
team at the University of Wisconsin Madison seek to better understand how
chemical catalysts perform their important functions. Catalysts allow difficult
chemical reactions to be proceed, but how they do this may involve many
individual steps that are difficult to follow. Professor Goldsmith is using a
new approach that combines optical microscopy, the light-emitting behaviors of
certain molecules (in this case, a property called "fluorescence"), and
nanotechnology to to allow observation of single catalyst molecules. The
Goldsmith team is essentially developing "molecular movies" of an individual
operational catalysts. This research project is not only providing new insights
into catalytic chemical reactions, but also developing a laboratory technique
that may be useful in many other chemistry, biology and materials science
investigations. The students involved in this research are gaining a wide range
of skills, from chemical synthesis, optical microscopy, and nano-
fabrication.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In particular, the project focuses on
palladium cross-coupling reactions, which are widely employed in the
pharmaceutical industry. A critical element is the use of nanophotonic devices
that sculpt light to make it substantially smaller than the diffraction-limit,
allowing observation of single-molecule dynamics at chemically relevant
concentrations. Individual catalyst molecules are immobilized in these devices
and studied via single-molecule fluorescence microscopy. A major readout is the
time-varying rate constant of a single catalyst molecule and the timescale of
transient intermediates. The broader impacts of this work include the societal
benefits of a mechanistic tool that can inform the design of the next generation
of catalyst molecules, the training of students in interdisciplinary chemical
sciences, and the development of single-molecule visualization demos that can be
deployed in schools to broaden participation of STEM
minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.