* 1856705
* Probing the Solution-Phase Dynamics of l3-Iodanes and Relation to Reactivity
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2019,09/30/2022
* David Stuart, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 09/30/2022
* USD 454,616.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamic &amp; Mechanism B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor David Stuart of the Department of
Chemistry at Portland State University is studying organoiodine chemical
reagents. The goal of this research is to understand how the molecular structure
and the reaction medium interact to influence overall behavior of these
compounds in chemical reactions. The project lies at the interface of physical
and synthetic organic chemistry with eventual applications in health,
agriculture, and technology; it is well-suited to the training of scientists in
a higher-education setting. Portland State University is a diverse institution
and is well-positioned for training underrepresented students in sciences.
Collaboration between the Professor Stuart's group and the fine-chemical
industry will facilitate a more rapid translation of fundamental discoveries
into applications by the broader scientific
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hypervalent iodine reagents are routinely used
as catalysts, initiators, reagents, and oxidants in chemical synthesis because
they integrate well with established and emerging reactivity paradigms such as
ionic, metal-mediated/catalyzed, and radical reactions. Electrostatic
interactions are an integral component of bonding in the expanded coordination
of hypervalent iodine compounds and the hypothesis is that they occur during
aggregation and Lewis acid-base chemistry with a direct impact on reactivity and
applications. The goal of this project is to unravel the structure and solvent
effects that influence solution-phase interactions of hypervalent iodine
compounds with a clear link to reaction chemistry. This is to be achieved by
synthesizing designed libraries of monoaryl and diaryliodonium compounds,
conducting nuclear magnetic resonance and mass spectrometry titration
experiments, fitting titration data to binding models by non-linear regression,
and analyzing linear Free-energy relationships and reaction kinetics. A deeper
understanding of the behavior of hypervalent iodine in the solution phase will
be obtained by 1) quantifying and exploiting the Lewis acidity of
aryl(2,4,6-trimethoxyphenyl)iodonium salts and related derivatives, 2) assessing
the influence of solution-phase aggregation of these salts on reactivity and
selectivity, and 3) activation of aryl iodanes with Bronsted-Lowry
acids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.