
* 0455266
* Moduli Spaces that are Upper Half Plane Quotients and the Inverse Galois Problem
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 09/01/2004,03/07/2006
* Michael Fried,MT,Montana State University - Billings
* Continuing grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2006
* USD 58,883.00

MODULAR TOWERS AND THE IGP OVER THE RATIONALS: Often researchers use algebraic
relations in two variables x and y over a field to describe significant data.
Some examples are sets of values x having an (x,y) with entries in the field
that satisfy the relation. One of these is the Davenport's problem of
determining equivalence classes of polynomials according to their value sets
over finite fields. Describing complex multiplication fields, generated by those
x with (x,y) a special elliptic curve torsion point, is a variant. A relation
with a data variable x produces a permutation group G: The Galois group. The
investigator treats these as cases of the Inverse Galois Problem (IGP). One goal
is to decide, from certain lists of relations, if some have the rational numbers
as definition field. Serious group theory helped solve Davenport's 1965 problem
and Schur's exceptional polynomial problem (1919; see below). Further, modular
curves reveal complex multiplication to be a version of Schur's problem. Having
command of all finite simple groups has many applications. One is to list those
groups attached to exceptional polynomials. Knowing many characters of Chevalley
groups showed Thompson and Voelklein where to find series of solutions to the
IGP. Yet, it will require more than massive group theory to solve the whole IGP.
The investigator uses Modular Towers, a modular curve generalization, to finesse
unknowable group classifications. He and his students let a known group G, and a
prime p dividing the order of G, seed the base level of a Modular Tower. Higher
tower levels code relations with mysterious groups covering G related to p.
Coherent maps between the tower levels replace details on these intricate
covering groups. Work of Y. Ihara and J.P. Serre inspire showing that Modular
Towers has many properties of their special, modular curve, case. For example,
high tower levels for a G with no Z/p quotient should have no rational points.
For certain groups G, and the prime p=2, this extends Serre's program on spin
structures. The investigator applies new spin-like structures to all cases when
p is 2 and to all primes p.

PRACTICAL CRYPTOGRAPHY AND IGP OVER FINITE FIELDS: Modern cryptosystems aim to
secure electronic transfers of data. Exceptional functions act as permutations
on infinitely many finite fields. A special case of the Inverse Galois Problem
over finite fields asks how to construct exceptional functions. These scrambling
functions look simple. Users can easily apply them (up to 1993, all came from
the 19th century). Still, finding them has been difficult. Fried (UCI),
Guralnick (USC) and Saxl (Cambridge) nearly classify them. This solves old
problems (Dickson 1896 and Carlitz 1965). They also produce unexpected new
examples. Their best discovery is that exceptional polyomial Galois groups
(excluding now well-understood cases) have the affine geometric property. This
is useful for it gives the degrees of exceptional polynomials. Yet, it is also a
difficult challenge: There can be no final description of all affine groups. The
investigator with A. Mezard approaches affine groups by generalizing to all
algebraic relations over finite fields Grothendieck's famous results for tame
relations. Applications for exceptional functions alone include ways to
manipulate data for encryption and to assure integrity. This will mean faster,
more efficient and accurate file back-ups; more stable software; and more secure
data transfers.


