
* 0515842
* Recent Developments in Higher Dimensional Algebraic Geometry Conference
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 01/01/2006,06/14/2005
* Vyacheslav Shokurov,MD,Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 12/31/2006
* USD 17,000.00

The Johns Hopkins University Department of Mathematics, together with the
Japan-U.S. Mathematics Institute (JAMI), will hold a conference and workshop in
March 2006 under the title "Recent developments in higher dimensional algebraic
geometry". The main focus of the proposed activity will be birational geometry.
Finding good birational models of algebraic varieties and understanding the way
these appear is the main achievement of the minimal model program. The activity
will cover related topics of interest: derived categories, Fano varieties, Mori-
Fano fiber spaces, explicit 3-fold geometry, minimal log discrepancies,
singularities, rational curves and connectivity.

Geometry is one of the oldest mathematical subjects. The Greeks were describing
geometrical objects using congruence (of segments, angles, ...) and incidences
(collinearity, tangency, ...). Congruence evolved into the modern-day
differential geometry. Incidences evolved into algebraic geometry simply by
replacing geometrical shapes by the equations defining them. The objects of
study of algebraic geometry are called algebraic varieties. Understanding the
structure of algebraic varieties is of fundamental importance from both the
standpoint of algebraic geometry alone, and from that of the related disciplines
and areas of application - mathematical physics, computational geometry, number
theory, and others. Knowledge of algebraic varieties is also important in
applied fields, such as optimization, control, statistics, economics and
bioinformatics, coding, complexity and communications.
