
* 0531048
* Prairie Analysis Seminar 2005
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 10/01/2005,06/29/2005
* Marianne Korten,KS,Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 09/30/2006
* USD 9,580.00

ABSTRACT

The Prairie Analysis Seminar, an ongoing joint project of Kansas State
University and the University of Kansas, has had four very successful annual
meetings in 2001-2004. The 2005 meeting will be held at Kansas State University
on October 14-15. The main speaker is Carlos Kenig of the University of Chicago
who will give two one-hour lectures. Professor Kenig's work is broad and far
reaching in the field of harmonic analysis and the application of harmonic
analysis and analysis techniques to partial differential equations, including
non-linear evolution equations and free boundary problems. Professors James
Colliander of the University of Toronto and Alexandru Ionescu of the University
of Wisconsin will each give a one-hour lecture on topics related to Kenig's
lecture. Contributed talks will be solicited and the conference will include a
session on discussion and open problems.

Differential equations provide mathematical models in physics, engineering, and
indeed throughout the sciences. Solutions or an understanding of the behavior of
solutions can give insight into the physical system being modeled and can be
used to predict behavior. The main lecturers invited are known for their uses of
analysis and harmonic analysis techniques to study a variety of equations that
arise in mathematical models, making this conference of interest to researchers
in several fields: differential equations and their models, analysis, and
harmonic analysis. This annual conference has become important in the
geographical area, due to the quality of the meeting and the lack of other
conferences and meetings in analysis in this region, especially in the fall. The
Prairie Analysis Seminar is now quickly becoming a tradition with a national and
even international reputation. The seminar is structured so as to keep costs for
the host university and participants to a minimum, allowing a wide range of
mathematicians to attend. The main speakers chosen are at the forefront of their
field, giving all in attendance the opportunity to learn of their recent work.
Equally important is that the conference will allow participants to give
contributed talks. This is critically important for graduate students,
postdoctoral researchers, and those early in their careers, to increase their
visibility and awareness of their work in the mathematical community. The first
four editions attracted a number of researchers from small universities and
colleges throughout the region, in addition to those attending from major
research institutions. Many of thesefaculty maintain research careers in spite
of geographical isolation and welcome the rare opportunity to meet with other
mathematicians. Strong connections with these small universities and colleges
are mutually beneficial, as these schools produce many excellent undergraduate
students who can be attracted to graduate education in mathematics and sciences.
Social events planned will increase the scientific interaction and foster useful
personal connections among the participants.


