
* 0532564
* Summer Research Conferences: A Continuing Collaboration Between AMS, IMS & SIAM
* DMS,INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
* 09/01/2006,08/31/2006
* John Ewing,RI,American Mathematical Society
* Standard Grant
* Dean Evasius
* 02/29/2008
* USD 144,859.00

Since 1981, the American Mathematical Society (AMS), the Institute for
Mathematical Statistics (IMS), and the Society for Industrial and Applied
Mathematics (SIAM) have managed a program of research conferences, held during
the summers at various locations and funded by the National Science Foundation.
During this time, more than 9,000 U.S. mathematical scientists have participated
in these conferences, advancing their research and making connections with other
scientists. For many young mathematicians, these summer conferences have played
a crucial role as they enter a specific area of mathematical research.

This project supports four additional one-week conferences in this series to be
held during the summer of 2006 at the Snowbird Conference Center in Utah. These
four conferences were the results of the traditional solicitation for the Summer
Research Conferences (SRCS) proposals carried out during 2004. They were
thoroughly reviewed in February 2005 by twelve-member Selection Committee
jointly appointed by the AMS, IMS and SIAM.

The four one-week conferences are: 1. Integer Points in Polyhedra: Geometry,
Number Theory, Representation Theory, Algebra, Optimization, Statistics 2.
Representations of Real Reductive Lie Groups 3. Machine and Statistical
Learning: Prediction and Discovery 4. Discrete and Computational Geometry-Twenty
Years Later

These conferences play a major role in career development for junior
mathematicians. They bring together senior and junior researchers in an ideal
environment to establish connections, which often last for many years after the
conference itself. In this sense, the conferences help to train the next
generation of researchers in various fields. This is especially true with the
added emphasis on including recent Ph.D.s. The organizing societies are also
keenly aware of the need to increase participation of under-represented groups,
and all aspects of the conferences will reflect that awareness (as do most
activities of the societies). Finally, the proceedings that grow from these
conferences reach mathematicians throughout the world, in every part of the
mathematical community. In this way, the work done at conferences can reach
scientists who work in areas far from the specific conference topic, who are
separated from the meeting in both place and time.
