
* 0532631
* NSF/CBMS Regional Conference in Mathematical Sciences--'Cluster Algebras and Applications'-6/13-17/2006
* DMS,INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
* 01/01/2006,11/30/2005
* Naihuan Jing,NC,North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 06/30/2007
* USD 33,884.00

The interaction between quiver representations and Lie theory has sparkled
several important developments in mathematics, for instance Lusztig's
introduction of canonical basis for quantum enveloping algebras in early 90's.
Recently S. Fomin and A. Zelevinsky introduced a new algebraic structure called
the cluster algebra in order to study positivity properties for canonical basis.
This new algebraic structure has quickly found connections and applications in
quiver theory, discrete dynamical systems, thermodynamic Bethe Ansatz,
generalized associahedra Grassmannians, projective configurations, Poisson
geometry and Teichmueller theory, and the quantum cluster algebra is also
introduced and studied actively. In order to make this new area of research
accessible to a wide audience we are holding an NSF/CBMS regional conference on
ClusterAlgebras and their Applications at North Carolina State University in
Raleigh during June 13--17, 2006 with Professor Zelvinsky as the principal
speaker. The audience will have a chance to listen to one of the founders of
cluster algebras to present the fundamental materials of cluster algebras. The
lectures aim to introduce graduatestudents and new comers to the field.
Specifically the following topics will be covered:

1) Motivation--total positivity, canonical bases, double Bruhat cells; 2)
Definitions and first examples of cluster algebras; 3) The Laurent phenomenon;
4) Rank 2 cluster algebras; 5) Y-systems and generalized associahedra; 6)
Quantum cluster algebras; 7) Cluster algebras and quiver representations.

In order for an even wider audience to study the subjects the lecture notes of
Professor Zelevinsky will be published by CBMS within one year after the
conference. Graduate students and young researchers, in particular those from
under-presented groups (women, minorities, and persons with disabilities) are
strongly encouraged to attend the conference.
