
* 0532039
* NSF/CBMS Regional Conference in the Mathematical Sciences - "Mathematical and Numerical Treatment of Fluid Flow and Transport in Porous Media" - "May 23-27, 2006"
* DMS,INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
* 05/01/2006,12/09/2005
* Jichun Li,NV,University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Standard Grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 04/30/2007
* USD 30,695.00

The need to study and understand the complex physical and chemical processes
occurring in and around the earth, such as groundwater contamination, oil
reservoir production, discovering new oil reserves, ocean hydrodynamics, and air
quality control, is vital to our living environment, economic development, and
natural resource management.

The study of the above problems through physical experiments, mathematical
theory, and computational techniques requires interdisciplinary collaboration
between engineers, mathematicians, computational scientists, and other
researchers working in industry, government laboratories, and universities. By
bringing together such researchers, meaningful progress can be made in
predicting, understanding, and optimizing many complex phenomena that occur in
these problems. The aim of this five-day regional research conference is to hold
lectures that pull together the major ideas and recent results and chart the
future directions for the mathematical and numerical treatment of fluid flow and
transport in porous media.

This research conference focuses on several important topics that have
fundamental scientific merits and significant application values. Multiphase
flow and transport in porous media usually leads to coupled systems of
nonlinear, time-dependent partial differential equations (PDEs). Numerical
solutions of these PDEs are very challenging due to multiple temporal and
spatial scales presented, nonlinear effects, and large scale and unusual long
time simulations needed. Holding the proposed regional conference will
definitely advance our understanding and solving those challenging problems.

The conference will ensure that participants, especially those new or recent
entrants to fluid flow and transport in porous media, gain a better and quick
understanding of major outstanding problems and the state-of-the-art techniques
developed in the past two decades. The conference will provide a strong stimulus
for increased local research activity, considering that the still ongoing Yucca
Mountain Project (funded by Department of Energy) is just located 100 miles away
from the University of Nevada, Las Vegas. Furthermore, the subjects covered in
this conference will benefit many other related fields such as mechanical
engineering, geosciences, petroleum engineering, and computational sciences.
