
* 0536873
* IWOTA 2005 - International Workshop on Operator Theory and Applications; Storrs, CT
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 08/01/2005,07/21/2005
* Vadim Olshevsky,CT,University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 07/31/2006
* USD 10,000.00

International Workshop on Operator Theory and Applications

The International Workshop on Operator Theory and Applications (IWOTA) has met
biannually since 1981 and annually in recent years (starting in 2002) rotating
among ten countries on three continents. The IWOTA conferences offer a rich
program on a wide range of the latest developments in operator theory and its
applications. In a combination of plenary lectures by eminent mathematicians and
parallel sessions of invited and contributed talks, the plan is for this year's
conference (to be held July 24-27, 2005 on the campus of the University of
Connecticut in Storrs (CT) is to cover a wide range of topics, including
operator/system theory, operator/scattering theory, operator theory/structured
matrices, operator theory/numerical analysis, operator theory/wavelets and
signal processing, operator theory/harmonic analysis as well as topics in Krein
space operator theory and core engineering. These topics form a core of the
basic science behind a variety of applications, including control of industrial
processes, tomography and image reconstruction, data compression and
reconstruction, coding theory.

The original concept of IWOTA was as a satellite conference for operator
theorists to the broader based international symposium on Mathematical Theory of
Networks and Systems (MTNS). While this concept is still in place, the scope of
IWOTA has broadened considerably in recent years and IWOTA has now attained an
independent identity as a world-wide conference for recent developments in core
operator theory and its applications. IWOTA's primary objective is to bring
together major researchers in the area of operator theory and related fields.
These meetings provide opportunities for all participants to present their own
work in contributed talks, to interact with other researchers from around the
globe, and to broaden their knowledge of the field by hearing the invited
lectures of eminent mathematicians. In addition IWOTA emphasizes cross-
disciplinary interaction among mathematicians, electrical engineers and
mathematical physicists. In addition, IWOTA encourages and financially supports
the participation of young researchers, i.e., advanced graduate students and
recent Ph.D. recipients, for whom the opportunities offered by expert
conferences are particularly important.
