
* 0555648
* Knots in Washington XXI: Skein Modules, Khovanov Homology and Hochschild Homology
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 01/01/2006,12/21/2005
* Jozef Przytycki,DC,George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 12/31/2006
* USD 20,000.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0555648 Principal Investigator: Jozef H. Przytycki

This award provides partial support for participants of the 21st conference in
the very successful ``Knots in Washington'' series. This meeting is devoted to
Skein Modules, Khovanov Homology and its relation to Hochschild Homology.
``Khovanov homology'' is a new development in quantum topology that emerged in
the last several years. It is a generalization of the Jones and Homflypt
polynomials of links to homologies of certain chain complexes. These homologies
turn out to be significantly stronger than the original invariants. Khovanov's
ideas were also applied to the polynomial invariants of graphs, as well as
Kauffman bracket skein module of some 3-manifolds. One of the most recent
developments is Przytycki's observation that Khovanov homology (or its
comultiplication-free variant developed by Helme-Guizon and Rong) can be
interpreted as Hochschild homology of underlying algebras. This shows how
seemingly distant branches of mathematics can be put together.

Low dimensional topology studies shapes of three and four dimensional spaces.
These dimensions are of particular interest to us because they are the
dimensions of our space and our space-time. Knot theory is a subfield of low
dimensional topology, which studies the knottedness in our space. One of the
main goals of knot theory is to distinguish knotted objects. This is often done
by means of the so called "knot invariants," functions that replace geometric
objects, such as knots, with those that are easier to compare. Over the past two
decades, there have been a flourish of new invariants in low dimensional
topology, boosted by ideas from gauge theory, quantum algebras, and mathematical
physics. In particular, a new invariant for knots, developed by Khovanov using
ideas from homological algebra, has sparked a great deal of interest recently.
The purpose of the Knots in Washington Conferences is to bring together the
researchers of the field, including established mathematicians as well as
graduate students and recent PhDs, to discuss the state of the art of the
subject.
