
* 0555525
* Homological Conjectures in Commutative Algebra: A Conference in Honor of Paul C. Roberts
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 03/15/2006,06/28/2007
* Melvin Hochster,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 02/29/2008
* USD 20,000.00

This conference, which will occur at the same time as the sixtieth birthday of
Paul Roberts, will deal with areas of commutative algebra and algebraic geometry
related to his work, including the local homological behavior of commutative
Noetherian rings, intersection theory, and K-theory. Of particular note is the
application, pioneered by Roberts, of the theory of local Chern classes
developed by Baum, Fulton, and MacPherson to the solution of long standing open
questions in commutative algebra. These include M. Auslander's zerodivisor
conjecture, the new intersection conjecture of Peskine and Szpiro, and Serre's
conjecture on the vanishing of intersection multiplicities. Many other problems,
such as the direct summand conjecture, remain to be solved.

The participation of graduate students and recent Ph.D.s will be strongly
encouraged, and open questions will be emphasized. The kinds of questions that
will be considered may be thought of as follows. When one has many equations in
many unknowns, one can think of the solutions algebraically, by forming an
abstract system called a ring in which the equations are forced to hold, or
geometrically, as a set that is contained in a possibly high dimensional space.
The latter construction generalizes the notion of graphing an equation. When one
has information about two solution sets, one wants to understand their
intersection: the common solutions of both sets of equations. In particular, its
dimension, which represents the number of degrees of freedom one has in choosing
a solution, is of great interest. Many of the questions considered can be
thought of as follows: given algebraic information about two solution sets,
e.g., special properties of the corresponding rings, what quantitative and
qualitative conclusions can one reach about the intersection? A major focus of
the conference will be on very subtle and deep theorems and conjectures in this
area.
