
* 0555730
* Graduate Student Topology Conference
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 01/01/2006,12/23/2005
* Kent Orr,IN,Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 12/31/2006
* USD 14,750.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0555730 Principal Investigator: Kent E. Orr

The Graduate Student Topology Conference will provide graduate student training
and create opportunities via student talks, via communication of recent
advances, and by introducing students to others within their field. We
accomplish this with the participation of established research leaders who will
give plenary talks and interact with students, and through graduate student
talks. Vaughan Jones from UC Berkeley and Dusa MacDuff from SUNY Stony Brook
will give keynote presentations. A winner of the 1990 Fields Medal, Jones is a
member of the National Academy of Sciences and the American Academy of Arts and
Sciences. After celebrated work in von Neumann algebras, Jones established a new
paradigm for knot theoretic research with his breakthrough discovery of the
Jones Polynomial. Dusa McDuff is a member of the United States National Academy
of Sciences, the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, and is a fellow of the
Royal Society of London. She has numerous honors including the Satter Prize of
the American Mathematical Society in 1991. Graduate students will present a
range of topics from elementary introductions of fundamental topics to ongoing
research.

Topology is an abstracted form of geometry studying the aspects of geometric
objects which are unchanged through continuous deformation. Of particular
interest to geometric topology is the classification of manifolds, that is,
spaces which near each point look Euclidean. One often solves a geometric
topology problem by relating it to other algebraic problems that are more
tractable. The algebraic tools so developed have substantial independent
interest within algebraic topology. Topology is a central field of theoretical
mathematics having broad applications to physics and other sciences. The
conference takes place at the Bloomington, Indiana campus of Indiana University
on April 1 - 2, 2006, and will encourage essential communication and
collaboration among graduate students working in the area of topology, and
pertaining to their research initiatives. The conference web page is
http://www.indiana.edu/~gstc/.
