
* 0601926
* SM: Workshop in Analysis and Probability
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/2006,04/28/2006
* William Johnson,TX,Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 05/31/2010
* USD 308,904.00



Workshop in Analysis and Probability

Abstract

The Workshop will bring together senior and junior researchers and advanced
graduate students in several areas of analysis and probability as well as some
researchers in other fields (such as geometry and theoretical computer science)
in order to broaden the education of the younger participants and to promote
interaction among researchers in various fields. Each summer the Workshop will
also sponsor a three day regional conference (SUMIRFAS), Concentration Weeks,
and mini-conferences. These conferences will include introductory lectures
designed to acquaint junior researchers and non experts with the basics of an
area as well as advanced lectures for experts. All participants are invited to
present seminars on their own work and past experience suggests that most
participants will take advantage of the opportunity to disseminate their work.
The resulting feedback from a wide range of experts is especially valuable for
junior researchers and graduate students.

The Workshop emphasizes supporting junior researchers, minorities, women, and
graduate students. As in its predecessor, the Workshop will support many
researchers not on sponsored research grants who will benefit from being in an
environment that is research friendly and from contact with participants who are
leaders in the field. Travel support and Young Investigator awards are available
only for graduate students and researchers who do not have grant support.




