
* 0603294
* 2006 Summer Conference on Topology and its Applications
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 04/01/2006,03/27/2006
* Frederic Mynard,GA,Georgia Southern University Research and Service Foundation, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 03/31/2007
* USD 25,000.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0603294 Principal Investigator: Frederic Mynard and Francis Jordan

The 2006 Summer Conference on Topology and its Applications will be held July
6-9, 2006, at Georgia Southern University in Statesboro, GA. This conference is
the twenty-first in a series that began at City College of New York in 1984 and
has been held every year, except 1986, at locations in the United States and
abroad. There will be seven invited plenary speakers, all of which are
international leaders in their fields. Additionally, two workshops will be
conducted on "Physics and Domain Theory" and "Selection principles in topology",
each of which will meet three times. These workshops will provide opportunities
for researchers and students to obtain an up-to-date overview of specific and
particularly active areas of research. Finally, six special sessions are
planned, each of which will be organized by a group of three leading researchers
in the corresponding field and feature one semi-plenary speaker and more than
twenty other speakers. The special sessions are: Set-theory and Topology,
Topological Groups and Semi-groups, Asymmetric Topology, Topology in Dynamical
Systems, Fractals and Tilings, and Categorical Topology. The areas of expertise
of the plenary speakers reflect the diversity of themes of the special sessions.

For more than twenty years, this series of conferences has been one of the main
forums for researchers in topology and related fields. Topology is an area of
pure mathematics that interacts with virtually every other branch of mathematics
in addition to many other scientific fields. Applications of topology in other
areas of mathematics, physics, and computer science have long been a focus of
this series of conferences. The 2006 conference will continue this tradition, as
reflected by the variety of workshops and special sessions proposed. This
conference usually brings together over 125 researchers and graduate students
from across the United States and more than 25 other countries. The goals of
this conference are to present participants with the leading experts and latest
research in topology and related fields; foster collaborations and interactions
between researchers in topology and related fields; provide the opportunity for
graduate students and underrepresented groups to be exposed to the latest
research in topology-related fields and to interact with leading researchers in
these areas. The wide range of special sessions and the types of workshops
proposed will provide the ideal environment for new interactions and
collaborations between researchers and students in different fields related to
topology.

For more information see the conference Web site,
http://www.cs.georgiasouthern.edu/faculty/mynard_f/STC06.htm.
