
* 0603808
* Travel Support for the 8th Valencia/ISBA World Meeting on Bayesian Statistics
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 04/01/2006,03/28/2006
* Alan Gelfand,NC,Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Grace Yang
* 03/31/2007
* USD 10,000.00

Abstract

The Valencia/ISBA Eighth World Meeting on Bayesian Statistics is jointly
organized by the Universitat de Valencia and The International Society for
Bayesian Analysis (ISBA). Valencia/ISBA 2006 will be held in Benidorm, Spain,
from June 1 to June 6, 2006. The University of Valencia has a strong tradition
in Bayesian statistics, and has organized seven previous international meetings.
The International Society for Bayesian Analysis was established in 1992 to
promote the development and application of Bayesian statistical theory and
methods. The co-operation of these two entities ensures a well-run meeting with
strong intellectual content and good attendance from around the world. The
``Valencia" meetings are the pre-eminent Bayesian gatherings in the world;
attendance is predicted at over 500 participants. Previous meetings have been
attended by participants from approximately 50 different countries, creating a
truly international conference. This funding is exclusively to provide support
to assist with travel expenses for junior statistical investigators from US
institutions, i.e., persons pursuing a PhD in statistics or a closely related
field, or who have received such a degree within the five years preceding the
conference. Such investigators are often doing research that is among the most
novel, interesting, and important for international dissemination. Yet, often
they lack the travel funds necessary to attend such a conference because they
have not yet established themselves sufficiently to attract external travel and
other funding for their work.

Statisticians are playing an increasingly indispensable role in
interdisciplinary research, contributing as vital team members to the entire
scientific enterprise. Scholarly conferences where new ideas can be exchanged
are vital for statistical science to move forward. International meetings are
particularly beneficial since they permit exposure to ideas and colleagues
attendees might not ordinarily encounter in their usual worlds. The benefit for
attendance at such meetings by junior statistical researchers is particularly
important; these meetings provide a special, unique environment to enable
connection with internationally-regarded researchers, to foster international
collaborations, and to assist in the recruitment of outstanding graduate
students to complete their studies in the U.S. The Valencia/ISBA Eighth World
Meeting on Bayesian Statistics is the pre-eminent Bayesian meeting in the world.
This funding is exclusively to provide support to assist with travel expenses
for junior statistical investigators from US institutions to attend this
meeting.
