
* 0603479
* Special Meeting: Recent Advances in Combinatorics, CRM Thematic Semester 2007
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 01/01/2007,04/28/2006
* Mark Haiman,CA,University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 12/31/2007
* USD 68,500.00

The 2007 special semester "Recent Advances in Combinatorics" will take place at
the Centre de Recherche en Mathematiques in Montreal, Canada from January to
July 2007. Combinatorics, a subject often motivated by the simplest and most
basic of questions, is nevertheless breathtaking in its scope of techniques and
breadth of applications. Many combinatorial topics are very exciting at the
moment, following extraordinary recent breakthroughs in the understanding of
some fundamental and difficult questions. Of particular emphasis at present is
the development of a new "Combinatorics of Macdonald Polynomials," which ties
together far-flung topics in a surprising way. The semester is organized as a
series of four research workshops, each with an associated preparatory school
for graduate and post-doctoral level participants. Each workshop/school
combination concentrates on an area in which current research advances are
occurring. This grant will support attendance at the workshops and schools by
graduate students and junior researchers from the United States, giving them an
unusual opportunity to interact with a large number of the world's leading
researchers in these areas, particularly those from Europe and Asia.

Three main themes guide the topics of the workshops. (1) Relations between
Enumerative Combinatorics and Statistical Physics; more specifically, the uses
of enumerative techniques for the study of gas models, Ising and Potts models,
etc., for the purpose of computing phase transitions or thermodynamic limits.
(2) Algebraic Aspects of Combinatorics on Words, underlining natural links with
the study of free groups, free fields, free Lie algebras, and of special
properties of continued fractions in relation with the study of Artin's
billiards and real quadratic fields. (3) Interactions between Algebraic
Combinatorics, Algebraic Geometry and Representation Theory, a theme of two of
the workshops. The emphasis here is on the study of subjects such as Schubert
varieties, Hilbert schemes, Gromov-Witten invariants, and their ties with
symmetric functions such as Macdonald polynomials, and with classical
combinatorial enumeration.
