
* 0605137
* Geometry of Groups and Splittings
* DMS,TOPOLOGY, EPSCoR Co-Funding
* 07/01/2006,08/02/2006
* Max Forester,OK,University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2010
* USD 96,633.00

Geometry of Groups and Splittings

This project has four components. The first component entails the study of
higher dimensional filling invariants of groups, with emphasis on contructing
examples exhibiting the full range of possible behavior. Forester and
collaborators Brady, Bridson, and Shankar intend to develop general methods for
computing such invariants, and to study the role of subgroup distortion and
curvature. The second component concerns the construction of geometric
structures for particular classes of groups, such as limit groups, and the study
of the structure of subgroups and ends for these groups. In the third component
Forester will investigate the classification of generalized Baumslag-Solitar
groups and pursue applications. In the fourth component Forester will continue
his work with Rourke on the multivariable adjunction problem, in the case of
torsion-free groups. This work extends and devolops Klyachko's methods.

Group theory is the theory of symmetry, which plays a fundamental role in
mathematics. Notions of symmetry (or "groups") arise very naturally in geometry,
but also in other, more abstract, areas. In the field of geometric group theory
one studies abstract groups by constructing geometric spaces, tailor-made for
the groups at hand, in order to "see" the symmetry and understand it. This
project involves the detailed study of the geometric spaces thus constructed.
