
* 0605679
* Conference on Methodological Developments of Statistics in Social Science
* DMS,STATISTICS, Methodology, Measuremt & Stats
* 06/01/2006,04/18/2006
* Lori Thombs,MO,University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 05/31/2007
* USD 20,000.00

The investigator and her colleagues propose to host a national interdisciplinary
conference in October 2006 to address key methodological issues related to
social science statistics. These areas are: structural equation modeling with
latent variables, multilevel modeling, test theory and item response theory,
social networks, survey sampling, cluster analysis and program evaluation.
Speakers include both prominent researchers in statistical and social science
areas, along with beginning assistant professors, post-doctoral researchers, and
graduate students. The format of this conference provides ample opportunities
for participation of young researchers through contributed papers, posters and
roundtable panel discussion. Another unique aspect of this conference is its
interdisciplinary nature, providing an environment of exchange of ideas between
persons that do not share common conferences and hence do not often interact.

Research in the social sciences is a dynamic area that has been traditionally
driven by applications in psychology, sociology, education and economics. This
conference on cutting-edge Methodological Developments of Statistics in the
Social Sciences brings together both established and young researchers from a
diverse set of fields -- mathematical statistics, psychology, education,
government, sociology, and political science. The results of this endeavor will
enhance our understanding of the contemporary issues in quantitative
methodologies of social sciences, and has enormous potential for the betterment
of society.




