
* 0606631
* Geometry and Representation Theory: A Conference in Honor of George Lusztig
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 07/01/2006,06/26/2006
* Pavel Etingof,MA,Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 06/30/2007
* USD 25,000.00

The grant provides funding for a conference highlighting recent developments
and open problems in the field of geometric representation theory. The
conference is to be held May 30 through June 3, 2006, at the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology in Cambridge, Massachusetts. The conference will bring
together leading scholars in the field to describe their latest research and to
honor George Lusztig, who introduced (and is still introducing) many of the
ideas that underlie geometric representation theory. Among the topics expected
to be covered are quiver varieties and their role in representation theory;
representations of groups over local fields and fields of positive
characteristics; quantum groups; and character sheaves.

Representation theory can be thought of as a natural extension of linear
algebra. A representation of an algebraic object is a collection of matrices
(possibly infinite dimensional) which encode properties of the algebraic object.
Geometric representation theory refers to the program of using techniques from
geometry to construct representations. The advantage of these constructions is
that it is often easy to prove a property of the representation that would not
be apparent otherwise; for example, that the representation has a nice basis or
that certain matrix elements turn out to be positive integers. George Lusztig is
a leading researcher in geometric representation theory, and the conference
being supported will bring together many of the most distinguished scholars in
the field to honor him. The grant will help to support graduate students and
recent doctorates in order that they may attend this exciting conference.


