
* 0606622
* Advanced Computational Electromagnetism -- ACE '06 Workshop
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS, APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 04/01/2006,03/28/2006
* P. Robert Kotiuga,MA,Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 03/31/2007
* USD 25,000.00

The Whitney form revolution in computational electromagnetics, initiated over
two decades ago, builds on the mathematics which created discrete Hodge theory,
solved the Ray-Singer conjecture and set the stage for Dennis Sullivan's
approach to rational homotopy theory. The basic tools point to a discrete
framework for Ed Witten's TQFT approach to the Jones polynomial, and associated
computational complexity issues. Furthermore, this interaction between
electrical engineers and geometrically minded topologists was largely unnoticed
by applied mathematicians! ACE '06 will bring together experts in very diverse
fields to continue this technology transfer from seemingly pure mathematics to
deep problems encountered in enlarging the scope of computational
electromagnetics.

Electrical engineers have always marveled at the beauty of Maxwell's theory of
electromagnetism and associated mathematical formalism. They have pondered both
the practical implications of this big picture, and the difficulties of fitting
it into the undergraduate curriculum. The Whitney form revolution of the past
two decades has translated the formalism associated with Mawell's equations into
a discrete setting, has resolved some of the deepest problems in computational
electromagnetics, has lead to very efficient software implementations, has
enabled unforeseen applications to be tackled, and has offered open research
questions back to mathematicians. A major objective in organizing this workshop
is to get key mathematicians who have been cited by engineers years ago, to
finally rub shoulders with the key players within the engineering community! By
having a diverse set talks, poster sessions, and panel discussions, ACE '06 will
sustain the strong level of cross-fertilization by bringing from different
countries, a diverse set of experts and academic disciplines, students,
professors, and engineers who have grown successful companies. More information
can be found on the conference webpage: http://www.bu.edu/eng/ace2006/


