
* 0607951
* Conference Proposal: CRM Theme Semester on Combinatorial Optimization (June 2006 - December 2006)
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, THEORETICAL FOUNDATIONS (TF)
* 05/01/2006,03/10/2006
* Michel Goemans,MA,Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 04/30/2007
* USD 30,000.00

The Centre de Recherches Mathematiques in Montreal (CRM) is organizing a Theme
Semester on Combinatorial Optimization that will include a NATO Advanced Study
Institute and five workshops. Broadly speaking, combinatorial optimization is
the study of optimization problems in which there are a finite (but usually very
large) number of potential solutions, also called feasible solutions. These are
not enumerated but rather defined implicitly by constraints, i.e., linear or
nonlinear relations. For instance, the famous traveling salesman problem (TSP)
consists of selecting the least expensive tour of a given set of locations, and
the minimum spanning tree problem (MST) of selecting the least expensive network
connecting given sites. Combinatorial optimization has been applied to many
fields of huge practical import, such as transport scheduling,
telecommunications planning and circuit design (where problems similar to the
TSP, among others, must be solved routinely). Since most combinatorial
optimization problems are very difficult to solve, researchers have, on the one
hand, improved the time-consuming algorithms that compute optimal solutions of
difficult problems such as the TSP, and on the other, designed efficient
algorithms that compute near-optimal solutions (also called heuristic
solutions). Two of the workshops will address the design of such algorithms
(from different angles). The three others will address the computation of
polyhedra related to optimization, the use of optimization in data mining, and
the design of computer and communication networks such as the Internet.
