
* 0610295
* Workshop on Statistical Analysis of Neuronal Data
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 03/01/2006,02/22/2006
* Robert Kass,PA,Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Rong Chen
* 02/28/2007
* USD 10,000.00

Studies of the neural basis of behavior typically use time-varying stimuli and
produce time-varying neuronal responses. Statistically, the setting involves
both continuous multiple time series and inhomogeneous point processes,
sometimes dozens or hundreds of them observed simultaneously. There are many
challenging analytical issues, including that of combining information obtained
from multiple modalities (EEG, fMRI, MEG, and extracellular recordings). The
third workshop Statistical Analysis of Neuronal Data will be devoted to
discussion of these issues.

The Statistical Analysis of Neuronal Data (SAND) workshops are held in even
years in Pittsburgh, PA. The third workshop is planned for May 11--13, 2006.
SAND3 will bring together neurophysiologists, statisticians, physicists, and
computer scientists who are interested in quantitative analysis of neuronal
data. In addition to four scientific sessions, we will run a pair of half-day
short courses to provide relevant background on neurophysiological data, for
statisticians, and in state-of-the-art statistics for experimentalists. This
workshop series aims to define important problems in neuronal data analysis and
useful strategies for attacking them; foster communication between experimental
neuroscientists and those trained in statistical and computational methods
encourage young researchers, including graduate students, to present their work;
expose young researchers to important challenges and opportunities in this
interdisciplinary domain, while providing a small meeting atmosphere to
facilitate the interaction of young researchers with senior colleagues.


