
* 0611653
* Noncommutative Geometry at the Newton Institute
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/2006,04/18/2006
* John Roe,PA,Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2007
* USD 19,380.00

This award is for partial support of US participants in a semester long
workshop at the Newton Institute, Cambridge, UK, in noncommutative geometry for
the period July 24 through December 22, 2006. Noncommutative geometry aims to
carry over geometrical concepts to a new class of spaces whose algebras of
functions are no longer commutative. The central idea goes back to quantum
mechanics, where classical observables such as position and momenta no longer
commute. In recent years it has become appreciated that such noncommutative
spaces retain a rich topology and geometry expressed first of all in K-theory
and K-homology, as well as in finer aspects of the theory. The subject has also
been approached from a more algebraic side with the advent of quantum groups and
their quantum homogeneous spaces. The subject in its modern form has also been
connected with developments in several different fields of both pure mathematics
and mathematical physics. In mathematics these include fruitful interactions
with analysis, number theory, category theory and representation theory. In
mathematical physics, developments include the quantum Hall effect, applications
to the standard model in particle physics and to renormalization in quantum
field theory, models of spacetimes with noncommuting coordinates. Noncommutative
geometry also appears naturally in string/M-theory. The program will be devoted
to bringing together these different streams and instances of noncommutative
geometry, as well as identifying new emerging directions. Three main themes of
the program will be reflected in workshops in July, September and December of
2006, covering noncommutative geometry and cyclic cohomology, noncommutative
geometry and fundamental physics, and new directions in noncommutative geometry
respectively.


