
* 0612007
* Conference on Frontiers in Applied and Computational Mathematics
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 06/01/2006,05/30/2006
* Robert Miura,NJ,New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Henry A. Warchall
* 05/31/2007
* USD 10,000.00

This award furnishes travel support for participants in the Conference on
Frontiers in Applied and Computational Mathematics, held in May 2006 at the New
Jersey Institute of Technology. Significant funding is allocated to support
participation of students, postdoctoral fellows, and junior faculty.

<br><br>

The emphasis of this meeting is mathematical fluid dynamics. The conference
brings together mathematicians and engineers whose research interests are in the
focused areas of moving boundary problems, geophysical fluid dynamics,
nanofluidics, biofluid dynamics, numerical and multiscale methods, and dynamical
systems. Invited speakers include theoreticians (specialists in both modeling
and analysis), scientific computation researchers, and experimentalists. The
objective is to create an environment that enables an open interchange of ideas
between groups of mathematicians and scientists who would usually not be brought
together in a focused fluid dynamics conference. <br><br>

This meeting provides an opportunity for interaction between leading experts and
junior researchers in an important area of applied mathematics. The conference
will provide a valuable opportunity for postdocs and students to broaden their
understanding and to learn about open problems.

<br><br>

Conference web page: http://m.njit.edu/Events/FACM06/
