
* 0612996
* Conference: Contemporary Combinatorics
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 03/15/2006,03/07/2006
* Bela Bollobas,TN,University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 02/28/2007
* USD 11,229.00

This award will provide support for a conference in Contemporary Combinatorics,
in Memphis. In the past decade or two, combinatorics has gone from strength to
strength. It has always been rich in problems and conjectures but, until a few
years ago, there had been rather few tools to attack many important conjectures.
That this situation has been improving rapidly is due, to a large extent, to the
influx of methods from probability theory, ergodic theory, Fourier analysis, and
algebra; in particular, the interaction between combinatorics and probability
theory has greatly benefited both communities.

The major mathematical event of 2004 was the deep result proved by Ben Green and
Terry Tao about arithmetic progressions in primes. Their ingenious proof makes
use of pure combinatorics, ergodic theory, number theory, and probabilistic
methods. A surprising aspect of their proof is that it does not need Szemeredi's
theorem with a much smaller density, as had been expected: it suffices to
transfer the original theorem to a new setting. It is likely that the methods of
this great achievement will have implications for quite a while to come. The
main speaker at the conference is Terry Tao. There will be several other
exciting speakers. There are not many high-level mathematics conferences in the
Mid-South. The Contemporary Combinatorics 2006 meeting in Memphis will have
considerable impact. Most of the NSF grant would be used to help graduate
students and senior mathematicians attend the meeting and so benefit from the
personal contact with the speakers.
