
* 0630571
* CBMS Regional Conference in the Mathematical Sciences - Numerical Methods for Nonlinear Elliptic Equations - Spring 2007
* DMS,INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
* 03/15/2007,03/16/2007
* Weimin Han,IA,University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Dean Evasius
* 02/29/2008
* USD 33,000.00

Nonlinear elliptic partial differential equations (PDEs) arise in many areas of
mathematics, sciences and engineering. Their numerical solution has continued to
be an important and popular research field. The conference will pull together
the major ideas and recent results on numerical solution of nonlinear elliptic
PDEs and chart directions for future research. The Principal Lecturer is an
internationally well-known expert, Professor R. Glowinski, who will deliver ten
lectures on a relatively large set of methods allowing the numerical solution of
a variety of nonlinear PDEs. Particular attention of the lectures will be given
to modular methods based on relatively simple components. The lectures will
discuss the solution of nonlinear eigenvalue problems, of fully nonlinear
elliptic equations of the Monge-Ampere type and of some elliptic variational
inequalities from Continuum Mechanics. The conference will serve as a forum for
researchers working on different aspects of numerical solution and applications
of nonlinear PDEs to interact and to exchange and promote new ideas, results and
techniques on solving nonlinear elliptic PDEs and their interdisciplinary
applications. It will also provide an opportunity for graduate students and
young mathematicians to learn quickly new problems and techniques in the area.
It will greatly contribute to the advancement of research on numerical methods
for nonlinear elliptic PDEs, and will help to enlarge the personnel base of the
nation for next generation numerical analysts and computational scientists.
