
* 0631446
* Appalachian Set Theory
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS
* 10/01/2006,06/06/2008
* Ernest Schimmerling,PA,Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 09/30/2009
* USD 45,000.00

Cummings and Schimmerling propose an innovative series of workshops on set
theory for the Appalachian region. Each workshop would be devoted to a single
topic such as a broadly applicable method, a complex seminal paper or a
significant unpublished theorem. The topic for each workshop would be announced
several months in advance together with suggested background reading material.
The immediate goal would be for faculty and students who are not experts in the
topic to get to the point where they could start to use its techniques in one or
two intensive days. Each time, an expert in the topic would be asked to lead the
workshop, which could mean doing all the lecturing herself or himself, or
delegating parts to others. There would be three workshops per calendar year;
students would be paid to generate notes for the participants, which might also
be disseminated in print or on the web. Special emphasis would be given to
encouraging the participation of mathematicians from underrepresented groups.

Set theory is the study of infinite structures; among the principal objects of
study are infinite sets, graphs, trees, games and orderings. What gives the
subject its distinctive flavour is the heavy use of tools from mathematical
logic, which are used side-by-side with the "combinatorial" methods familiar
from the study of finite structures. Ideas from set theory have found
application in many areas of mathematics: to pick a recent example Gowers'
celebrated work in analysis uses the ideas of some classical work on colourings
of infinite families of infinite sets.
