
* 0635449
* Statistical and Applied Mathematical Sciences Institute
* DMS,OFFICE OF MULTIDISCIPLINARY AC, MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES RES INST, COFFES
* 08/15/2007,06/19/2015
* Richard Smith,NC,Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2016
* USD 14,888,558.00

Abstract DMS 0635449 Principal Investigator: James O. Berger

SAMSI is a national institute that will deeply impact the future of the
statistical and mathematical sciences and, through them, science in general, by
catalyzing creation of the theory and methodology necessary to confront the
central data- and model-driven scientific challenges of our time. SAMSI will
focus on new syntheses of the statistical sciences, applied mathematics and
disciplinary science. To illustrate the vision, consider an activity central to
modern science and technology, and with which SAMSI will be heavily engaged:
numerical modeling of complex physical processes. Developing numerical models
and evaluating their fidelity to reality requires merging knowledge from
multiple disciplines. Applied mathematics builds on disciplinary understanding
to construct a fine-detail numerical representation of the deterministic aspects
of a process; probability provides concepts and insight to characterize
stochastic elements of the process; and statistics provides the mechanisms to
relate these constructs to observational data on the real-world process. But,
despite a multiplicity of context-specific advances, there is currently no
general framework for combining these disciplines, much less a formal system for
simultaneously applying them. The SAMSI efforts in this direction will focus on
filling this gap, by bringing together statisticians, mathematicians and
modelers from across the country (and beyond) to establish frameworks for model
development and validation, at a high level that spans multiple application
contexts.

To carry out this synthesis of the statistical sciences, applied mathematical
sciences and disciplinary sciences, SAMSI engages established researchers - from
academia, industry, national laboratories and government - as well as young
researchers (postdoctoral fellows and graduate students) at the formative stages
of their careers. Each research program lasts from 6 months to one year, and
involves a host of activities ranging from research by intensive
interdisciplinary working groups to broad, energizing workshops. Outreach to
undergraduate students, high-school teachers and faculty from teaching
institutions extends SAMSI's impact on the essential development of the national
human resource base for science. To enable activities of the breadth and depth
necessary for the success of SAMSI, the institute is a partnership between the
National Science Foundation and the consortium of Duke University, North
Carolina State University, the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill and
the National Institute of Statistical Sciences. These partners provide a
uniquely strong base for SAMSI's national scope. Scientific input to SAMSI
comes, in part, from a National Advisory Council composed of eminent statistical
and mathematical scientists. Most important, SAMSI will engage the entire
nationwide statistical and mathematical sciences communities, by means of widely
publicized opportunities to bring problems to SAMSI, or direct SAMSI's attention
to them.


