
* 0635561
* Mathematical Biosciences Institute
* DMS,MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES RES INST, COFFES
* 07/15/2007,07/09/2009
* Martin Golubitsky,OH,Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 06/30/2011
* USD 8,171,975.00

Proposal: DMS-0635561 Principal Investigator: Friedman, Avner Institution: Ohio
State University Proposal Title: Mathematical Biosciences Institute

ABSTRACT

This is a renewal proposal for the Mathematical Biosciences Institute (MBI) at
Ohio State University (OSU). The mathematical biosciences include the
biological, medical, and environmental sciences where the application of
mathematical, statistical, and computational science may lead to significant
progress in understanding key processes in the application area. The mission of
the MBI is (i) to develop mathematical theories, statistical methods, and
computational algorithms for the solution of fundamental problems in the
biosciences; (ii) to involve mathematical scientists and bioscientists in the
solution of these problems; and (iii) to nurture a community of scholars through
education and support of students and researchers in the mathematical
biosciences. The Institute organizes a yearly program consisting of 6-8
workshops and several tutorials around selected themes. Workshops emphasize
discussions over formal talks and offer an environment that encourages
developing collaborations. The themes selected for the next three years are
Bioengineering (2007-'08), Developmental Biology (2008-'09), and From Genes to
Cells: Networks, Scales, and Complexity (2009-'10). A unique postdoc program is
designed to develop young researchers into truly interdisciplinary scientists.
They are immersed in a broad range of topics and interact with workshop
participants, visiting scientists, and local researchers, while being co-
mentored by a mathematical scientist and a life scientist.

The Mathematical Biosciences Institute (MBI) at Ohio State University (OSU) is
one of seven Mathematical Sciences Institutes (http://mathinstitutes.org/)
supported by the NSF Division of Mathematical Sciences. The MBI supports
programs that promote multidisciplinary research at the interface of the
mathematical and life sciences. It hosts scientific programs on long (academic
year) and short (one week or less) time scales. The programs are organized
around selected themes, which range from Mathematical Neurosciences (2002-'03)
to Systems Physiology (2006-'07) and From Genes to Cells: Networks, Scales, and
Complexity (2009-'10). The MBI provides opportunities for researchers in the
mathematical and life sciences to interact and form new collaborations. Most of
the Institute's programs are conducted on the OSU campus, but the MBI also
sponsors conferences and workshops at its academic Institute Partners. These
Institute Partners and MBI's Corporate Partners contribute to the Institute's
programming and planning through dedicated governance committees. The MBI
website (http://www.mbi.ohio-state.edu/) describes upcoming and past programs,
solicits ideas for future programs, and offers application forms for Institute
activities.
