
* 0640282
* Conference on Geometry and Theoretical Physics
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, TOPOLOGY
* 09/15/2006,08/16/2006
* Alan Weinstein,CA,University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2007
* USD 15,270.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0640282 Principal Investigator: Alan D. Weinstein

A scientific symposium titled "Geometry and Theoretical Physics" will take place
at the National Meeting of the Society for the Advancement of Chicano and Native
Americans in the Sciences (SACNAS) in Tampa, Florida on October 27, 2006. Mirror
Symmetry, Quantum Cohomology and Gromov-Witten theory lie at the heart of the
intersection of contemporary geometry and theoretical physics. Great strides
have recently been made in our understanding of these subjects, including a
complete determination of the Gromov-Witten theory (and Donaldson-Thomas theory)
of local curves, and of toric Calabi-Yau threefolds, and new proofs of Witten's
conjecture; announced results include the computation of the quantum cohomology
of certain Hilbert schemes of basic importance, and a construction of the
Equivariant Vertex, determining the Gromov-Witten theory of all toric
threefolds. A number of important conjectures drive the field, including Chern-
Simons/Gromov-Witten duality, the Donaldson-Thomas/Gromov-Witten correspondence,
and the Crepant Resolution Conjecture. The speakers at this symposium will
announce accomplishments and also discuss new directions of research.
Specifically, Jim Bryan will discuss Topological Quantum Field Theories, Robin
Wilson will discuss knots and three-manifolds, and Vincent Bouchard will discuss
the Standard Model of particle physics, and its relation to geometry.

This symposium will enable and encourage students and other scientists to pursue
research in areas related to the interaction of theoretical physics and
mathematics, provide the opportunity for scientists to interact and foster
collaboration and new research, and disseminate knowledge to a wide and
extraordinarily diverse audience. While the reasons for organizing a scientific
symposium on geometry and theoretical physics are many, there is additionally an
acute need to do so for an audience of underrepresented minorities. There is at
this time significant underrepresentation of minorities in the mathematical
sciences; this underrepresentation is evidently severe in Gromov-Witten theory
and other fields relating to the interactions of geometry and physics. There are
very important questions that need to be addressed in Gromov-Witten theory, and
it is necessary to attract a broad and diverse audience to work on these
problems. Gromov-Witten theory and related fields have been extremely successful
in solving outstanding problems, some over 100 years old, in several branches of
mathematics and physics. It is predicted that underrepresented minorities will
become the majority of United States Citizens; as such, it is in the long term
interest of geometry and physics to have increased participation from members of
these groups. Moreover, given the importance of geometry and theoretical physics
to mathematics and science in general, it is in our National interest to work
against the underrepresentation of minorities conducting research in these
fields. This symposium has been approved and scheduled by SACNAS. In addition,
funding has been secured from SACNAS to cover the speakers' and organizers'
travel, lodging and conference registration fees. The funding requested in this
proposal will be used for student support.

Further information about mathematics at SACNAS in general, and about this
symposium in particular, can be found, respectively, at
http://www.uprh.edu/~sacnas/ and http://math.berkeley.edu/~dkarp/sacnas.
