
* 0648786
* SM: Graph Models in Nanotechnology, Photonics, Chemistry, and Other Areas
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 03/15/2007,03/07/2007
* Peter Kuchment,TX,Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 02/29/2008
* USD 70,000.00

Kuchment DMS-0648786

The series of a tutorial and three workshops is a part of a semester-long
program at the Isaac Newton Institute for Mathematical Sciences in Cambridge,
UK. The program assembles a large international group of mathematicians and
physicists interested in graph models arising in widely disparate areas of high
practical and theoretical importance. Analysis on graphs has been developing
very quickly in the last decades, due to needs of number theory, algebra,
probability theory, and spectral geometry. This area has experienced recently a
surge of new important applications, new methods, and new models. New objects,
such as quantum graphs (quantum networks) or differential operators on fractals,
have emerged, which provide simplified models of complex systems and help with
studying difficult issues such as, for instance, Anderson localization and
quantum chaos. All these developments have sparked the interest of experts in
other areas of sciences and mathematics in analysis on graphs and in the
diversity of methods employed. The program starts with a tutorial workshop where
young researchers and students are introduced to the basics of analysis on
graphs, quantum graphs, and fractals. Then two workshops follow devoted to
spectral analysis and quantum chaos on quantum graphs and graph models for
nanotechnology, chemistry, optics, microelectronics, and other areas. The third
workshop addresses algebraic aspects of analysis on graphs and fractals. Besides
workshop participation, longer term visits of both established and young
researchers are arranged.

Analysis on graphs has experienced sharp growth in recent years, due to many
new applications that sweep throughout a wide scientific landscape: computer
graphics, information technology, Internet studies, nanotechnology,
microelectronics, superconductivity, optics, chemistry, and material science.
Researchers in these areas meet problems that are similar to those faced by
mathematicians in areas like number theory, combinatorics, differential
equations, and spectral theory. The program facilitates the urgently needed
communication and cooperation among researchers in different areas of
mathematics and sciences. It thus accelerates progress in this new area that has
extensive applications in crucial scientific and technology fields, such as
nanotechnology, photonics, and material science. It alsos help to increase
participation and visibility of US researchers in these fields. Significant
training for junior researchers and graduate students is provided, including
specially designed tutorials, seminars, and open problems sessions. A
proceedings volume is planned to be published. The grant supports US-based
participants in the program, mostly US students, postdocs, junior faculty,
women, and other underrepresented groups.
