
* 0649808
* Conference on Differential Geometry, Mathematical Physics, and Mathematics and Society
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/2007,03/19/2009
* Robert Stanton,OH,Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2009
* USD 15,000.00

Abstract: Stanton In previous joint work with Kroetz the proposer constructed a
specific domain for which they showed that most matrix coefficients of
irreducible unitary representations of semisimple Lie groups as well as related
automorphic functions have a canonical holomorphic continuation. For those
representations occuring in the Plancherel density of the associated Riemannian
symmetric space they used their construction to identify a natural Kahler
structure on these domains. We shall attempt to enlarge the class of the unitary
representations so related to complex differential geometry by studying Kahler
structures on vector bundles over the previously constructed domain. The success
of such a complex differential geometric formulation of parts of the unitary
dual should have interesting applications to harmonic analysis. Also following
up on our previous work, we shall attempt to obtain estimates on the Fourier
coefficients of automorphic functions by analyzing the boundary values of their
holomorphic continuation on the distinguished boundary of this domain. A
different project is joint work with Slupinski in which we propose to obtain
very detailed structure of the topology and differential geometry of nilpotent
co-adjoint orbits of semisimple Lie groups. We have identified a class of orbits
associated to 5-gradings of the corresponding Lie algebra and have substantial
progress towards relating this to an extended version of conformal geometry.
Possible payoff of these investigations include a compactification of the moduli
space of exceptional holonomy structures on low dimensional manifolds as well as
a geometric construction of representations associated to these orbits. Any
complex nxn matrix may be written as a sum of two matrices where one is
diagonalizable and the other is nilpotent, i.e. the matrix times itself some
number of times is the zero matrix. The group of invertible matrices acts via
conjugation (i.e. pre-multiply by the matrix and post-multiply by the inverse)
on the vector space of all complex nxn matrices. As the sets of diagonalizable
and nilpotent matrices are preserved it is reasonable to seek for each matrix a
representative from these classes which is in some uniformly recognizable form.
For the diagonalizable class the diagonal matrices are a natural choice and are
universally used. On the other hand, the nilpotent elements have only a finite
number of possibilities leading to the familiar standard form called Jordan
blocks in linear algebra. These finitely many possibilities of a fixed block
seem to be richer in geometric structure that those of the semisimple classes
but much less understood. The proposed research is give a detailed description
of the differential geometry of these class of nilpotent matrices. Somewhat
surprisingly, the geometry these classes lead to include ones of current
interest to theoretical physicists in string theory as well as geometers. One of
the applications of our work is to present a space of such geometries, and to
examine possible degenerations in the geometry as one approaches the boundary of
the space. Another possible application of our description is towards
identifying new geometries associated with certain algebraic structures on the
space of matrices. Our approach has many points of contact with a construction
proposed many years ago in relativity theory by the physicist Penrose using an
algebraic object called spinors. Indeed, the use of higher dimensional spinors
is critical to our investigations.
