
* 0653736
* Travel Support for the Directions in Statistical Computing (DSC) 2007 Meeting
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 03/01/2007,02/27/2007
* Luke-jon Tierney,IA,University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 02/28/2010
* USD 10,000.00

DSC 2007, an international workshop on Directions in Statistical Computing, will
be held February 15-16, 2007 at the University of Auckland, New Zealand. This is
the fifth in a series of meetings; previous meeting were held in Vienna, Austria
(1999, 2001, and 2003), and Seattle, WA (2005). The workshop will focus on, but
is not limited to, open source statistical computing and aims to provide a
platform for exchanging ideas about developments in statistical computing. This
project is for funding exclusively to provide support to assist with travel
expenses for junior investigators from US institutions to attend this meeting.
Work of young researchers is often among the most novel, yet often these
researchers lack the travel funds necessary to attend such a conference because
they have not yet established themselves sufficiently to attract external travel
and other funding for their work.

Statistics is playing an increasingly important role in interdisciplinary
research, and statistical computing is essential as the means for making new
methodology available to researchers and allowing the best statistical practices
to be applied effectively. Scholarly conferences on statistical computing are an
essential framework for the exchange of ideas and for encouraging the
exploration of new directions in the design of statistical software.
International conferences are particularly valuable as they allow the exchange
of ideas among researchers from around the world who would not ordinarily come
into direct contact. The benefit to young researchers of a first exposure to the
international research community is particularly important. International
meetings also provide an opportunity to meet with outstanding international
graduate students and encourage them to consider opportunities for further study
in the United States.


