
* 0701554
* International Conference on Algebra and Related Areas
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 08/01/2007,03/07/2007
* Chongying Dong,CA,University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 07/31/2009
* USD 25,000.00

There will be an international conference on Algebra and Related Areas held in
Beijing during August 18-20, 2007. The conference will be supported by Qinghua
University, Institute of System Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences and
National Science Foundation of China. The funding from the NSF will support
American mathematicians who will speak or participate in the conference. There
will be 18 talks by prominent people covering topics of current interest such as
infinite dimensional Lie algebras, vertex operator algebras, representation
theory, algebraic geometry, number theory, computational group theory,
combinatorics, and application of algebra in other fields. The goal of the
proposed conference is to present some of the most important advances in algebra
and related areas and to discuss future research directions. A major part of the
conference focuses on bringing mathematical leaders together with students,
postdoctoral fellows and young academics in a stimulating environment.

The conference has chosen two women professors from US universities as main
speakers so the broad participation can be achieved. Also the senior
mathematicians from US institutions can attract and recruit best Chinese
students to do graduate study in US. The conference will help to strengthen the
communication and cooperation between algebra communities in US and China.
