
* 0701001
* Nonlinear Partial Differential Equations in Sub-Riemannian Geometry
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/2007,05/05/2009
* Nicola Garofalo,IN,Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 05/31/2012
* USD 254,930.00

Nonlinear Partial Differential Equations in sub-Riemannian Geometry

Abstract of Proposed Research Nicola Garofalo

Sub-Riemannian spaces model media with a constrained dynamics: motion at any
point is only allowed along a limited set of directions, which are prescribed by
the physical problem at hand. Typical examples are crystalline structures, or
the movements of the arm of a robot. Models of sub-Riemannian spaces appear in
diverse areas of both pure and applied sciences. These include harmonic
analysis, several complex variables, group representation, calculus of
variations and control theory, geometry (collapsing of Riemannian spaces, CR
geometry), geometric measure theory, (Alexandrov spaces, Lie group theory,
complex manifolds), quantum mechanics, robotics, mathematical finance, material
sciences (crystalline structures), medicine (neurophysiology of the cerebral
cortex). The development of analysis and geometry during the past century has
been greatly influenced by questions arising from the analysis of systems of
partial differential equations; often nonlinear systems. While most of these
problems have by now been settled in the classical Euclidean or Riemannian
settings, their sub-Riemannian counterparts presently form a body of fundamental
and challenging new directions in mathematics. The appropriate mathematical
formulation of the problems at hand involves the framework of sub-Riemannian
spaces, whose basic prototype is the Heisenberg group (also known to physicists
as Weyl group). The class of Carnot groups, is the geometric framework for most
problems to be studied under this award. Specific topics include (i) To continue
the study of minimal surfaces with particular emphasis on the Bernstein problem
and on the question of their regularity including Poincare-Sobolev inequalities
and Liouville type theorems on minimal surfaces; (ii) The development of a
regularity theory for new variational inequalities with non-holonomic
constraints arising in various branches of the applied sciences and the
investigation of monotonicity formulas for the relevant constrained energies
associated with these problems; (iii) Isoperimetric inequalities for the
Gaussian measures associated with the heat semigroup; (iv) To continue the
development of the theory of convexity in connection with a maximum principle of
Alexandrov-Bakelman-Pucci type; (v) To investigate a CR positive mass theorem
using the theory of minimal surfaces; (vi) To study the sharp interior
regularity of solutions of nonlinear subelliptic equations.

The basic laws that describe most natural phenomena are usually stated as
partial differential equations or systems of equations. An understanding of the
physical world also requires use of the underlying geometric structure. The
present proposal belongs to the mainstream of research which sits at the
confluence of the theory of partial differential equations with an emerging type
of geometry, called sub-Riemannian geometry. Both theories have witnessed an
explosion of interest in the last decade and now attract the interest of various
schools of mathematicians both in the US and abroad. Under this award we will
investigate problems from mathematical physics and geometry where symmetry plays
an important role. Symmetry is present everywhere in nature, including in the
fundamental laws of gravitation and electrostatic attraction. The study of
conditions under which a natural phenomenon develops symmetries has both
practical consequences and intrinsic interest.


