
* 0702256
* Travel Support for the 56th Session of the International Statistical Institute
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 04/01/2007,09/17/2007
* William Smith,VA,American Statistical Association
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 03/31/2008
* USD 13,000.00

The American Statistical Association (ASA) will use this NSF award as a travel
grant for United States participants to attend the 56th Session of the
International Statistical Institute (ISI) in Lisboa, Portugal from August 22-29,
2007. The ISI meeting includes the meetings of the Bernoulli Society,
International Association for Official Statistics (IAOS), International
Association for Statistical Computing (IASC), International Association of
Survey Statisticians (IASS), and the International Association for Statistical
Education (IASE). Thus it is an umbrella meeting with a wide range sessions with
applications of interest for thousands of statisticians. The travel grants will
provide partial support to defray transportation costs for individuals selected
from institutions and non-profit associations. An emphasis of the award is to
encourage and provide the opportunity for younger statisticians, as well as
statisticians from disadvantaged groups, to participate in the meeting.

Participants will be notified of the availability of the travel grant through
Amstat News, a membership publication of the ASA, and on the ASA Home Page on
the Internet. Notices will be provided to university and college departments to
encourage younger statisticians to apply for the travel grant. A review and
selection committee will be established to review the applications and select
grantees. The committee will be comprised of four or more ASA members and will
convene at the ASA office in Alexandria, Virginia. Special consideration will be
given to statisticians who have recently received their Ph.D.'s and to women and
minorities.




