
* 0713868
* International Conference on Computational Methods in Energy and Environmental Research
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2007,08/17/2007
* Guan Qin,TX,Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2008
* USD 27,000.00

Real world problems that arise in energy and environmental research are often
times mathematically challenged. They contain comprehensive issues that require
thorough understanding of the underlining principles of physics, mathematical
modeling, numerical solution techniques and computing infrastructure. Therefore,
it is essential to form a multi-disciplinary team to efficiently solve theses
problems. This inaugural conference on Computational Methods in Energy and
Environmental Research will be a highly multi-disciplinary meeting. Researchers
from different disciplines will attack some of the critical challenges in energy
and environmental research. The objective of the conference is to have the
researchers present their work and share their vision on important energy and
environmental issues. In the mean time, they will listen, consult and learn from
others, especially from those who are engaged in different disciplines. The
plenary speakers, who are leading researchers in their area, will present their
research and vision to lead the conference discussion. The plenary sessions will
be followed by parallel minisymposium sessions, which feature in-depth technical
discussions on the subject of special interest that is related to the conference
topics.

The organizing committee chose to hold the inaugural conference in China for
China's increasing importance in global energy and environment development.
China is currently the world's second biggest energy consumer and greenhouse gas
emitter after the United States. In the battle against energy shortage and vast
environmental footprints, China's top leaders have launched robust policy
initiatives that support research on renewable sources, energy efficiency,
policy, petroleum exploration and other important energy and environmental
problems. The organizing committee anticipates strong participation from Chinese
energy and environmental research communities. They will share the hard lessons
learnt and also catch up with frontier research through interactions with
leading international scientists. It is also the first U.S.-China conference in
this very important field. The conference will foster open dialogue and
substantial research collaborations that will benefit both counties and arm them
for the battle against energy crisis and global environmental deterioration.
