
* 0713682
* Harvey Mudd College Mathematics Conference Series
* DMS,INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
* 03/15/2008,01/12/2010
* Susan Martonosi,CA,Harvey Mudd College
* Continuing Grant
* Dean Evasius
* 02/28/2011
* USD 49,022.00

The mathematics department at Harvey Mudd College in Claremont, CA has been
organizing a series of annual mathematics conferences since 1999. These
conferences, unusual because the topics vary from year to year, have been
designed to expose faculty, recent post-docs, graduate students and
undergraduates to cutting-edge mathematics, and to enhance the Harvey Mudd
College research environment by fostering interactions between its students and
faculty and the participants of the conference. Since 2004, these conferences
have benefitted from NSF grants which have permitted the conference to grow and
attract a national audience. This award will continue to provide support for
four plenary speakers and a contributed poster session. It will also further
broaden the geographic participation in the conferences by providing travel
support for graduate students and recent Ph.D.'s, with preference given to
members of under-represented groups.

By bringing topflight researchers to Harvey Mudd College each fall, the
conferences expose participants to a wide range of mathematics. Past topics have
included analysis; applied mathematics; differential geometry; applied algebra
and combinatorics; mathematical biology; geometry, algebra and phylogenetic
trees; scientific computing; and enumerative combinatorics. The planned topics
for the conferences covered by this award are public sector operations research,
nonlinear analysis, and fluid mechanics. The conferences give rise to activities
and projects in mathematics courses taught at Harvey Mudd College, and many
Harvey Mudd College undergraduates are in attendance. They also serve as a
convenient gathering place for mathematicians and mathematics students in
Southern California, fostering interaction and collaboration in several
mathematical communities. With community-wide pre-conference talks that
emphasize the impact and beauty of mathematics, these conferences will annually
influence nearly 200 people, encouraging mathematical research while also
strengthening public awareness of mathematics.
