
* 0714620
* Formal Power Series and Algebraic Combinatorics Conferences in 2007 and 2008
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 06/01/2007,03/11/2008
* Helene Barcelo,AZ,Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 05/31/2009
* USD 46,625.00

In July 2007, the nineteenth international conference entitled Formal Power
Series and Algebraic Combinatorics (FPSAC) will be held at the Center for
Combinatorics at Nankai University in Tianjin, China. In June 2008, the
twentieth FPSAC international conference will be held in Valparaiso, Chile. The
funding from this grant will be used to exclusively support the attendance, at
each of these 2 conferences, of 45 graduate students, post-doctoral students,
early career researchers, and researchers from underrepresented groups, who are
studying or working at American Universities.

Traditionally, the FPSAC conferences feature 9 plenary speakers, approximately
30 contributed talks, and 2 poster sessions. The number of participants varies
between 120 to 200 from all around the world, of whom between 70 to 120 are
graduate students and early career researchers. The continuing success of the
annual FPSAC conferences stems in part from their considerable interdisciplinary
breadth---linking leading researchers in combinatorial mathematics with strong
researchers in allied fields drawn from pure and applied mathematics,
theoretical computer science, physics, and biology. The considerable span of
this conference series is unique among international conferences with an
emphasis on combinatorial mathematics.

The principal topics featured during the next two FPSAC conferences will be:
algebraic and enumerative combinatorics and their applications and relations to
other areas of mathematics, physics, biology, and computer science. The
interdisciplinary span is evidenced by the choice of plenary speakers. All the
plenary speakers for China have confirmed their participation. Those are: Bruce
C. Berndt (U. of Illinois, USA), Philippe Biane (Ecole Normale Superieure,
France), Anders Buch (Rutgers U., USA), Maxime Crochemore (U. of Marne-la-
Vallee, France), Eva-Maria Feichtner (U. of Stuttgart, Germany), Sergey Fomin
(U. of Michigan, USA), Ezra Miller (U. of Minnesota, USA), Soichi Okada (Nagoya
U. Japan), and Peter Paule (U. of Linz, Austria). As for the FPSAC'08 in Chile,
the following speakers have confirmed their participation: Marcelo Aguiar (Texas
AM), Micheal Albert (U. of Otago, New Zealand), Jonathan Brundan (U. of Oregon,
USA), Ian Grojnowski (U. of Cambridge, UK), Maria Ronco (U. de Valparaiso,
Chile). The Chair and co-Chair for the Scientific program of the FPSAC'07
conference are: Bill Chen of Nankai University, China and Jean-Yves Thibon of
the University of Marne-La-Vall\'ee, France. For the FPSAC'08 conference the
chair and co-chair are: Luc Lapointe of the Universidad de Talca, and Bruce
Sagan of Michigan State University.

A distinguishing characteristic of FPSAC conferences is the concerted effort to
recognize and encourage outstanding young scientists. This is accomplished in
part by choosing at least one plenary speaker to be an ``emerging'' star (Eva-
Maria Feichtner, Marcelo Aguiar and Jonathan Brundan) and by ensuring that
talented young researchers are well represented among the speakers selected for
contributed talks. Another special feature of the FPSAC conferences is a
continuing effort to emphasize inclusiveness among participants. The conference
seeks to draw substantial participation from groups which have been
traditionally under-represented in the mathematical sciences. Attendance at
these two conferences will be exceptionally valuable for graduate students and
junior researchers. China has a vibrant community of researchers in
combinatorics, and in recent years they have sought to significantly increase
their international research collaborations. This will be a unique opportunity
for graduate students and early career resarchers to develop ties with Chinese
researchers. FPSAC 2007 marks the first time this conference series will take
place in Asia. FPSAC 2008 also marks the first time this conference will be held
in South America. In contrast to other countries in the region such as Argentina
and Brazil, Chile still has a relatively small mathematical community. However,
it has been fast growing in recent years. We are hopeful that FPSAC will bolster
the efforts for the developement of mathematics in Chile, at the very least in
the field of Discrete Math. There will be conference Proceedings for each of
these two conferences.
