
* 0714590
* Summer School on Flow in Porous Media with Emphasis on Modeling Oil Reservoirs
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, Hydrologic Sciences
* 06/15/2007,06/08/2007
* Benito Chen,WY,University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Ashwani K. Kapila
* 05/31/2008
* USD 20,000.00

The Department of Mathematics of the University of Wyoming will be hosting a
Summer Conference on Flow in Porous Media with Emphasison Modeling Oil
Reservoirs. This Summer School will be the 2007 edition ofthe Rocky Mathematical
Consortium summer conferences that have been going onfor twenty five years. The
conference is scheduled to last 12 days, from Monday June 18, 2007 to Friday
June 29, 2007. Lectures will only take place during weekdays. Each day of the
meeting will begin with two 75-minutes lecturesby the main lecturers. It is
planned to have two main lecturers per week. Each afternoon will also include
1-2 hours of talks and presentations from additional regional speakers and from
the participants. The objective of the summer school is to educate graduate
students and facultyabout the most recent developments in oil reservoir
modeling, multiphase flowthrough porous media and the numerical and
computational methods used in the simulations. There will also be talks about
multiphase problems in hydrology.The summer school will provide participants
acutting-edge survey of multiphase modeling. Topics to be covered include:
Physicaland chemical structure of porous media, multiphase flow in porous media,
numericalmethods and stochastic modeling of porous media. The four main
lecturers will be:Zhangxin Chen (Southern Methodist University), Martin Diaz
(Instituto Mexicanodel Petroleo), Malgorzata Peszynska (Oregon State University)
and Mohammad Piri (University of Wyoming). There will be additional speakers who
will give one ortwo-hour presentations.

The impact of the program and further goals are to enhancethe general population
understanding of the important role that mathematics playsin their lives through
the study of a vital application, and to help middle school andhigh school
teachers develop lessons for their classrooms. This will help students beginto
understand and enjoy some of the basic mathematical and computational issues
that arise in multiphase flow through porous media. There will be two
conferencesfor a general audience and some participants and speakers will
interact with highschool students and teachers who will be on campus for other
programs, speciallyteachers getting a masters degree by taking summer courses.
These teachers will getideas on how to make mathematics and science more
pertinent and exciting to theirstudents. Participants will get an invaluable
education in a research area of national relevance.
