
* 0717981
* Workshop on Geometry of Holomorphic and Algebraic Curves in Complex Algebraic Varieties
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS, ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 04/15/2007,03/07/2007
* Bernard Shiffman,MD,Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 03/31/2008
* USD 24,000.00

We will bring together top researchers, as well as graduate students and young
mathematicians from the U.S., in both algebraic geometry and complex analysis
for a five-day Workshop from April 30 to May 4, 2007, at the Centre de
Recherches Mathematiques in Montreal. The workshop will focus on a key aspect of
the structure and classification of complex algebraic varieties: the conjectures
of Lang and others on the existence and properties of algebraic and holomorphic
curves in complex varieties. Both analytic and algebraic techniques have
recently played a role in making inroads into these conjectures, which are
related to Mori's program on the algebraic side and which refine Nevanlinna's
Second Main Theorem on the analytic side. The workshop will bring the experts in
algebraic geometry and complex analysis together to foster further interaction
and collaboration.

Complex algebraic varieties, which are the solution sets of polynomial
equations, provide models for describing physical problems in science and
engineering. The understanding of the structure and classification of these
varieties is a central theme in both algebraic geometry and complex analysis.
The workshop will introduce recent developments in this area to graduate
students, postdoctoral researchers and junior faculty members, as well as to
senior mathematicians. Approximately 50 mathematicians, at all stages in their
research careers, are expected to participate; eight of the invited speakers are
postdoctoral researchers or junior faculty members. In addition to the scheduled
talks, we shall provide ample time for open discussions during the afternoons in
order to encourage active participation by graduate students and postdoctoral
researchers. Most of the funding will go towards paying travel expenses of
graduate students, young mathematicians and members of under-represented groups.
