
* 0723627
* International Conference in Harmonic Analysis and Partial Differential Equations with Applications
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/15/2007,05/07/2007
* Guozhen Lu,MI,Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 05/31/2009
* USD 25,760.00

The Mathematics Department of Wayne State University is co-organizing an
"International conference in harmonic analysis and partial differential
equations with applications" from June 24 to June 30, 2007, together with
Beijing Normal University in China, Beijing Institute of Applied Physics and
Computational Mathematics in China and University of Bologna in Italy. The
scheduled conference topics cover a wide range of subjects in harmonic analysis
and partial differential equations with applications, but with a focus of
harmonic analysis techniques. This five-day-long conference is intended to
stimulate further interest in these important mathematical research areas. The
aim of this conference is to highlight the new methods, directions and most
recent developments in harmonic analysis and PDEs. The format of the conference
will be intensive lectures by the invited speakers along with semi-structured
discussion sessions following the invited talks. Invited speakers are from
Italy, US and China. Anticipated participants shall include not only well
established researchers, but also graduate students, postdoctoral and young
researchers. In particular, the conference will encourage the participation of
women, persons with disabilities and people from underrepresented groups.

This conference is expeced to strengthen the US-China and US-Italy research
collaborations. Students, post-doctors and other participants and researchers
from US will have the opportunity to learn new research developments from
speakers from Italy and China. International collaboration is an important
component of mathematical research nowadays. This conference will provide a
unique opportunity to initiate, build up and strengthen such collaborations.
