
* 0724880
* Second International Workshop on Differential Algebra and Related Topics
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 08/01/2007,07/19/2007
* Li Guo,NJ,Rutgers University Newark
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 07/31/2008
* USD 7,000.00

Second International Workshop on Differential Algebra and Related Topics
(0724880)}

Differential algebra studies differential equations from an algebraic point of
view. It extends the analytic study of ordinary and partial differential
equations and generalizes the algebraic study of systems of multivariate
polynomial equations.

Based on the pioneering work of Ritt and foundational and continual research of
Kolchin and others throughout much of the last century, differential algebra has
evolved into an extremely rich subject. The fields of mathematics with which
differential algebra has interactions are highly diversified, ranging from
algebraic geometry and mathematical logic to differential equations and
Diophantine geometry. More recently, new and improved differential algebraic
methods have been incorporated in more and more symbolic computation systems.
Since our first international workshop (held at Rutgers University at Newark on
November 2--3, 2000), much progress has also been made by researchers in related
algebra structures, such as difference algebra, differential schemes, and Rota-
Baxter algebra (which has a linear operator that generalizes the integration
operator with its integration by parts formula). In particular, the study of
Rota-Baxter algebras links several areas of mathematics and physics.

This diversity and rapid progress increasingly challenge researchers in one
branch of differential algebra to stay ahead of the developments in other
branches. Furthermore, the sophistication and specialization of the language
make it more difficult for mathematicians in other fields to appreciate the
advances in differential algebra. In response to the need raised by the above
concerns, we are organizing a second international workshop, to be held again at
Rutgers University at Newark in April 12--13, 2007, to bring together
international experts from the different branches to give expository talks on
their fields.

The workshop will provide broad surveys of the methods and results of
differential algebra developed since the first workshop, encourage potential
collaborations to extend new theories and solve open problems, and attract
graduate students and new researchers. To bring the participants further up to
date on the most current research results, we are coordinating with organizers
of the Kolchin Seminar in Differential Algebra at the City University of New
York to hold a Special Session at the AMS meeting at Stevens Institute of
Technology immediately following this workshop.


