
* 0729565
* Design and Analysis of Experiments (DAE 2007) Conference
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 09/01/2007,07/10/2007
* Manohar Aggarwal,TN,University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2008
* USD 25,000.00

The Design and Analysis of Experiments 2007 Conference (DAE 2007) will be hosted
by the University of Memphis in October 31 to November 3, 2007. This will be the
fifth in a series of conferences whose principal aims are to provide support and
encouragement to junior researchers in the field of design and analysis of
experiments and to stimulate interest in topics of practical relevance to
science and industry. The focus of DAE2007 is on emerging areas of research in
experimental design, as well as novel innovations in traditional areas. The
conference will cover topics of importance to the academic and industrial
community, such as screening experiments, computer experiments, sequential
designs, split plot and split lot designs, designs for biomedical experiments
and genetic studies.

The design and analysis of experiments is at the foundation of the scientific
method. It is used in applications across all scientific disciplines and
engineering. It is used throughout business and industry to improve the
reliability of processes and equipment and to identify and understand how
process factors affect output. It is used in medicine, especially in the design
of clinical trials and biomedical experiments and is also used in many other
scientific disciplines. The advancement of statistical theory and methodology
over the past years has resulted in the development of sophisticated methods
capable of analyzing complex experiments. This has given rise to a demand for
efficient designs for these experiments. At the same time, a new generation of
enthusiastic and talented researchers in design of experiments is needed in the
years to come to carry out original theoretical and applied research in the
emerging areas. The junior researchers of today need to be nurtured and
encouraged to assume this role. For this purpose, DAE2007 will bring together
senior and junior researchers and practicing statisticians from universities and
industry to discuss research and the future directions of the field.
Additionally, DAE2007 will strengthen collaborative research between academia
and industry and will broaden the participation of underrepresented groups,
mainly minorities and women.
