
* 0734827
* KUMUNU 2007
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 08/15/2007,05/16/2007
* Brian Harbourne,NE,University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 07/31/2008
* USD 8,545.00

2007 KUMUNU conference to be held at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln,
September 8-9. KUMUNU is an annual weekend conference anchored by the
Universities of Kansas (KU), Missouri-Columbia (MU) and Nebraska-Lincoln (NU),
promoting interaction among researchers, postdocs and graduate students in
commutative algebra and related disciplines (such as algebraic geometry,
representation theory, combinatorics, K-theory and coding theory) at regional
schools. The KUMUNU triad has significant strength in these areas. The KUMUNU
conference has a tradition of playing a strong regional mentoring role at all
levels, including graduate students, recent PhD's and faculty at nonPhD granting
institutions. KUMUNU accomplishes this by providing an annual venue bringing
these groups together with senior researchers at KU, MU and NU in addition to
one or two senior researchers from outside the region. KUMUNU stimulates
interaction by having a series of 7 short (45 minute) talks, accessible to
graduate students, by speakers representing a diverse mix of senior researchers,
young faculty and postdocs, with plenty of time reserved outside of talks for
additional interaction. In addition to faculty and postdocs at KU, MU and NU,
speakers in the past have come from Colorado State University, Kansas State
University, Michigan, Michigan State, New Mexico State, Notre Dame, Purdue,
Texas Tech University, University of Texas-Austin, and Washington University.
Other participants have come from such diverse institutions as Benedictine
College, University of Missouri-Kansas City, Missouri State University, Georgia
State University, University of Arkansas and Gustavus Adolphus College. Travel
and lodging support, especially for graduate students, is a key element for
KUMUNU to achieve its main goals of showcasing the research of postdocs and
young faculty, and of helping recent Ph.D.s and graduate students in commutative
algebra and related disciplines enrich their research programs by meeting
experienced researchers based at KU, MU, NU and elsewhere, by learning about
recent developments in commutative algebra, by exchanging ideas with one
another, and by developing collaborations for future research.
