
* 0735361
* NSF/CBMS Regional Conference in the Mathematical Sciences -- Inverse Scattering for Radar Imaging -- Spring 2008
* DMS,INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
* 01/01/2008,10/26/2007
* Tuncay Aktosun,TX,University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Dean Evasius
* 12/31/2008
* USD 32,990.00

This conference features Prof. Margaret Cheney of Rensselaer Polytechnic
Institute as the distinguished lecturer who will deliver ten lectures in the
field of inverse scattering for radar imaging. The basic idea behind radar
imaging is to illuminate a target with pulses of electromagnetic waves; the
reflected waves are recorded and analyzed in order to make an image of the
target or to determine its properties.

The field of radar imaging has been developed, during the last fifty years,
entirely within the engineering community. Fifty years ago many of the
challenges were engineering ones: It was difficult to design equipment to
transmit microwaves at the high powers necessary and to detect the very faint
returning signals. These hardware problems, however, have generally been
overcome, and the remaining challenges in the field are mainly mathematical:
What waveforms should we transmit? Where should we position the antennas to
obtain the information we want? How should we process the data to make high-
resolution images? How can we detect and remove artifacts? Can we form images of
targets hidden by foliage? Can we determine the material properties of a target?
Any significant future progress in the field is possible only if such problems
are analyzed mathematically, and it is essential for mathematicians to
understand the basic problems in this field and to contribute to the field.

The conference will bring all the major ideas and results in the field, provide
a deeper understanding of the main open problems, and outline current directions
in the field. The participants will include both established researchers and
interested qualified newcomers, and special efforts will be made to include
postdoctoral fellows, graduate students, and traditionally underrepresented
groups. The conference will allow participants to interact with each other and
also with the principal lecturer, will promote interdisciplinary work and
collaborations, will stimulate the regional research activity in an atmosphere
conducive to establishing long term collaborations, and will also provide an
interdisciplinary environment where mathematicians and researchers from other
areas interact
