
* 0735260
* NSF-CBMS Regional Conference on Water Waves-Theory and Experiment
* DMS,INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
* 05/15/2008,10/24/2007
* Mohammad Mahmood,DC,Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Dean Evasius
* 04/30/2009
* USD 32,999.00

The theory of water waves has a long and distinguished history, with important
contributions from Euler, Stokes, Kelvin, Zakharov and others. The subject has
had practical application throughout history; its recent significance was
demonstrated dramatically by the tsunami of 2004, the storm surge that battered
New Orleans in 2005, and "rogue waves" that seem to appear and disappear
mysteriously. In each of these cases, the large amplitudes of these waves were
predicted poorly or not at all and caused enormous damage. For these reasons and
others, much of the emphasis in current research on water waves is on the
dynamics of nonlinear waves, with finite amplitude. More abstractly, this
subject is a prototype of a dynamical system that exhibits interesting nonlinear
phenomena: resonant interactions, solitons, wave breaking and more.

In a series of ten lectures, Professor Harvey Segur (University of Colorado at
Boulder) will develop the mathematical theory of water waves, starting from
basic principles and ending at forefronts of research in several directions. The
lectures are intended to be accessible to someone with a basic knowledge of
partial differential equations and of classical physics. The lecture series has
two objectives: (i) to identify mathematical methods that have proven useful in
solving important problems in this subject; and (ii) to identify important open
problems.

Some of the topics to be discussed are:

-What are the governing equations of water waves? Stokes' formulation (from
1847) is the most commonly accepted statement of the problem, and it describes
very many (but not all) of the phenomena observed. -Which physical phenomena can
be predicted easily from these equations? Some examples are phase velocity,
group velocity, dispersive waves, wave focusing, deep water vs. shallow water,
and more. -How can participants at the conference observe these physical
phenomena?

This lecture series will differ from others in the CBMS series in that a
laboratory will be set up, where Professor Diane Henderson (Penn State
University) will create a series of physical experiments on water waves.
Participants at the conference will be encouraged to 'play' in the laboratory,
and to see how mathematical concepts from the lectures appear naturally in
physical experiments.

-Both deterministic and statistical models are used to predict oceanic events
like storms, dangerously high seas and tsunamis. What are the advantages and
disadvantages of each kind of model? -Careful analysis, applied to Stokes'
formulation, has led to impressive new results, both in terms of well-posedness
and in terms of existence of wave patterns of permanent form. What are these
results? -What have we learned from approximate theories of water waves? Is
there more to learn from them? For example, the interlocking miracles of soliton
theory were first discovered in the KdV equation, which was derived by Korteweg
and de Vries as an approximate model of wave propagation in shallow water. -What
important physical phenomena are not described by Stokes' formulation? -What are
some of the open problems in this subject?
