
* 0735233
* NSF/CBMS Regional Conference in the Mathematical Sciences: Topology, C*- algebras, and String Duality, June 2008
* DMS,INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
* 03/01/2008,09/30/2008
* Greg Friedman,TX,Texas Christian University
* Standard Grant
* Dean Evasius
* 02/28/2010
* USD 33,088.00

The Prinicpal Investigators will organize a CBMS (Conference Board of the
Mathematical Sciences) conference on Topology, C*-algebras, and String Duality
from June 2 to June 6, 2008, to be held in the southwest region of the United
States at Texas Christian University in Fort Worth, Texas, featuring Professor
Jonathan Rosenberg of the University of Maryland as the principal speaker.

The purpose of the meeting will be to present to a diverse audience, especially
to young researchers, an overview of an exciting area of research combining
ideas from topology, operator algebras, and mathematical physics. Interaction of
participants from all backgrounds will be strongly encouraged. The central focus
of the lectures will be on attempts to put T-duality in string theory on a firm
mathematical foundation. The idea of T-duality suggests that sometimes two
different space-times are physically indistinguishable when circles in the first
space-time (say of radius R) are replaced by their "dual circles" (of radius
1/R). We will examine how such a duality can be explained (at least in part) in
terms of topology or C*-algebras.

Professor Rosenberg's 10 lectures will focus primarily on the following topics:
(1) The basic structure of string theories and the idea of T-duality, (2)
K-theory and its relevance to physics, (3) Continuous-trace C*-algebras, twisted
K-theory, C*-crossed products, and their K-theory, (4) The topology of T-duality
and T-duality via crossed products, (5) Higher-dimensional T-duality via
topological methods, and (6) Higher-dimensional T-duality via C*-algebraic
methods. Finally, some advanced topics and open problems dealing with string
duality from other perspectives will be discussed as time permits.
