
* 0735319
* NSF/CBMS Regional Conference in the Mathematical Sciences: Tropical Geometry & Mirror Symmetry, December 13-17, 2008
* DMS,INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
* 02/01/2008,01/23/2008
* Ricardo Castano-Bernard,KS,Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Dean Evasius
* 01/31/2010
* USD 33,000.00

The emphasis of this conference will be put on the interplay between tropical
geometry and mirror symmetry. The principal lecturer will be Mark Gross from
University of California, San Diego. Mirror symmetry poses the equivalence
between different models of string theory. This phenomenon involves several
dualities such as the Homological Mirror symmetry, the Strominger-Yau-Zaslow
duality, the Batyrev-Borisov duality, and the Landau-Ginzburg model. Tropical
geometry is a relatively new subject that has proved to be very effective
solving problems in computer science, mathematical biology and statistical
physics. In the past few years, tropical geometry has also been applied to solve
problems in Gromov-Witten theory and, more recently, mirror symmetry.

The conference will provide a comprehensive expository treatment of the
interaction between tropical geometry and mirror symmetry. Mark Gross will
deliver a series of lectures around subjects such as: tropical curves & affine
manifolds; Calabi-Yau degenerations & logarithmic structures; and the tropical
Morse category. In addition, there will be introductory mini-courses and special
seminar lectures delivered by leading experts in the field.
