
* 0737765
* School and Conference in Symmetries and Integrability of Difference Equations
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2007,08/21/2007
* Peter Olver,MN,University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 08/31/2008
* USD 37,675.00

This award supports attendance by U.S. participants in a summer school and a
subsequent conference to be held in Montreal, Canada in June, 2008:

(1) The Summer School on Symmetries and Integrability of Difference Equations,
to be held 9-21 June 2008, is organized as a NATO Advanced Study Institute in
the framework of the Seminaire de Mathematiques Superieures (SMS), a series of
summer schools organized at the Universite de Montreal annually since 1962.

(2) The conference, Symmetries and Integrability of Difference Equations, to be
held 23-29 June 2008, is the 8th in a series, begun in 1994, of biennial
meetings in the field.

The aim of the summer school is to make the recent progress in the field of
symmetries and integrability of difference equations available to researchers at
the graduate-student, postdoctoral, and junior faculty levels. Specific topics
to be covered are: (1) Discrete integrable and isomonodromic systems; (2)
Discrete Painleve equations; (3) Singularity confinement, algebraic entropy and
Nevanlinna theory; (4) Discrete differential geometry; (5) Special functions as
solutions of difference or q-difference equations; (6) Integrability, symmetry
and numerical methods; (7) Lie symmetries of difference systems; (8) Integrable
chains; (9) Coding theory, sparse recovery, and image reconstruction.

The subsequent conference is intended to bring together leading experts in the
field, including mathematicians, physicists, and engineers, to exchange
information on significant recent progress in the research area.

A proceedings volume is to be published by the Centre de Recherches
Mathematiques Press and distributed by the American Mathematical Society. A
panel discussion on the status of the field and future prospects for advances
and applications will be an integral part of the conference and will be posted
on the conference web site, together with copies of slides of conference
presentations and posters. NSF funds will be used to foster U.S. participation,
particularly by graduate students and postdocs. Women and underrepresented
groups are especially encouraged to apply for support.

Conference web site: http://www.physics.utu.fi/theory/SIDE/
