
* 0751568
* Workshop on: Discovery in Complex or Massive Datasets: Common Statistical Themes
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 09/01/2007,08/24/2007
* Jianqing Fan,NJ,Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2008
* USD 45,530.00

The amount and complexity of data generated to support contemporary science
continues to grow rapidly. In domains from genomics to climate science,
statisticians are actively engaged in interdisciplinary research teams. The
history of statistics shows that, while frequently arising in response to
challenges in specific scientific domains such as these, statistical methods and
theory often achieve their full range and power from later application to
subjects far remote from those of origin. The study of the ``intersections'' --
statistical problems, theories and methods that are relevant to multiple domains
of scientific enquiry -- thus offers great opportunity in today's Age of
Information.

The proposed workshop responds to this opportunity: it aims to enumerate today's
most intellectually compelling statistical challenges arising out of these
intersections, in the hope of stimulating future research advances that will
extend and enhance our data analytic toolkit for scientific discovery. The
proceedings and discussions of the workshop will be distilled into a 10-15 page
report, which will be disseminated widely by NSF through its website and other
usual channels. This workshop and report respond to a number of compelling
national needs: a) enhancing the nation's ``methodologic infrastructure'' for
research, by advancing the capability of statistical theories and methods to
contribute to discovery from massive and/or complex datasets, b) through
promotion of research on statistical intersections, to advance the pre- and
post- doctoral level training of research statisticians who will be critically
needed core faculty members in expanding graduate and undergraduate degree
programs in statistics in the U.S., c) fostering the flow of ideas between
disciplines, as analysis methods developed in one domain are transferred in
other areas.


