
* 0751511
* Request for Student Travel Support to the Isaac Newton Institute Workshops on Statistical Methods for Complex, High-Dimensional Data
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 01/01/2008,11/07/2007
* David Banks,NC,Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 12/31/2008
* USD 15,000.00

The Isaac Newton Institute at the University of Cambridge has organized a six-
month research program on "Statistical Methods for Complex, High-Dimensional
Data" that starts in January, 2008. This program will bring together some of the
world's foremost researchers on critical problems related to manifold learning,
"large p, small n", model capacity, PAC bounds, overcomplete bases, kernel
methods, and related topics. The investigator will use the NSF funds to ensure
that ten of the best U.S. graduate students working in this area have the
opportunity to travel to Cambridge and to participate in one of the three
workshops that anchor the research program.

The Isaac Newton Institute is the major center for mathematical research in
Europe. For 2008, it has organized a program that addresses the major challenge
problem confronting statistics in this decade: how to analyze highly
multivariate and complex data sets. Progress on this problem would significantly
improve the understanding of genetic data from microarray experiments, the
analysis of atmospheric data from distributed sensor systems, complex financial
models, proteomics, text mining, medical imaging, and many other scientific
domains. The NSF funds in this award will be used to support travel by 10 of the
top U.S. graduate students working in these problem areas to attend one of the
the three workshops that have been organized as part of the research program.




