
* 0751449
* Mathematics Research Communities
* DMS,OFFICE OF MULTIDISCIPLINARY AC, INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
* 04/15/2008,09/06/2009
* John Ewing,RI,American Mathematical Society
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 03/31/2012
* USD 962,929.00

This is a project where the American Mathematical Society (AMS) to create a
national program that initiates early career mathematicians into a research
community, guiding them as they begin life as research mathematicians and form
working relationships with other researchers. The goal of this project is to
create research cohorts of young mathematicians that will sustain themselves
over time, fostering joint research and coherent research programs that will,
eventually, reach all research areas of mathematics.

This project is a three-year program, Mathematics Research Communities, that
would include a total of eleven conferences, special sessions at three annual
AMS/MAA Joint Mathematics Meetings, as well as a mentoring program and
discussion network. Conference topics will include both pure and applied
mathematics areas of research. In the first year, 2008, three conferences will
be held on the following topics: - Teichmueller Theory and Low-Dimensional
Topology - Scientific Computing and Advanced Computation - Computational Algebra
and Convexity

Each of these conferences will bring together a diverse group of young
mathematicians. The organizing committee for each conference is composed of
leaders in the field of the conference and includes individuals with previous
experience in organizing successful workshops and conferences. The programs of
these conferences will bring together groups of young mathematicians who are
working on core problems from different perspectives, and will foster exchanges
of concepts and insights that can occur more readily with face-to-face
communication. The AMS has a long track record of attracting outstanding
organizing committees, a key to any successful conference, and administering
them so as to maximize the experience of participants.

The conferences and special sessions at the JMM will bring together senior and
junior researchers in an ideal environment to establish connections, which often
last for many years after the conference itself. Most importantly, this program
will focus on mathematicians who are beginning their research careers; all
program components will help to train and connect the next generation of
researchers in, eventually, all research areas of mathematics. It is the
formation of research cohorts that sets this program apart from any other
(national) professional development programs for mathematicians that currently
exist, and it is this aspect of the program that has the potential to lay a
foundation for decades of research in the U.S. Finally, the AMS is keenly aware
of the need to increase participation of underrepresented groups, and all
aspects of the program will reflect that awareness.

This project was jointly funded by the Division of Mathematical Sciences and
MPS' Office of Multidisciplinary Activities (OMA).
