
* 0752978
* Conference on Low Dimensional Topology and Quantum Geometry, Kansas City, MO
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 12/01/2007,06/05/2008
* Alan Weinstein,CA,University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 11/30/2008
* USD 4,444.00

A scientific symposium titled Low Dimensional Topology and Quantum Geometry will
take place at the National Meeting of the Society for the Advancement of Chicano
and Native Americans in the Sciences (SACNAS) in Kansas City, Missouri on
October 12, 2007. The two a priori disparate fields of low dimensional topology
and quantum geometry are related through theoretical physics and string theory.
Exciting progress has recently been made in each of these subjects
independently, including a proof of the Weinstein conjecture in dimension three,
and the degree-0 Donaldson-Thomas/Gromov-Witten duality. Important open
conjectures motivate continued study; these include notonly the higher-degree
Gromov-Witten/Donaldson-Thomas conjecture and the general Weinstein conjecture,
but also such important topics as the Volume conjecture, the Crepant Resolution
Conjecture. Furthermore, and central to our symposium, there are important
conjectures relating these two sub jects. Most notable is Large N duality,
relating Gromov-Witten theory to knot theory and low dimensional topology. The
speakers at this symposium will announce accomplishments and also discuss new
directions of research. Specifically, Joel Kamnitzer will give an introduction
to knot theory and its relation to derived categories, Mariel Vazqeuz will
discuss applications of knot theory, and Kevin Costello will discuss connections
to Algebraic Geometry and Gromov-Witten theory.

This symposium will enable and encourage students and other scientists to pursue
research in areas related to the interaction of quantum geometry and low
dimensional topology, provide the opportunity for scientists to interact and
foster collaboration and new research, and disseminate knowledge to a wide and
extraordinarily diverse audience. While the reasons for organizing a scientific
symposium on low dimensional topology and quantum geometry are many, there is
additionally an acute need to do so for an audience of underrepresented
minorities. There is at this time significant underrepresentation of minorities
in the mathematical sciences; this underrepresentation is evidently severe in
both low dimensional topology and quantum geometry and certainly the
intersection of these subjects. There are very important questions that need to
be addressed in these subjects, and it is necessary to attract a broad and
diverse audience to work on these problems. Gromov-Witten theory and related
&#64257;elds have been extremely successful in solving outstanding problems,
some over 100 years old, in several branches of mathematics and physics. Low
dimensional topology is not only of basic importance in geometry and topology,
but in several areas of applied mathematics as well, as highlighted in this
symposium. It is predicted that underrepresented minorities will become the
majority of United States Citizens; as such, it is in the long term interest of
low dimensional topology and quantum geometry to have increased participation
from members of these groups. Moreover, given the importance of these sub jects
to mathematics and science in general, it is in our National interest to work
against the underrepresentation of minorities conducting research in these
fields. This symposium has been approved and scheduled by SACNAS.

Further information about mathematics at SACNAS in general, and about this
symposium in particular, can be found, respectively, at
http://www.uprh.edu/~sacnas/ and
http://math.berkeley.edu/~dkarp/sacnas/2007.html.
