
* 0753092
* Conferences on Frontiers of Applied and Computational Mathematics, 2008-2010
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2008,06/03/2010
* Daljit Ahluwalia,NJ,New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 06/30/2011
* USD 90,150.00

Ahluwalia DMS-0753092

The investigators organize an annual conference on Frontiers in Applied and
Computational Mathematics (FACM) on the campus of the New Jersey Institute of
Technology (NJIT) in Newark, New Jersey. The conferences include the significant
participation of undergraduate and graduate students, postdoctoral fellows, and
junior faculty. The FACM conference series has been organized over the past four
years by the Department of Mathematical Sciences and the Center for Applied
Mathematics and Statistics at NJIT and is partially funded through an NJIT
Strategic Initiative Plan. The conference has become a leading forum for the
dissemination of research in applied and computational mathematics and applied
statistics. The three year conference plan for 2008-2010 is as follows: FACM '08
is a large (250-300 participants) general meeting in applied mathematics,
involving in particular mathematical biology, fluid dynamics, wave propagation,
and applied probability and statistics. FACM '09 and '10 are smaller (125-150
participants) focused meetings on mathematical biology and fluid dynamics,
respectively, which are areas of focus in the Department.

This conference series brings together mathematicians, statisticians,
physicists, engineers, and biologists to share results of their research in
applied and computational mathematics and applied statistics. The broader
impacts are that significant cross-fertilization takes place during and after
the conferences between researchers in different disciplines who utilize the
methods of applied mathematics, statistics and numerical computation. For
students and postdocs, this is a major learning experience that helps them with
future presentations and research. For many of these students, such a local
research conference is their first exposure to high quality research being
undertaken at other research institutions. This exposure helps students strive
to emulate the quality of these research activities. Past FACM conferences have
an excellent record of participation of women and underrepresented minorities,
and special efforts are made to continue this trend.


