
* 0753096
* U.S. participation in "O-minimal Structures and Real Analytic Geometry"
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS
* 09/01/2008,03/04/2008
* Christopher Miller,OH,Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Bruce E. Sagan
* 08/31/2009
* USD 40,000.00

ABSTRACT

Miller and Keyfitz propose to help fund participation by U.S. mathematicians,
and mathematicians in training, in the thematic program "O-minimal Structures
and Real Analytic Geometry" to be held at the Fields Institute for Research in
Mathematical Sciences (Toronto, Ontario, Cananda) from January through June of
2009.

The intellectual merit of the project arises as follows. Many results of so-
called classical mathematics are very general: They apply to a wide range of
input, so to speak, and thus tend to produce a wide range of output. But one
could hope that if the input is particularly well behaved in some respect, then
the output would be similarly well behaved. This turns out to be true in many
important cases, but usually requires new, more constructive, proofs of
classical results, as well as a deeper understanding of which inputs should be
regarded as well behaved. The theory of o-minimal structures on the real field,
a sub-discipline of mathematical logic, has been developed in large part to deal
with this issue. This has been a rapidly developing area for the last two and a
half decades, with many contributions from, and cooperation between, researchers
from several branches of mathematics and logic, in particular, model theory and
real analytic geometry. Applications have been found in areas as diverse as
theoretical economics, neural-net learning theory, and hybrid control systems,
as well as in pure mathematics.

The broader impact of the project arises primarily as follows. It is an
important goal of the program to introduce or elaborate the main themes of the
program to U.S. mathematicians, and mathematicians in training, as the
combination of o-minimality and real-analytic geometry is not currently widely
practiced in the U.S. The direct impact of NSF funding will be the training and
advancement of research of a significant number of U.S. researchers---especially
junior faculty, postdoctoral fellows and graduate students---who will gain the
opportunity to participate in the program.


