
* 0753635
* Infinite Possibilities Conference
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 01/01/2008,12/18/2007
* Kimberly Weems,NC,North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 12/31/2008
* USD 10,013.00

The Infinite Possibilities Conference promotes, educates, encourages and
supports minority women interested in mathematics and statistics. This national
event assembles female mathematical scientists from underrepresented groups for
a two-day conference at North Carolina State University. The plenary speakers
include the following inspiring mathematical scientists: Dr. Alicia Carriquiry,
professor of statistics at Iowa State University and editorial board member of
several Latin American journals of statistics and mathematics; Dr. Iris Mack,
the second African-American woman to earn a Ph.D. in applied mathematics from
Harvard University; and Dr. Freda Porter, President and CEO of Porter Scientific
and founding member of the North Carolina American Indian Chamber of Commerce.
These speakers showcase the importance of mathematics and statistics in
forensic, financial and environmental applications. Participants present
research projects during the poster session and concurrent research talks. Also,
participants learn how to best write a proof and improve technical writing
skills at workshops. Through the Dialogues in Mathematics sessions, the
conference creates a forum to discuss experiences unique to minority female
mathematicians and statisticians and identifies factors leading to success in
the mathematical sciences for underrepresented minority women.

The goal of the Infinite Possibilities Conference, by presenting examples and
showcasing role models, is to make all participants aware of the unlimited ways
in which mathematicians and statisticians contribute to the scientific community
and society at large. This conference provides a forum for underrepresented
minority females to share experiences in mathematics and statistics as well as
an opportunity to share resources and build networks. Participants include high
school students, undergraduates, graduate students, and professionals from the
various fields in mathematics and statistics. The Infinite Possibilities
Conference increases awareness of existing organizations and programs that
support women and underrepresented minority groups. In addition, it celebrates
and honors the achievements of minority women in the mathematical sciences.


