
* 0753043
* Conference Proposal: Theory and Applications of Benford's Law
* DMS,PROBABILITY, ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, STATISTICS
* 12/01/2007,10/17/2007
* Steven Miller,RI,Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 11/30/2008
* USD 13,368.00

Benford's Law describes the distribution of the leading significant digit of
many data sets; rather than being uniformly distributed, the probability the
first digit equals d is often log_10(1 + 1/d). The number of systems satisfying
Benford's Law is astounding, and extremely diverse, including budget and income
tax data, stock market tables, census figures, DCT-domain coefficients in
images, hydrology data, standard mathematical functions (such as n!), iterates
of dynamical maps, values of L-functions and characteristic polynomials of
random matrix ensembles, solutions of recurrence relations, and the 3x+1
problem, to name just a few. We believe that our proposed workshop is the first
attempt to assemble a large, representative sample of people in the myriad of
disciplines working on the theory and applications of Benford's law. There are
numerous examples of major advances in science and mathematics arising from
people applying the tools and techniques of one field in another. We hope to
have similar success here. Specifically, by gathering experts from all the
different fields studying Benford's law, we plan on disseminating the problems
and techniques across the different disciplines. It is likely that participants
will be able to provide helpful suggestions to each other (or be intrigued by
proposed questions and participate in joint research).

The list of topics include mathematical foundations, interpretation, information
forensics and fraud detection, signal and data processing, dynamical systems,
complex networks and system design. As one of our primary goals is to
disseminate knowledge of tools, techniques and problems related to Benford's Law
throughout the community, we plan on publishing proceedings of the workshop. We
are investigating the publication through SIAM or AMS of a book based on the
workshop talks, as well as possibly some expository articles. The immediate
deliverables of the workshop will be a report, as well as electronic
proceedings. The longer term deliverables are published proceedings as well as a
team proposal for a large grant.


