
* 0753038
* Conference: Motives, Quantum Field Theory and Pseudodifferential Operators
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS, APPLIED MATHEMATICS, ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 04/01/2008,02/18/2010
* Steven Rosenberg,MA,Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Zongzhu Lin
* 12/31/2010
* USD 29,610.00

On June 2-14, 2008, Boston University will host the conference Motives, Quantum
Field Theory, and Pseudodifferential Operators. This conference will feature
both introductory and advanced lectures on the rapidly developing relationships
among these established fields. Since the fundamental tools in these research
areas are quite different, there is a need for experts in different aspects of
the conference to both present overviews of their subjects and point out the
interactions among these topics.

Speakers and participants have been invited from the US and Europe. Already over
30 top mathematicians from the three conference fields have agreed to attend,
including Spencer Bloch, Alain Connes, Alexander Goncharov, Dirk Kreimer, and
Richard Melrose. The attendance for this conference is expected to be roughly 75
-- 100 mathematicians and mathematical physicists.

The three fields of motives, quantum field theory, and pseudodifferential
operators are well established and active as independent fields, but until the
past decade they have been viewed as essentially disjoint enterprises. The
theory of motives was developed by Grothendieck in the 1960s as an arithmetic
algebraic geometric setup incorporating diverse cohomology theories.
Perturbative quantum field theory first appeared around 1945 to explain
laboratory results in quantum electrodynamics and other field theories, and
depends heavily on the calculation of Feynman integrals. Finally, the theory of
pseudodifferential operators, dating from the 1960s, is a framework to treat all
classical differential, Green's and heat operators in one setting.

Until recently, connections among these apparently very different fields were
limited mainly to the appearance of Green's operators in quantum field theory.
The unexpected appearance of multiple zeta values as values of Feynman integrals
indicated a deep connection between quantum field theory and motives, the usual
setting for multiple zeta functions. In addition, the Hopf algebra structure
encoding the complicated combinatorics of Feynman integrals, uncovered by Connes
and Kreimer, appears both in the theory of multiple zeta values and symbol
calculations for pseudodifferential operators. Further research has shown that
the connections are much more than coincidences, and the work of Bloch, Connes,
Esnault, Kreimer, Marcolli and others points towards the possibility of a
noncommutative geometry explanation or a direct motives/quantum field theory
connection.

This is the first conference on this topic in the US. Since junior faculty and
graduate students are encouraged to attend with partial NSF support, the
schedule will include introductory lectures on the three conference areas and on
Hopf algebras and multiple zeta functions. Other speakers will give research
level talks on the conference areas, with a particular emphasis on their
interactions.
