
* 0753152
* Fields Program on Arithmetic Geometry, Hyperbolic Geometry, and Related Topics: International U.S. Participation
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 05/01/2008,05/17/2010
* Paul Vojta,CA,University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 04/30/2011
* USD 94,750.00

The Fields Institute is an international center for mathematical research
affiliated with the University of Toronto. Since 1992, a major part of the
Institute's activity has focused on semester- and year-long programs designed to
bring the world's leading mathematical researchers from a particular area
together with students, postdoctoral fellows, and young academics.

In July--December, 2008, the Fields Institute will hold a program entitled
"Arithmetic Geometry, Hyperbolic Geometry, and Related Topics." This will be the
Institute's principal activity during that period.

Arithmetic geometry is the application of methods of algebraic geometry to
questions of relevance to number theory. Specifically, given a system of
equations for which one wants to study its rational solutions (or solutions over
a given number field), one studies this system using methods of algebraic
geometry and attempts to show finiteness or sparseness of the set of solutions.
The focus of this program is to do so using ideas stemming from the Thue-Siegel-
Roth theorem in diophantine approximation.

Hyperbolic geometry (as envisioned by this program) is the study of analytic
functions from the complex plane to complex algebraic manifolds, again studied
through the lens of algebraic geometry. If there are no such functions (other
than constant functions), then the manifold is said to be hyperbolic. A weaker
condition would be to show that such maps have sparse image. The main methods
used in this program stem from the work of R. Nevanlinna in value distribution
theory.

Although the above two paragraphs describe very different areas of mathematics,
their statements and methods have been found to be very similar, for reasons
that are not fully understood. In addition, the program will also encompass
Arakelov theory, an area of algebraic geometry that is of particular use in
arithmetic geometry, and which relies heavily on tools of hyperbolic geometry.

This grant will be used to bring US mathematicians to this program and its two
workshops, and support them while there. The funds will be used principally to
support young mathematicians who do not have other sources of support, but may
also help cover travel expenses of some senior participants. Since the basic
program is primarily funded through Canadian sources, the impact of NSF funding
will be highly leveraged, allowing junior and underfunded US researchers to
access the program at the relatively small cost of their own travel and
subsistence.
