
* 0754330
* Conference on Algebraic Cycles: II Progress and Prospects, Spring 2008
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 01/01/2008,02/26/2009
* Roy Joshua,OH,Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Zongzhu Lin
* 12/31/2009
* USD 12,100.00

Abstract

Principal Investigator: Joshua, Roy Proposal Number: DMS - 0754330 Institution:
The Ohio State University Title: Conference on Algebraic Cycles II: Progress and
Prospects

Organizers: Reza Akhtar (Miami University), Patrick Brosnan (University of
British Columbia) and Roy Joshua (The Ohio State University).



This conference will bring together many of the world?s leading mathematicians
to survey current developments, report on recent progress, and anticipate future
developments in the field of algebraic cycles. The conference will also explore
connections with arithmetic geometry and mathematical physics/non-commutative
geometry. Progress in algebraic cycles, with related results in algebraic
K-theory, has been dramatic in recent years. The principal contributors to
motivic cohomology which underlies this progress, Bloch, Lichtenbaum, Levine,
Nori and Friedlander have agreed to participate. Related investigations include
the work of Totaro, Weibel and Esnault all of whom have agreed to participate.
Developments in arithmetic geometry closely related to algebraic cycles involve
the work of Colliot-Thelene and Huber who will also participate in this
conference. The connections between algebraic cycles and mathematical
physics/non-commutative geometry have begun to be explored in recent years. Some
of the main players in this emerging field are Bloch, Esnault and Kreimer: in
addition to Bloch and Esnault, Kreimer also will participate in this conference.

The venue of this conference is The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, from
Monday, March 24 through Saturday, March 29, 2008. The conference plans to
support participation by a number of young people, at both the post-doctoral and
advanced graduate student level, so that it will serve to stimulate increased
interest and participation in these exciting mathematical topics.


