
* 0756904
* Interactions of Classical and Numerical Algebraic Geometry
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 03/15/2008,01/10/2008
* Daniel Bates,MN,University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 02/28/2009
* USD 22,530.00

Algebraic geometry is a classical discipline which has for many years been
situated at the intersection of algebra, number theory, several complex
variables, and geometry in all its incarnations. The advent of personal
computing, and more so the development of software for symbolic computation,
introduced a new facet of the discipline; it was suddenly possible to carry out
computations far too sophisticated to be handled manually. More recently, a
numerical approach to algebraic geometry was pioneered, largely driven by the
work of Sommese, Verschelde, and Wampler. This new field is aptly known as
numerical algebraic geometry. The fundamental technique of this field, known as
homotopy continuation, provides a numerical means of tracking the changing
geometry resulting from algebraically morphing one system of polynomial
equations into another. The ubiquity of polynomial systems throughout the
sciences and engineering means that the techniques of numerical algebraic geome
try may be used to solve problems arising in many different disciplines, such as
kinematics, chemistry, economics, robot vision, and power electronics.

It has recently been realized that the techniques of numerical algebraic
geometry may be used to study problems in classical algebraic geometry as well.
The purpose of this conference is to bring together classical and numerical
algebraic geometers in a lively discussion forum to spark joint efforts between
these two communities. The intersection of these two fields is ripe for rapid
growth fueled by joint work, so it is the hope of the organizers that these
interactions will help to yield important advances along this front. The
conference will take place at the University of Notre Dame from May 22 to May
24, 2008. There will be 13 lectures over those three days, given by eminent
scholars from both communities and from various locations throughout Europe and
the U.S. As this field seems poised to spawn many new avenues of research, the
participation of young mathematicians will be actively sought.
