
* 0757708
* Local and global analysis of groups and related objects, Conference in honor of George Glauberman, March 23-29, 2008, Chicago, IL
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 02/01/2008,02/11/2008
* Alexandre Turull,FL,University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Bruce E. Sagan
* 01/31/2009
* USD 15,000.00

ABSTRACT

Principal Investigator: Turull, Alexandre Proposal Number: DMS - 0757708
Institution: University of Florida Title: Local and global analysis of groups
and related objects, Conference in honor of George Glauberman

The conference "The local and global analysis of groups and related objects", a
one week international conference, will be held at the University of Chicago,
from March 23, 2008 to March 29, 2008. The mathematical study of symmetry is
called group theory. One of the great achievements of Twentieth Century
mathematics is the complete classification of the finite simple groups, the
building blocks of all finite groups. The first major success of the local and
global analysis of groups is precisely the Classification of Finite Simple
Groups. The methods involved in this study arise from a tension between the
properties of p-groups and those of general groups. Exciting developments are
currently taking place in this area. The restructuring and systematization of
the Classification of Finite Simple Groups is progressing at an impressive rate,
with different approaches being actively pursued. Our understanding of the
finite p-groups is rapidly increasing, with important new approaches being
proposed.

The global/local analysis of finite groups, which is the cornerstone of all work
on the classification of finite simple groups, is finding unexpected
applications in new areas of mathematics. This conference, in honor of George
Glauberman, whose work has had a profound influence on this subject, will bring
together experts and young mathematicians in these connected areas to discuss
and learn about the different points of view and the different connections.

Broader Impact: The purpose of this conference is to enhance research, education
and training. The conference will allow experts to keep abreast of the latest
advances in these diverse areas. They will be able to exchange ideas. The
conference will be especially useful for young researchers, and students, who
will be able to get an overview of these interrelated fields. The conference
encourages the participation of women and minorities. It is being publicized
widely through email, mailings, and a web site.
