
* 0758479
* Conference on Mathematical Physics and Geometric Analysis
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 02/01/2008,01/23/2008
* Tara Holm,NY,Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Maria H. Noronha
* 01/31/2010
* USD 25,155.00

This award will support U.S. participants at a four-day conference on
Mathematical Physics and Geometric Analysis in January, 2008, at the Fields
Institute in Toronto, Canada. While many recent conferences have focused single
aspects of geometric analysis, such as symplectic topology, microlocal analysis,
or Poisson geometry, none has hitherto brought together researchers representing
the gamut of subfields. This conference will gather a wide variety of
mathematicians who do not frequently interact. The lectures will cover a broad
range of recent advances in the symplectic geometry, representation theory,
microlocal analysis, and the interactions of these with physics. With an eye
towards the future, a key aim is to identify the significant open problems and
conjectures through formal and informal discussions. The comprehensive nature of
the conference makes an ideal opportunity, not usually available at a
specialized workshop, for graduate students and junior researchers to gain a
perspective of the breadth of geometric analysis and its relationships with
physics. Moreover, the great range of senior researchers at this conference
represent a tremendous resource for junior researchers to seek advice on their
work and to foster new collaborations, as they make the transition from graduate
school to postdoctoral positions to tenure-track positions.



There has been extensive progress in recent years at the interface between
mathematics and physics. This award will allow U.S. mathematicians to
participate in a four-day conference in January, 2008, at the Fields Institute
in Toronto, Canada, where these new developments will be presented and
discussed. Meetings of this kind are often the forum where new collaborations
are formed and new research initiatives undertaken. Hence the principal impact
of this conference is the advancement of discovery and understanding in the wide
variety of mathematical fields that are strongly influenced by physics.
