
* 0802900
* Commutative Algebra: Connections with Algebraic Topology and Representation Theory, May 17-22, 2008, Lincoln, Nebraska
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 02/01/2008,02/05/2008
* Roger Wiegand,NE,University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Bruce E. Sagan
* 01/31/2009
* USD 25,000.00

ABSTRACT

The conference will highlight recent developments in commutative algebra, as
well as its interactions with algebraic topology, group cohomology and
representation theory. The conference will take place May 17-22, 2008 at the
University of Nebraska-Lincoln. The choice of topics and the selection of
speakers recognizes the research contributions of Luchezar Avramov, as well as
his many contributions to his students and postdoctoral mentees.

The conference will feature 20 one-hour lectures by internationally recognized
researchers, plus 9-10 shorter talks by mathematically younger participants. In
order to avoid parallel sessions and to allow ample time for informal
mathematical interaction among the participants, the number of talks will be
limited to 30.

About 130 participants are expected from outside the University of Nebraska, in
addition to about 25 local participants. Partial support for travel and lodging
will be provided for domestic participants, with emphasis on mathematically
young participants (early career and graduate students). Participation by women
and by members of underrepresented minorities will be particularly encouraged.

The field of commutative algebra is in a period of profound transformation.
While its roots in algebraic geometry continue to supply tools, problems and
intuition to commutative algebra itself, new connections to other areas have
been discovered in the last twenty years. Currently commutative algebraists are
involved in intense interactions with researchers in homotopy theory, cohomology
of finite groups and representation theory. The conference will feature one-hour
talks by twenty top researchers, eleven of them in commutative algebra per se,
five in algebraic topology and rational homotopy theory, and four in
representation theory and group cohomology. Many other researchers, established
leaders, recent Ph.D.'s and advanced graduate students, will join these twenty
main speakers for a week of intense mathematical interaction. One can expect
many new insights, collaborations and discoveries as a result of this gathering.

The conference will help recent Ph.D.'s and graduate students to (i) interact
with leading researchers in algebra, (ii) learn about recent developments in
commutative algebra and related fields, (iii) exchange ideas with one another
and (iv) develop collaborations for future research. Graduate students will gain
insights and perspectives that may be lacking at their home institutions.
Postdoctoral scholars, recent Ph.D.'s, and researchers at institutions where
teaching is the primary focus, will bring to their professions an enhanced
enthusiasm for research and a better understanding of important recent
developments in algebra.
