
* 0802740
* New Directions in Algorithms, Combinatorics and Optimization
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 04/01/2008,01/15/2008
* Robin Thomas,GA,Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Bruce E. Sagan
* 03/31/2009
* USD 40,826.00

This award will support an international conference entitled "New directions in
Algorithms, Combinatorics and Optimization". The central theme of this
conference will be combinatorics and its applications in theoretical computer
science and operations research. The conference will take place in May 2008 on
the campus of the Georgia Institute of Technology in midtown Atlanta, and will
honor the 65th birthday of William T. Trotter.

There are two main reasons for holding the conference in Atlanta, namely direct
flights from most of the world's major airports, and the presence of the PhD
program in Algorithms, Combinatorics and Optimization (ACO) at Georgia Tech,
with its more than 45 affiliated faculty and 40 students.

The conference program will consist of approximately 30 invited lectures, a
poster session and a problem session. The conference is expected to attract
200-300 attendees, including local, regional, national and international
delegates. A conference proceedings will be published as a special issue of the
journal Combinatorics, Probability and Computing.

The list of invited speakers includes only the leading experts and fine
expositors. The organizing committee consists of experienced senior researchers
who will uphold very high standards. Georgia Tech has excellent facilities to
accommodate a conference of this type.

Using federal support the organizers will be able to offer financial assistance
to attendees with no outside funding, including students, postdoctoral
associates, junior faculty, women, and underrepresented minorities, with
priority given to young people and members of underrepresented groups. While the
main lectures will be by invitation only, junior scientists will be able to
present in the poster session and participate in the scientific discussions
throughout the conference.

A further aspect of broader impact is the interplay of mathematics, computer
science and operations research, that is already present in the ACO program at
Georgia Tech. This conference will further promote the fruitful interactions of
these disciplines, drawing upon the successful experience at Georgia Tech, and
in doing so will further strengthen the ACO program.

The conference proceedings will be stringently refereed subject to the standards
of premier combinatorics journals. Thus the conference will have lasting impact
not limited to its attendees.
