
* 0810224
* Workshop on Statistical Analysis of Neuronal Data (SANDS) - Participant Support, Pittsburgh, PA, May 2008
* DMS,STATISTICS, Robust Intelligence
* 05/15/2008,05/20/2008
* Robert Kass,PA,Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Yazhen Wang
* 04/30/2009
* USD 10,000.00

Statistical Analysis of Neuronal Data (SAND4) is a workshop devoted to defining
important problems in neuronal data analysis and useful strategies for attacking
them. The conference will display novel statistical methods in the context of
substantive neuroscientific research, and will highlight problems that require
new statistical approaches. Throughout the conference an attempt will be made to
discuss the interplay of statistical theory and practice. There will be 5
scientific sessions, at which 9 senior investigators and 16 junior investigators
will speak. There will also be a poster session. A special issue of the Journal
of Computational Neuroscience is planned for publication of selected papers from
the conference.

Statistical Analysis of Neuronal Data (SAND4) is the fourth international
workshop in the series that began in 2002. The workshops are held in even years
at Carnegie Mellon University during the Spring. The fourth workshop will occur
May 29-31, 2008. SAND4 will bring together neurophysiologists, statisticians,
physicists, computer scientists, and engineers who are interested in
quantitative analysis of neuronal data. This workshop series aims to foster
communication between experimental neuroscientists and those trained in
statistical and computational methods; and to provide further dissemination of
the findings presented at the workshop via a set of peer-reviewed articles.
Secondary objectives are to encourage young researchers, including graduate
students, to present their work; expose young researchers to important
challenges and opportunities in this interdisciplinary domain, while providing a
small meeting atmosphere to facilitate the interaction of young researchers with
senior colleagues; and include as participants women, under-represented
minorities and persons with disabilities who might benefi from the small
workshop environment.
