
* 0814126
* Transformation Groups in Topology and Geometry, July 14-17, 2008
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 04/01/2008,04/03/2009
* Weimin Chen,MA,University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Yongwu  J. Rong
* 03/31/2010
* USD 25,500.00

This project is to provide funding for the international conference
``Transformation Groups in Topology and Geometry'', which will take place at the
University of Massachusetts in Amherst, July 14-17, 2008. The participants of
this conference come from many countries. The conference plans to cover three
subjects. The first is symmetries of 3-dimensional manifolds. The topics to be
discussed include Thurston's Conjecture of geometrization of 3-manifolds with
symmetries whose singular set is of dimension at least 1, geometrization (after
Perelman) of 3-manifolds with finite fundamental groups, and symmetries of
3-manifolds related to knots and links. A second topic is group actions on
4-manifolds. The topics to be discussed include locally linear, topological
actions on 4-manifolds, smooth and symplectic symmetries of 4-manifolds, and
gauge theoretic techniques and their roles in studying symmetries of
4-manifolds. A third subject is transformation groups on higher dimensional
manifolds. The topics to be discussed include homotopy theory in transformation
groups, group actions and surgery theory, group actions in symplectic geometry,
and group actions on algebraic varieties. Besides the standard conference talks
(30 minutes long) there will be invited (1-hour long) plenary talks delivered by
leading researchers in the corresponding areas. These talks will give an
overview of a given research area and suggest possible new research directions.

Symmetry is a fundamental phenomenon in mathematics (as well as physics), which
is a unifying theme of a wide range of research areas. The main purpose of this
conference is to bring together researchers from quite diverse areas of topology
and geometry whose research is related to or involves transformation groups.
This conference will be especially useful to young researchers and graduate
students. For it will give them a chance to obtain a more global and
comprehensive view of various research areas which only on a surface look to be
disjoint and unrelated.
