
* 0817858
* Knots in Washington: Conferences on Knot Theory and its Ramifications 2008-2010
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 05/15/2008,08/24/2009
* Jozef Przytycki,DC,George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 04/30/2011
* USD 97,971.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0817858 Principal Investigator: Jozef H. Przytycki, Yongwu Rong,
Alexander N. Shumakovitch, Hao Wu

A series of conferences devoted to knot theory and its ramifications will be
held in 2008-2010, continuing the "Knots in Washington" conferences held every
semester in the greater Washington, D.C. area since fall 1995. Plenary talks
will survey the state of knowledge in areas such as Khovanov homology, Heegard
Floer homology, and categorification of existing invariants such as skein
modules. Contributed talks and periods devoted to interaction among participants
provide opportunities for graduate students and recent PhDs to be a part of
"Knots in Washington," and the organizers encourage students and junior
researchers to attend these meetings.

Low dimensional topology studies shapes of three and four dimensional spaces.
These dimensions are of particular interest to us because they are the
dimensions of our space and our space-time. Knot theory is a subfield of low
dimensional topology, which studies the knottedness in our space. One of the
main goals of knot theory is to distinguish knotted objects. This is often done
by means of the so called "knot invariants," functions that replace geometric
objects, such as knots, with those that are easier to compare. Over the past two
decades, there have been a flourish of new invariants in low dimensional
topology, boosted by ideas from gauge theory, quantum algebras, and mathematical
physics. The purpose of the "Knots in Washington Conferences" is to bring
together the researchers of the field, including established mathematicians as
well as graduate students and recent PhDs, to discuss the state of the art of
the subject. The conference web page is
http://home.gwu.edu/~przytyck/knots/index.html.


