
* 0835558
* Workshop on Equivariant Gromov-Witten Theory and Symplectic Vortices; July 2009, Luminy, France
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 10/01/2008,09/16/2008
* Christopher Woodward,NJ,Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 09/30/2009
* USD 25,058.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0835558 Principal Investigator: Christopher Woodward

Algebraic geometry, symplectic geometry and low-dimensional topology have been
revolutionized in recent years by the introduction of holomorphic curve
techniques. This workshop, to be held July 6-10, 2009, at the CIRM (Luminy)
conference center, concerns equivariant generalizations of invariants defined by
holomorphic curves. In Gromov-Witten theory, equivariant invariants have been
extensively studied by Givental and others, in the sense of integrals of
equivariant cohomology classes over moduli spaces of stable maps. The focus of
the workshop will be on the following more sophisticated version of equivariant
Gromov-Witten theory: the study of moduli spaces of maps to the stack-theoretic
quotient of, say, a smooth projective variety by a reductive group. By
definition, such a map consists of a holomorphic principal bundle, together with
a section of the associated bundle. From the symplectic point of view, suitable
moduli spaces of such pairs are known as moduli spaces of {\em symplectic
vortices}. The workshop is organized around this specific direction, with an aim
to bring together researchers in algebraic and symplectic geometry who have had
no previous interaction. On the other hand, the workshop will promote discussion
of the interaction of holomorphic maps, gauge theory, and group actions more
broadly. Applications of the theory are expected for instance, to the relation
between Gromov-Witten theories of different varieties, and to the relation
between the gauge-theoretic invariants such as Floer-Donaldson invariants and
their symplectic analogs.

We propose a workshop which will bring together gauge theory and holomorphic
curves. Gauge theory is the study of local symmetry in mathematics and physics;
the most famous example is electromagnetism. Holomorphic curve techniques aim,
in algebraic geometry, to understand spaces by understanding the certain classes
of curves in them, or in symplectic geometry, to understand the periodic orbits
of dynamical systems. Symmetry of the target varieties may be used as a
computational tool, and also combined with holomorphic curves to define new
invariants. The workshop will focus on recent developments and emerging
applications to algebraic geometry, symplectic geometry, and low-dimensional
topology. The workshop will benefit a number of graduate students and
postdoctoral fellows working in this area who have had little interaction with
other groups working on related problems.

The conference web-page controlled by the organizers is
www.math.rutgers.edu/~ctw/Luminy, while that controlled by the conference center
CIRM is www.cirm.univ-
mrs.fr/web.ang/liste_rencontre/Rencontres2009/Renc346/Renc346.html.


