
* 0844136
* Ulam Centennial and Spring Topology and Dynamical Systems Conference 2009; Gainesville, FL, March 2009
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS, TOPOLOGY
* 09/15/2008,09/16/2008
* Philip Boyland,FL,University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 08/31/2009
* USD 47,869.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0844136 Principal Investigator: Philip L. Boyland, Louis S. Block,
Alexander N. Dranishnikov, James E. Keesling

The University of Florida Department of Mathematics will host a joint Ulam
Centennial and 43rd Annual Spring Topology and Dynamical Systems Conference
(Ulam Centennial STDC-2009) from Saturday, March 7 through Thursday, March 12,
2009. The Annual Spring STDC's are among the nation's most successful series of
topology/dynamics conferences. Stanislaw Ulam would turn 100 in Spring, 2009. He
was one of the preeminent mathematical scientists of the 20th century and a
Graduate Research Professor at the University of Florida. In light of Ulam's
many contributions to topology, dynamics, and related fields, it is very fitting
that the annual STDC be combined with an Ulam Centennial. The joint conference
will maintain the basic structure and sessions of the STDC, but will be extended
by 3 days to allow additional special sessions and plenary lectures in the areas
of Ulam's many contributions to mathematics and science.

Topology studies generalized notions of spatial structure; Dynamical Systems
studies the topological and analytic nature of time evolution. Each is a
fundamental part of modern mathematics and has applications as far ranging as
robotics, fluid mixing, computer networks and cardiac rhythms. Conferences are
fundamental to the strength and development of mathematics, and as such are a
fundamental part of the national scientific infrastructure. This conference will
combine the latest results in Topology and Dynamical Systems with many applied
topics associated with Stan Ulam. While Ulam is perhaps best remembered by the
public for his participation in the Manhattan Project, his mathematical and
scientific contributions were wide and deep. They include significant work in
numerical methods, classical mechanics, dynamical systems, number theory, graph
theory, set theory, and ergodic theory. Inspired by Ulam's example, the
conference will advance top quality research in Topology and Dynamical Systems
while facilitating broad and deep interaction among adjacent mathematical
research areas and between abstract and applied research.
