
* 0852276
* Undergraduate Knot Theory Conference; Granville, OH, July 2009
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 01/01/2009,12/11/2008
* Lewis Ludwig,OH,Denison University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 12/31/2009
* USD 28,000.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0852276 Principal Investigator: Lewis D. Ludwig, Colin C. Adams

This grant is to fund the first ever Undergraduate Knot Theory Conference to
take place at Denison University in summer, 2009. Over the last few decades,
there has been a dramatic increase in the involvement of undergraduates in
mathematical research. Knot theory particularly lends itself to this endeavor
since it is highly pictorial, one can easily stated open problems, and students
can get actively involved with examples from the first day. A variety of
Research Experience for Undergraduate (REU) summer programs have pursued
research on this topic. Moreover, there have been various workshops funded by
NSF and the MAA that have helped undergraduate faculty to pursue research with
students in knot theory.

This conference will bring together a variety of mathematicians at various
stages in their careers: undergraduates who are either interested or have
already done research in knot theory, graduate students with undergraduate knot
theory experience, faculty members interested in working with undergraduates on
knot theory research, and four senior researchers in the field who will give
plenary lectures. There will be a wide range of talks by the other participants,
some on research and some expository. As a centerpiece, we will have a
collective problem session to give participants numerous ideas for future
research directions. This conference will provide an opportunity for students to
experience a mathematics research conference that is specifically designed and
directed toward them. Moreover, the conference will establish a supportive
network of students and faculty with an interest in knot theory research, thus
furthering the involvement of students in the field of mathematics.

http://www.denison.edu/academics/departments/mathcs/unknot


