
* 0852516
* SM: Five Inverse Problems Workshops targeting Computational and Applied Mathematics together with Application Areas
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 05/01/2009,04/27/2009
* Joyce McLaughlin,NY,Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 05/31/2013
* USD 87,487.00

McLaughlin DMS-0852516

The investigator and her collagues organize a series of five workshops in five
different application areas of inverse problems. All of the represented fields
are advancing rapidly and in all cases the mathematical advances, the
engineering advances and the new experiments enabled by new technology or
innovative ideas combine together to make a rich opportunity for new research
projects at the interface of disciplines. It is expected that research projects
will be inspired, and in some cases be newly developed, as a result of the
workshops. The presentations include state of the art techniques in mathematical
sciences and engineering; an important addition in some of the workshops is the
inclusion of experimentalists who describe their latest advances, the data sets
that are obtained from those experiments, and their anticipated results from
that data. Early career participants, including a strong representation of
participants from underrepresented groups, are targeted. The Inverse Problems
Center, IPRPI, provides an ideal environment to hold these workshops.

The problem areas being targeted all impact quality of life and safety of
individuals. Two of the workshops specifically target medical imaging; one is in
imaging of biomechanical tissue properties, a new, very fast moving area with
significant success anticipated, and another considers diffusion optical
tomography, which also has a great deal of promise. Successes in these two areas
significantly impact human health. Two other workshops emphazize identification
in geosystems and waveform tomography. Both target understanding the effects of
earthquake dynamics, as well as the identification of new energy sources. As
such, the safety of individuals and quality of individual life is strongly
affected. Finally, the microlocal analysis workshop emphasizes a broad set of
application areas, including radar imaging, which is an important homeland
security component. Much of the grant supports participants who are students,
postdocs, junior faculty, women, and other under-represented groups.
