
* 0852446
* Graduate Student Topology and Geometry Conference
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 01/01/2009,11/10/2008
* Yong-Geun Oh,WI,University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Yongwu  J. Rong
* 12/31/2009
* USD 20,000.00

Building on the success of the tri-annual midwest topology seminars, graduate
students in Geometry and Topology from several midwest institutions began an
annual Graduate Student Topology and Geometry Conference. Now in its seventh
year, the University of Wisconsin will be hosting the conference in 2009. The
plenary speakers will be John Baez from UC-Riverside and a distinguished
geometer. In addition, 27 talks by graduate students, run in parallel sessions,
will be delivered. The grant is primarily to provide travel assistance for
participants and speakers. The conference will run two days and provide ample
opportunities for informal discussions and new introductions to occur.
Historically, these conferences have provided an excellent opportunity for
positive support and fruitful collaborations to begin. The result has often been
to increase students' success rate both in school and during the critical
transition soon after finishing the doctorate. Because of the traditionally high
participation rate among usually under represented demographics at these
conferences combined with the conferences effectiveness as an aid to students
during a critical transition period, partially supporting the approximately 160
participants is an effective investment in the science.

The Graduate Student Topology and Geometry Conference is a two-day event in
which graduate students from across the country meet to share their work, gain
experience presenting at conferences, and hear from some of the most
distinguished geometry and topology professors in the nation. Now in its seventh
year, the conference draws around 160 graduate students from across the United
States. The University of Wisconsin--Madison will be hosting the conference in
2009, with grant funds primarily aimed at providing travel assistance for
participants. The conference consists of twenty-seven talks given by graduate
students, in addition to two plenary talks by visiting professors; this year the
plenary talks are given by John Baez from UC-Riverside and a distinguished
geometer. Through its unique combination of research and expository talks, the
Graduate Student Topology and Geometry Conference creates a supportive
environment to encourage future researchers and to allow them to make contacts
amongst one-another that can lead to future collaboration. Additionally, the
experience of presenting at a conference allows speakers to refine their
speaking skills and grow into more effective communicators. The conference also
encourages communication among different geographic regions. Participants come
from very diverse schools all across the country and include graduate students
at all years of study with a high participation rate among usually under
represented demographics.
