
* 0852231
* The 2009 John H. Barrett Memorial Lectures
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 01/01/2009,11/13/2008
* Jie Xiong,TN,University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 12/31/2009
* USD 15,250.00

The Barrett Lectures Series began in 1970 as a tribute to the memory of our
distinguished scientist, John H. Barrett. They have been given annually since
1972 by a succession of distinguished lecturers on a topic selected by the
Department of Mathematics each year. The 2009 Barrett Lectures will be in the
area of Probability with ``Stochastic Analysis and Its Applications'' as its
general theme. The lecturers will consist of two principle speakers (Professors
Richard Bass and Ofer Zeitouni), who will present three one-hour lectures each;
and five additional invited speakers (Professors Amarjit Budhiraja, Dan Crisan,
Christian Houdre, Davar Khoshnevisan, and Wembo Li), who will give one hour-long
lecture each. Further, about a dozen contributed talks of fifteen minutes each
by junior researchers and graduate students will be given.

The scientific program of the Lecture Series will emphasize a selection of
possible applications of stochastic analysis. Professor Bass proposes to lecture
on potential theory and integro-differential equations while Professor Zeitouni
intends to speak on problems in the study of random walks in random media. The
one-hour speakers are expected to speak on filtering, stochastic partial
differential equations driven by Levy processes, random polynomials, and other
topics related to stochastic analysis and its applications. The main objective
of the 2009-Barrett Lectures is to provide the participants the opportunity to
gain a rapid and concise introduction to these rapidly developing fields of
Stochastic Analysis and Its Applications through lectures and informal
discussions.
