
* 0901523
* Research Experiences in the Mathematical Sciences for Undergraduate Faculty (REMS-UF)
* DMS,INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
* 05/15/2009,04/03/2009
* Roselyn Williams,CA,American Institute of Mathematics
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 04/30/2010
* USD 54,256.00

The Research Experiences in the Mathematical Sciences for the Undergraduate
Faculty (REMS-UF) Workshop will provide faculty members of undergraduate
institutions and universities having limited research activity the opportunity
to have a research experience that will lead to research projects with
undergraduates. Participants will investigate open problems that are suitable
for undergraduate projects at their own institutions. Four research
mathematicians who have experience doing research with undergraduate students
will lead the workshop and present problems in graph theory, number theory,
algebra, and linear algebra. The workshop will begin with lectures and
background information on the problems to be investigated. The participants will
work in teams on the problems and present their results to the entire group.
Numerical experiments and computational investigations are crucial to much of
the research done with undergraduates. Training sessions will be provided on the
use and applications of the free open-source mathematics software Sage.

The primary goal of the workshop is the engagement of participants in
mathematical problems that they can work on with their students; this is not
necessarily expected to lead to publishable research. A secondary goal is to
forge collaborations among the project leaders and participants that will lead
to active involvement of some participants in publishable research through
participation in a research group.

The workshop will be held at the American Institute of Mathematics in Palo Alto,
CA on July 20-24, 2009. Participants will receive full funding for travel,
accommodations, and a per diem.
