
* 0913405
* Conference on: Quantum Groups, Algebraic Groups and Related Topics; Summer 2009, Beijing, China
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 04/01/2009,02/10/2009
* Aloysius Helminck,NC,North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 03/31/2011
* USD 43,000.00

ABSTRACT

Principal Investigator: Helminck, Aloysius G. Proposal Number: DMS - 0913405
Institution: North Carolina State University Title: Conference on: Quantum
Groups, Algebraic Groups and Related Topics

Quantum groups have become a comprehensive and mainstream research area in
mathematics with numerous applications in mathematics and theoretical physics.
It involves research from a broad range of fields, including many types of
algebras, like vertex algebras, Kac-Moody Lie algebras, Hecke algebras, etc.
Much of the theory of quantum groups is based on results developed for algebraic
groups and Lie groups and the interface of these areas continues to provide a
base of new research opportunities. The scope of the areas of quantum and
algebraic groups is very broad and expertise in the various aspects has been
developed all over the world. In order for the subject to continue to develop
and flourish it is important that there are periodic international conferences
bringing together specialists from all over the world together with young
mathematicians and graduate students seeking to specialize in these rich areas.
This will create opportunities for exchange of ideas and to expose new
frontiers.

This award supports the travel expenses of a group of research mathematicians
and graduate students from USA universities to join researchers from Asia,
Australia and Europe in a timely international conference on "Quantum groups,
Algebraic groups and related topics" at the Peking University, Beijing, China
during July 18-23, 2009. Some of the participants will also attend a second
related conference hosted at the Chern Institute of Mathematics, Nankai
University, Tianjin during July 23-27, 2009 on "Quantum algebras and Physics.''
There are more than half dozen major mathematical departments and research
centers in the region such as Peking University, Tsinghua University, Beijing
Normal University, Institute of Mathematics, etc. A large number of graduate
students from local universities and research centers will attend this
conference. The senior invited international experts will outline the future
directions of research in quantum groups and algebraic groups. The informal
sessions will provide ample opportunity for junior researchers and graduate
students to interact with other experts in the field. This conference will bring
unprecedented opportunities for graduate students and young researchers to gain
insights on the important area of quantum groups and algebraic groups. In
particular, the USA graduate students will gain international working
experience. It will also help strengthen the ongoing collaboration between USA
and Chinese mathematicians.
