
* 0913073
* The 2009 Graduate Student Combinatorics Conference; Spring 2009; Lexington, KY
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 03/15/2009,03/09/2009
* Margaret Readdy,KY,University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Zongzhu Lin
* 02/28/2010
* USD 8,603.00

The proposal is to provide partial support for seventy-five graduate students
and the keynote speaker Richard Stanley (MIT) to attend the 2009 Graduate
Student Combinatorics Conference. The University of Kentucky is hosting this
event. The twenty-four student research and expository talks and twenty-five
posters at the poster sessions are a representative sampling of current trends
in algebraic, geometric and topological combinatorics. The talk topics include:
tropical oriented matroids, Coxeter graphs, k-Schur polynomials, permutation
enumeration, Hopf algebras, non-crossing partition lattices, sporadic groups,
the Rogers-Ramanujan identities, Hamiltonian decompositions of multigraphs, free
and non-free hyperplane arrangements, energy of graphs and digraphs, the
Monotone Column Permanent conjecture and k-parabolic subspace arrangments. The
participants hail from leading combinatorics graduate programs in the United
States and Canada. The results intersect work of researchers from a wide variety
of areas of combinatorics, including Ardila and Develin, Babson and
Steingrimsson, Barcelo, Billera and Brenti, Bressoud, Ehrenborg and Readdy,
Fukuyama, Goulden and Jackson, Haglund, Knutson and Miller, and Stanley.

This conference serves to give young researchers in combinatorics a welcoming
medium to present their results, an opportunity to make new professional
contacts, and a forum to showcase new results and trends in combinatorics. The
field of combinatorics is a growing, vibrant and interdisciplinary area of
mathematics. Combinatorialists use techniques from algebra, topology, geometry,
and more recently, harmonic analysis and algebraic statistics to understand
discrete structures. Combinatorial methods are applied to questions in the
sciences, including those stemming from genetics, biology and physics. The GSCC
will expose the participants to many of the new ideas, leading developments and
techniques in combinatorics, will augment the mathematics they are currently
seeing at their home institutions, and will continue to foster the
interdisciplinary nature of the field of combinatorics. Additionally, the poster
session will encourage greater networking and interaction among the participants
and these new professional contacts may very likely result in future research
projects.
