
* 0932078
* Mathematical Sciences Research Institute 5-Year Proposal
* DMS,MSP-OTHER AWARDS, Robert Noyce Scholarship Pgm, CYBERINFRASTRUCTURE, MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES RES INST, CI-TEAM, Discovery Research K-12
* 09/01/2010,01/08/2015
* David Eisenbud,CA,Mathematical Sciences Research Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 04/30/2017
* USD 23,376,432.00

This is a renewal proposal for the Mathematical Sciences Research Institute
(MSRI), which organizes and hosts a variety of working groups of mathematicians
and mathematical scientists, who participate in research and training activities
on topics drawn from a broad spectrum of active areas in fundamental
mathematics. At any given time during the academic year, MSRI is home to 80-90
leading research professors, members, postdoctoral fellows (as well as around 15
graduate students) from around the country and the world who are organized into
semester-long programs (usually two, though, occasionally, one) concentrating in
a particular research area. Each program features introductory and research
workshops, seminars and lectures, postdoctoral mentoring, and general
collaboration between members, with the goal of assimilating and expounding the
latest results in the area, stimulating new research and collaborations, and
disseminating the results, through traditional publication channels as well as
video streaming of lectures. The programs for the next three years include
random matrix theory (2010), arithmetic statistics (2011), and quantitative
geometry (2012). In addition to the semester-long research programs, MSRI
organizes and hosts many workshops each year that benefit the mathematics
community; subjects include mathematics education, recent breakthroughs in
mathematics, graduate and undergraduate training and research, and mathematical
biology. As a result of these combined activities, about 2000 mathematical
scientists each year visit MSRI. Meanwhile, the training of a diverse US
workforce in the mathematical sciences is a high priority, and MSRI works to
increase participation in its activities of women and other under-represented
groups.

The Mathematical Sciences Research Institute (MSRI) in Berkeley, CA is one of
seven Mathematical Sciences Institutes (http://mathinstitutes.org/) supported by
the NSF Division of Mathematical Sciences. The fundamental mission of MSRI is,
first and foremost, to support first-rate mathematical research and to develop
the human resources needed to sustain and apply the resulting knowledge base
and, secondarily, to educate the public about mathematics, its impact and
connections. The MSRI supports programs that promote fundamental research in the
mathematical sciences by bringing together visiting groups of mathematical
scientists from around the US and the world. It hosts semester- and year-long
research programs as well as 1- to 2-week workshops, and it conducts mentoring
and training of early-career mathematicians. The programs are organized around
subjects proposed by members of the mathematics research community that are then
developed with the advice and guidance of MSRI's Scientific Advisory Committee,
which is comprised of leaders in the mathematical sciences. These programs come
from a wide range of areas in mathematics, from number theory (such as the 2011
Arithmetic Statistics Program) to subjects connected to physics and computation
(such as the 2012 Quantitative Geometry Program). The MSRI website
(http://www.msri.org) describes upcoming and past programs, solicits ideas for
future programs, offers application forms for Institute activities, and details
MSRI's extensive outreach and education activities, which help expose to the
public the inherent beauty and utility of mathematics in modern society.
