
* 0935974
* Conference: The Interplay of Algebra and Geometry
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2009
* Pavel Etingof,MA,Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Zongzhu Lin
* 06/30/2010
* USD 36,000.00

ABSTRACT

Principal Investigator: Etingof, Pavel I. Proposal Number: DMS - 0935974
Institution: Massachusetts Institute of Technology Title: Conference: The
Interplay of Algebra and Geometry

The one-week conference entitled "The Interplay of Algebra and Geometry"
intends to present some of the most important and recent developments in
representation theory. It will take place in Cortona (Italy), at the Palazzone,
a conference location belonging to the Scuola Normale Superiore of Pisa, between
June 14 and 20, 2009, on the occasion of Corrado De Concini's 60th birthday. The
speakers will be distinguished mathematicians working in the areas of Lie
groups, representation theory and related fields with an emphasis on the
interplay of algebraic and geometric methods in representation theory. The main
topics of the conference are: finite and infinite dimensional Lie groups and Lie
algebras, representation theory of Lie algebras and algebraic groups, invariant
theory, symmetric and wonderful varieties and their compactifications, quantum
groups and quantum affine algebras, hyperplane and subspace arrangements and
their compactifications.

Representation theory is an area of mathematics that studies symmetry in linear
spaces. It has important applications to quantum physics and chemistry. For
instance, it allows one to incorporate the rotational symmetry of the space into
the study of atoms, ultimately underlying the structure of the Periodic Table of
chemical elements. Also, representation theory is one of the main tools in
classifying elementary particles, and is a fundamental instrument of string
theory, which aims to explain gravity quantum-mechanically. In addition,
representation theory has applications to statistical physics, and to the theory
of quantum computers. Recently, a great progress in representation theory was
made thanks to applying deep ideas from geometry. In the other direction,
representation theory may shed a new light on classical problems in geometry.
The conference will highlight this interplay and will review some of the main
achievements in this field.
