
* 0937695
* CBMS Regional Conference in the Mathematical Sciences-The mathematics of diffusions-May, 2010
* DMS,INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
* 01/01/2010,12/09/2009
* Xuefeng Wang,LA,Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 12/31/2011
* USD 44,899.00

An NSF/CBMS Regional Conference in the Mathematical Sciences will be held at
Tulane University in May, 2010. The principal lecturer, Professor Wei-Ming Ni of
the University of Minnesota, will deliver ten lectures on the mathematics of
diffusions. Diffusion is a very important mechanism that triggers and enhances
patterns in biological and physical systems. The research area has enjoyed a
tremendous growth and nurtured many graduate students and young researchers
since the fundamental and pioneering work of Professor Ni on these phenomena.

Professor Ni's lectures will give not only an overall view of the subject area,
but also open problems and new directions for future research. The lectures will
address various effects of diffusion in nonlinear partial differential
equations. They are of fundamental and practical interest to analysts, applied
mathematicians, experts in computation, as well as scientists from
biology/ecology and physics. The conference will bring mathematics of highest
quality to faculty and students from not only Tulane but also nearby
universities in Louisiana and in the South. The conference is expected to
attract and nurture young mathematicians to/in this important area which has a
lot of potential to grow.
