
* 0937025
* International Symposium on Mathematical Programming 2009; Chicago, IL; August 2009
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2009,06/09/2009
* Stephen Wright,WI,University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Rosemary Renaut
* 06/30/2010
* USD 20,000.00

This project supports travel by graduate students, postdoctoral associates, and
young faculty members from US institutions to the International Symposium in
Mathematical Programming (ISMP), to be held on August 23-28, 2009, in Chicago,
Illinois. This year's ISMP is the twentieth conference in a series that began in
1949 and is held about every three years. ISMP is the major conference for the
optimization / mathematical programming community and is a must-attend event for
researchers in the area worldwide. The attendance has grown from about 40
participants in 1949 to over 1400 at more recent gatherings. About every second
or third ISMP is held in the US. Further information on ISMP 2009 can be found
at http://www.ismp2009.org. ISMP provides the main forum for the exchange of
ideas in optimization, and in particular for cross-fertilization between the
discrete, continuous, and stochastic aspects of the discipline. The major
professional prizes in optimization, which are decided by juries assembled by
MPS and co-sponsoring societies AMS and SIAM, are awarded during the opening
ceremony of ISMP. Particularly notable is the Tucker Prize, which is awarded to
the best student thesis written during the three years preceding ISMP. It has
been a long-standing tradition to hold a technical session at ISMP during which
the three student finalists present their work; this session is always a
highlight of the meeting.

The project provides reimbursement of travel costs for at least 25 graduate
students and young researchers from US institutions to attend ISMP 2009, to a
level of up to $800 per participant. ISMP is the premier conference in
optimization, held triennially. Optimization is a field of mathematical and
computational research that concerns itself with finding the best way to operate
a system subject to restrictions on the choices that can be made. It has
applications in a great many areas of science, engineering, and commerce, which
are illustrated by the following three examples. First, optimization is a vital
tool in designing radiation treatment plans for cancer patients, where the goal
is to irradiate and thus destroy tumors while sparing healthy tissue. Second,
optimization is used in designing mechanical parts for vehicles and machines
that have minimum weight and cost while meeting certain strength and robustness
requirements. Third, optimization is used in budget planning for businesses, to
allocate resources in a way that maximizes expected profit in an uncertain
economic environment. Support of attendance by young US researchers at ISMP will
be of great benefit to their careers and research programs. It will eventually
have important positive benefits for US industry, science, and technology.
Applications for support will be solicited and reviewed by a committee of
optimization researchers. Awardees will be chosen to ensure breadth and
diversity of individuals and institutions represented, and to ensure
participation of women, minorities, and persons with disabilities in ISMP 2009.
