
* 0938266
* CBMS Regional Conference in the Mathematical Sciences - Nonlinear Water Waves with Applications to Wave-Current Interactions and Tsunamis - Spring 2010
* DMS,INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
* 01/01/2010,12/09/2009
* Lokenath Debnath,TX,The University of Texas Rio Grande Valley
* Standard Grant
* Dean Evasius
* 12/31/2010
* USD 39,770.00

NSF/CBMS Regional Conference in the Mathematical Sciences--Nonlinear Water Waves
with Applications to Wave?Current Interactions and Tsunamis--May 17-21, 2010

Professor Adrian Constantin, Chair of Partial Differential Equations, University
of Vienna, Austria, has agreed to serve as the Principal Lecturer of the
conference and to deliver ten lectures on the proposed topic. The objective of
the lectures is to give a self-contained and comprehensive exposition on the new
and modern developments in the subject of nonlinear water waves with a broad
spectrum of nonlinear problems. The general area of the conference's endeavor is
of great scientific interest and has seen an explosive expansion of research
activity in the last few years, both in modern mathematical theory and in
diverse applications. The research focus includes three general aspects
encountered in the theory of nonlinear water waves: (i) the effects of vorticity
on the surface water waves, (ii) the particle motion within water waves and
(iii) wave breaking. These aspects will then be applied to an in-depth study of
destructive tsunamis.

The conference will stimulate interest in research, teaching and learning of
graduate students and faculty of mathematics, science and engineering at The
University of Texas-Pan American (UTPA) and other institutions. This conference
will ultimately prove useful for research and development of more effective
techniques and strategies that lead to better tsunami forecasting, warning and
protective systems that minimize catastrophic damage,loss of human lives and
economic resources. The conference will attract junior researchers, graduate and
postdoctoral students including women, and individuals from underrepresented
groups, most notably Hispanic researchers from South Texas.
