
* 0938769
* CBMS Regional Conference in the Mathematical Sciences - Bayesian Nonparametric Statistical Methods: Theory and Applications - Summer 2010
* DMS,INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
* 01/01/2010,12/01/2009
* Abel Rodriguez,CA,University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Dean Evasius
* 12/31/2010
* USD 34,959.00

The Principal Investigators will organize a five-day conference, focused on the
theory and applications of Bayesian nonparametric statistical methods, that will
feature Dr. Peter Muller of the University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center
as a principal lecturer. Dr. Muller will deliver a total of ten two-hour
lectures (two each day), which will be complemented by four two-hour invited
lectures. The conference will be held at the campus of the University of
California, Santa Cruz between August 16 and August 20, 2010.It will bring
together the major ideas and recent results in the rapidly growing field of
Bayesian nonparametrics, and will chart future directions for research.

Bayesian nonparametric methods constitute an extremely important and timely area
of research in the statistical sciences, which has recently generated enormous
interest and is starting to become widely used in multiple areas of application.
However, the sudden growth in the area of Bayesian nonparametricsover the last
ten years has resulted in a literature that is scattered and confusing for
newcomers, imposing a steep entry barrier into the field. This conference, will
contribute to alleviate this problem. In particular, we expect that it will help
attract new researchers to the field of Bayesian nonparametrics by providing a
well organized introduction to this important research area. In addition, given
the regional emphasis of the conference, we expect that it will strengthen the
links and collaborations between multiple groups working on Bayesian
nonparametric methods in the western United States, including groups at
University of California, Irvine, University ofCalifornia, Santa Cruz,
University of California, Berkeley, and University of Washington.
