
* 0946649
* Supplemental Funding for a Conference on: Combinatorics, groups, algorithms, and complexity; March 2010; Columbus, OH
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, TRUSTWORTHY COMPUTING, COMPLEXITY & CRYPTOGRAPHY
* 12/01/2009,09/18/2009
* Akos Seress,OH,Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 11/30/2010
* USD 20,000.00

ABSTRACT

Principal Investigator: Seress, Akos Proposal Number: DMS - 0946649 Institution:
Ohio State University Research Foundation Title: Supplemental Funding for a
Conference on: Combinatorics, groups, algorithms, and complexity

A conference on ``Combinatorics, groups, algorithms, and complexity'' will be
held on March 21-24, 2010, at The Ohio State University. The objective of the
conference is to provide a forum to explore the manifold interactions between
the branches of mathematics and computer science named in the title. Ever since
the inception of the polynomial-time paradigm in the late 1960s, theoretical
computer science has been a major consumer of concepts and techniques developed
in combinatorics, and, conversely, the conceptual frameworks developed in
algorithms and complexity theory have transformed much of combinatorics. As the
relatively young areas of combinatorics and complexity theory have matured in
the past decades, algebraic methods have become increasingly relevant to each.
Group theory has played an important role both as a source of techniques and as
a subject of rigorous algorithmic study, with the subarea of asymptotic group
theory leading the way in the interaction.

The subareas to be covered include but are not limited to arithmetic
combinatorics, asymptotic group theory, automorphism groups of combinatorial
structures, vertex-transitive graphs, expanders, combinatorial models of
computation (circuits, decision trees, communication complexity, etc.),
probabilistically checkable proofs and approximation algorithms,
derandomization, algebraic graph theory, abelian sandpiles, algorithmic problems
in combinatorics and algebra, mathematical problems motivated by problems in
algorithms and complexity theory. This interdisciplinary conference will focus
on the crossfertilization between the areas of combinatorics, group theory,
algorithms, and complexity theory, the first two being areas of mathematics and
the last two - areas of theoretical computer science. Each of these areas has
significantly contributed to the development of the others over the past
decades. It is expected that the conference will increase our understanding of
the deeper mathematical issues that underlie the connections between these
areas, with implications to each of the areas concerned. A particular occasion
for this meeting will be the 60th birthday of Laszlo Babai whose work has been
influential in developing connections between these fields.




