
* 0955038
* Western Algebraic Geometry Seminar - Five Year Plan
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 03/01/2010,06/04/2014
* Renzo Cavalieri,CO,Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 12/31/2015
* USD 286,742.00

Western Algebraic Geometry Seminar (WAGS) is a weekend conference on algebraic
geometry held twice a year at various institutions in the western region of the
United States and Canada, including Utah, Stanford , British Columbia, Berkeley,
Colorado State, Washington and now Colorado and Arizona. WAGS has been
instrumental in building a vibrant algebraic geometry community in the West. It
provides an important way for researchers to connect to one another in the
broader geographical area. A crucial feature of WAGS is that it provides an
opportunity for algebraic geometers to come together and hear a semesters worth
of seminars. Young researchers and graduate students get the opportunity to meet
senior faculty, and to get a broader sense of the &#64257;eld. The relevance of
WAGS in the development of research in algebraic geometry is underscored by the
fact that many people around the world currently leading the &#64257;eld of
algebraic geometry have come up through the WAGS system.

Algebraic geometry concerns the solution sets of algebraic equations, and has
long been a central subject in mathematics with deep and substantial connections
to almost every aspect of modern mathematics. Beyond the natural interactions
with ?neighboring? mathematical &#64257;elds such as number theory, symplectic
geometry, topology, and commutative algebra, exciting connections have recently
emerged between algebraic geometry and apparently ?foreign? fields including
mathematical physics, biology, digital communications, and robotics. There are
numerous di&#64256;erent approaches to the study of algebraic geometry,
utilizing a wide variety of technical tools; commutative algebra, complex
analysis, sheaf theory, cohomological methods, and combinatorial techniques all
play important roles. The speakers at WAGS are chosen to represent a broad
spectrum of research in the field and a good mix of established figures and
young active researchers. A goal of WAGS is certainly to share new research
result within algebraic geometry community and to encourage new connections and
research collaborations.
