
* 0963810
* Two Spring Lecture Series in Geometric Analysis
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS, ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 04/01/2010,02/09/2010
* Andrew Raich,AR,University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 03/31/2013
* USD 85,762.00

The 35th and 36th Arkansas Spring Lectures Series in the Mathematical Sciences
(SLS) will take place in 2010 and 2011 at the University of Arkansas, in
Fayetteville, AR. The focus topics are the following. For SLS 2010: "Minimal
Surfaces and Mean Curvature Flow." The conference will take place April 15-17,
2010. The principal speaker will be Professor William Minicozzi from Johns
Hopkins University. There will be additional one-hour talks by ten invited
speakers to be chosen by Professor Minicozzi, and several twenty-minute
contributed talks by graduate students and recent Ph.D.'s. Professor Minicozzi
will address recent progress on the study of minimal surfaces and mean curvature
flow. In particular, he will speak about sharp partial regularity theorems for
weak solutions of the mean curvature flow and other instances of the increased
understanding of geometric flows that have accompanied recent dramatic progress
on Ricci flow. Many of the tools of regularity theory that were originally
invented for minimal surfaces have been widely applied to other geometric
problems. In the case of mean curvature flow, this includes the monotonicity
formula of Huisken, Brian White's parabolic version of Federer's dimension
reducing, and Brakke's regularity theorem (which is a parabolic version of
Allard's theorem for stationary varifolds). For SLS 2011: "Conformal
Differential Geometry and Its Interaction with Representation Theory." The
conference will take place April 7-9, 2011, and feature principal speaker
Professor Michael Eastwood of the University of Adelaide. There will be
additional one-hour talks by ten invited speakers to be chosen by Professor
Eastwood, and several twenty-minute contributed talks by graduate students and
recent Ph.D.'s. Professor Eastwood's talks will address the interplay between
conformal differential geometry and Bernstein-Gelfand-Gelfand (BGG) machinery.
The conformal case, important in itself, also acts as an excellent testbed for
the more general theory of parabolic geometry. In particular, these talks will
set the scene for a conjectured vast extension of the BGG machinery and a
properly geometric theory of prolongation. Branson's Q-curvature and its
prescription problem will be discussed in this context. Recent work of Oshima
finds the symmetry algebras of all conformally invariant differential operators
on the flat model. These lectures will discuss the curved cases, which are
completely open at present. Finally, the BGG machinery can be used with complex
analysis to solve reconstruction problems for integral geometry on suitable
homogeneous spaces. The talks will present the current research and outlook in
this direction.

Mathematics conferences are vital to the development of the field. They provide
unique opportunity for scientists from different subfields to meet so as to (a)
summarize the most recent progress in these fields, and their interactions, (b)
present new directions of research with sufficient detail to formulate and
develop a list of open problems, and (c) provide an opportunity to foster new
collaborations and exchange ideas toward the solution of important open
questions. In the tradition of the Arkansas Spring Lectures Series, these
meetings will provide unique opportunities for young researchers and graduate
students to interact with prominent experts in their research areas. Public
talks by Professor Daniel Rockmore (Dartmouth College) in 2010 and by Professor
Eastwood (Adelaide) in 2011 will address audiences of high school students and
the public at large.
