
* 0963919
* SM-Special Year in Arithmetic Geometry at the CRM Barcelona
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 05/01/2010,02/09/2010
* Wayne Raskind,AZ,Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 04/30/2011
* USD 20,000.00

This grant will support US-based speakers and other US-participants to attend
the conference, Regulators III, to take place in July 2010 at the Centre de
Recerca Matematica (CRM) in Barcelona, Spain. This is the culminating conference
of a year-long program in arithmetic geometry at the CRM, and will attract many
of the best researchers in the world. The funding will allow US-based
researchers to learn of the latest developments in a field in which
mathematicians from Europe and Asia have been playing an increasing role over
the last 10 years. Recent developments in the subject include work on
Beilinson?s conjecture on special values of L-functions of certain automorphic
representations of a symplectic group in four variables, and the lack of
surjectivity of certain regulators for generic surfaces of degree at least 5 in
projective 3-space over p-adic fields.



Regulators help to measure the size of objects in arithmetic and geometry, and
they are a unifying theme in the subject. The definition and computation of
regulators is a fundamental part of several parts of mathematics. One recent
theme in the subject has been to transport techniques from arithmetic to
geometric situations, and vice-versa. These methods have allowed us to
demonstrate the existence of interesting elements of important arithmetic and
geometric objects.
