
* 0969578
* A Proposal of the Renewal of the Banff International Research Station for Mathematical Innovation and Discovery (BIRS)
* DMS,MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES RES INST
* 09/01/2010,09/03/2014
* Nassif Ghoussoub,nan,University of British Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 08/31/2016
* USD 3,488,639.00

Established in 2003, the Banff International Research Station (BIRS) is a North
American initiative that addresses the imperatives of collaborative research, of
cross-disciplinary synergy, and of intense and prolonged interactions between
scientists. BIRS is a unique infrastructure that provides a creative environment
for the exchange of ideas, knowledge, and methods within the mathematical
sciences and their vast array of applications.

Unlike any other North American institute, the main mode of operation at BIRS is
a series of weekly workshops, each hosting 42 researchers in disciplines in
which mathematics, computer science and statistics are used in deep and novel
ways. There are 48 such workshops each year. In addition, the Station hosts
teams of two to four researchers for periods of two weeks to allow
collaborative, distraction-free, research and/or to finish major scientific
projects. The setting of the Station has also been ideal for summer schools and
graduate summer camps, for hosting focused collaborative research groups, and
for promoting university-industry interactions. Every year, the station hosts
over 2000 researchers from 400 institutions in more than 30 countries who
participate in over 60 different programs.

BIRS represents a new level of development in North American scientific
cooperation as it brought together for the very first time: Canada's NSERC, the
US National Science Foundation (NSF), the Alberta government, and Mexico's
National Council for Science and Technology (CONACYT) in a partnership of this
scale, providing new and exciting opportunities for North American Faculty and
students giving them access to their international counterparts at the highest
levels and across all mathematical disciplines.
