
* 0969431
* SEAM XXVI Georgia Institute of Technology Spring 2010
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 01/01/2010,01/14/2010
* Brett Wick,GA,Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 12/31/2010
* USD 24,300.00

The proposal is for partial funding of the 26th Southeastern Analysis Meeting
(SEAM). The meeting will be held from March 25 to 28, 2010, at the Georgia
Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia. The purpose of SEAM is to disseminate
and exchange the latest ideas and developments in classical analysis, complex
analysis, and operator theory. Emphasis is placed on involving junior faculty
and graduate students in the meeting. The host school will provide facilities
and cover local organizing expenses. NSF funding will be used to pay for the
expenses of the main speakers and for participant support. Priority will be
given to graduate students, post-docs, younger faculty, and members of
underrepresented groups. Historically, the topics of the main lectures have
reflected the major current developments in analysis. The intimate format of the
meeting fosters collaborations between younger and more senior mathematicians,
and, in the past, this exchange of ideas has lead to significant scientific
advances in the area and likely will do so in the future.

In its more than a quarter of a century history, SEAM has served as the first
significant research experience for many beginning researchers and advanced
graduate students. In particular, SEAM has always been very successful in
promoting participation from under-represented groups, women, and minorities.
Because the conference is so well-known and well-advertised, we have confidence
that this trend will continue for the 26th SEAM.
