
* 1001890
* Collaborative Research: Atlanta Lecture Series on Combinatorics and Graph Theory
* DMS,Combinatorics
* 03/15/2010,04/13/2010
* Guantao Chen,GA,Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 02/29/2012
* USD 4,700.00

The Atlanta Lecture Series on Combinatorics and Graph Theory is a series of
three mini-conferences hosted jointly by Emory University, the Georgia Institute
of Technology and Georgia State University. As the various areas of
combinatorics and graph theory have matured, many new techniques and ground-
breaking results have been established. Often these break-throughs are relevant
to other areas of mathematics or other disciplines. Techniques and results in
combinatorics and graph theory have greatly impacted such fields as computer
science, bioinformatics, transportation and communication network theory,
topology, algebra and computational matrix theory to name just a few.

The areas to be covered by these conferences include, but are not limited to
extremal, algebraic and probabilistic combinatorics and graph theory, as well as
structural and topological graph theory. These interdisciplinary meetings will
focus on the interplay of results across areas including extremal graph and
hypergraph theory, random graphs, structural graph theory, topological graph
theory, poset theory, probabilistic combinatorics, domination theory and graph
algorithms. It is expected that the conference will also promote deeper
collaborations among researchers from the surrounding region, as well as build
both the knowledge base and set of potential collaborators for participating
young researchers and graduate students.
