
* 1001167
* Automorphic Forms Workshop
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 01/15/2010,02/03/2010
* Pavel Guerzhoy,HI,University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 12/31/2010
* USD 15,000.00

Automorphic Forms is a central subject in contemporary number theory.
Traditionally participants of this annual workshop come from a whole range of
research domains related to Automorphic Forms such as Maass wave forms, elliptic
curves, Siegel and Jacobi modular forms, classical and p-adic theory of modular
forms, arithmetic of special values of L-functions, Langlands program, to name a
few. Over the years these presentations proved to be of high quality, and the
role of the workshop as one of the leading forums in the area was established.
This year we intend to put some emphasis on recent developments in the theory of
mock modular forms. This area is very actively developing during recent years,
many basic papers exist currently only as preprints, basic notions are not yet
described systematically. It is already clear that this theory has a
considerable amount of connections with various branches of mathematics (such as
combinatorics, Artin L-functions, hypergeometric functions, Lie theory, and
topology), and even some areas of physics (e.g., conformal field theory). Most
of these areas are already known to have strong connection to Automorphic Forms.
Disseminating the knowledge about these new developments is among the priorities
of this year's workshop.

The Workshop on Automorphic Forms and Related Topics is an internationally
recognized conference attended regularly by many leading experts in this wide
area of mathematics. Traditionally, this workshop has a unique feature to
attract a significant number of junior mathematicians and encourage them to
deliver research presentations. About half of the participants are US
mathematicians at the early stages of their careers and this workshop is
especially beneficial to them. This conference provides junior mathematicians a
rare opportunity to interact with a wide range of senior mathematicians whose
expertise is related to their research field. Broadening their horizons and
adopting different points of view boosts their preparation and allows them to
gain a deeper understanding of the subject. Attracting a considerable amount of
junior mathematicians, the workshop provides them an excellent opportunity to
get to know each other, and to find out about young researchers in related
areas. This kind of networking may enhance their careers in various ways:
initiate future research collaborations, obtain career advice, set up the links
which will help a lot in future exchange of ideas. The workshop will also be
attended by undergraduate students from the University of Hawaii. Many of these
students belong to the local population, and may never have a chance to travel
to other parts of the country. This population is heavily underrepresented in
science. Attending lectures of world class mathematicians and getting to know
junior mathematicians may highly motivate them, influencing their choices and
preferences concerning their future education and careers.


