
* 1001553
* Palmetto Number Theory Series
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 08/01/2010,02/22/2010
* Matthew Boylan,SC,University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* tara smith
* 07/31/2012
* USD 13,423.00

The Palmetto Number Theory Series (PANTS) is a series of three number theory
meetings per year managed jointly by Clemson University and the University of
South Carolina, the flagship research institutions in South Carolina, the
Palmetto state. Meetings are planned for December 2010 at the University of
South Carolina, February 2011 at the Clemson University, and September 2010 at a
third Southeastern school. In recent years, there have been important
development in number theory and conference will help to disseminate new
developments and new results, as well as to train graduate students and junior
researchers in the region.

An important goal of these meetings is to provide the number theory community in
the Southeast region to keep up to date recent research results and development
in number theory. The primary research topics are in analytic number theory,
arithmetic geometry, and automorphic and modular forms. PANTS meetings bring
prominent researchers in number theory to the southeastern region to keep
graduate students and junior faculty into research areas of emerging interests.
The frequency and regularity of the meetings promotes collaboration and
strengthens working relationships between participants. Another objective of
PANTS meetings is to involve number theorists at all career stages and types of
institutions at minimal cost. PANTS speakers include graduate students, junior
faculty, and senior faculty. PANTS participants come not only from South
Carolina, but from schools in neighboring states. They come from Ph.D. granting
institutions, institutions whose highest degree awarded is a master's degree,
and from institutions granting only baccalaureate degrees. The organizers will
also continue to try to attract a demographically diverse participant base,
including women and other underrepresented groups.
