
* 1003889
* Workshop on Fluid Motion Driven by Immersed Structures: Analysis, Computation, and Applications
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2010,07/19/2010
* Anita Layton,NC,Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2011
* USD 41,550.00

This project will provide travel support for graduate students and junior
faculty to attend the Workshop on Fluid Motion Driven by Immersed Structures, to
be held in August of 2010 at the Fields Institute. The meeting will be organized
around three main themes: formulation and analysis of the underlying governing
equations; algorithmic and computational issues related to increasing accuracy
and efficiency through use of adaptivity, novel time-stepping schemes and
parallelism; applications to problems in the biological, physical and
engineering sciences. The principal goal of this workshop is to advance the
field of fluid-structure interactions on various fronts, in part, via the
gathering of a number of highly-respected applied mathematicians and engineers,
who have agreed to present keynote lectures. In addition, the workshop will
include two tutorials targeted to graduate students and junior mathematicians,
with the goal of providing training opportunities to young scientists. By
providing travel support, the workshop will facilitate the exposure of graduate
and undergraduate students to state-of-the-art current research.

The workshop will bring together pioneers in both applied mathematics and
engineering, who work on advanced computational techniques for simulating the
interactions between fluid and an immersed structure. There is tremendous
interest in the development and application of such techniques, in large part,
because of the multitude of applications in biology and medicine. For example,
these techniques have been used to simulate fluid flows around heart valves, so
to shed insights into the design of prosthetic mitral heart valves. Also,
recognizing that a commitment to nurturing young scientists is essential to the
continued growth and success of a field, the workshop will attract junior
participants (graduate students and junior faculty) by providing travel support
and by making sure that keynote lectures are accessible.
