
* 1005317
* Rocky Mountain Summer School: Conservation Laws & Applications
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2010,06/18/2010
* Gregory Lyng,WY,University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2011
* USD 25,000.00

This award supports travel for participants in the summer school program
"Conservation Laws and Applications," held at the University of Wyoming on June
22 through July 2, 2010. This summer school, part of an annual program organized
and sponsored by the Rocky Mountain Mathematics Consortium (RMMC), focuses on
recent developments in the understanding of conservation laws. The program
begins with a tutorial on the subject, followed by lectures to introduce the
participants to current research. The program is designed to balance the
mathematical, computational, and modeling aspects of conservation laws, and it
aims to expose participants, especially graduate students, to current areas of
active research in the field.

Conservation Laws (or balance laws) are systems of partial differential
equations that arise naturally as models for a variety of physical phenomena,
including fluid dynamics, magneto-hydrodynamics, combustion, oil recovery, and
nonlinear elasticity. The focus of this summer program is on recent developments
in the understanding of such equations. Beginning with a rapid tutorial phase,
the program will expose participants to current areas of active research and
help prepare them to pursue open problems in the field. The program will touch
on both theoretical and computational aspects of conservation laws, and
application areas (old and new) in which conservation laws play a central role
will be highlighted. Participation of members of groups underrepresented in
mathematics is encouraged and supported.

Summer school web site: http://math.uwyo.edu/rmmc/2010/
