
* 1007305
* Conference - The 2010 Graduate Student Topology and Geometry Conference to be held Spring 2010 at the University of Michigan in Ann Arbor
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 03/01/2010,02/22/2010
* Lizhen Ji,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 02/28/2011
* USD 29,500.00

Building upon the success of the tri-annual MidWest topology seminars, graduate
students in Geometry and Topology from several MidWest institutions began an
annual Graduate Student Topology Conference. Now in its eighth year, the
University of Michigan will be hosting the conference in 2010. The plenary
speakers will be Alan Reid from University of Texas, Austin, and Doug Ravenel
from University of Rochester. In addition, twenty-four talks by graduate
students, run in parallel sessions, will be delivered in many of the following
subfields: hyperbolic geometry, three--manifolds, homotopy theory, symplectic
geometry, dynamics, knot theory, cobordism theory, category theory, Teichmueller
theory, four--manifolds, differential topology, geometric group theory, and
algebraic K--theory. This year we are very excited to add, for the first time,
three open-problem sessions run by local young faculty in three different areas
of geometry/topology. The grant is primarily to provide travel assistance for
participants and speakers. The conference will run two days and provide ample
opportunities for first introductions and fruitful discussions to occur, as well
as new collaborations to begin. This conference format helps beginning graduate
students to gain a broad introduction to an active and diverse area of
mathematics, and equally well helps older graduate students nearing the end of
their degrees to transition to their post-docs knowing a large group of peers in
their field.

Very little math is done is complete isolation. Most often, new mathematics
comes about when mathematicians feed off of each others' creativity and ideas.
It is important for young mathematicians (graduate students) to feel part of
this vibrant collaborative mathematical community from the get-go. Now in its
eighth year, the Graduate Student Topology and Geometry Conference is a two day
event in which graduate students from across the country, from all years of
study, come to share their work in Geometry and Topology. They meet and talk
with their mathematical peers, gain professional experience presenting at a
conference, and hear from some of the most distinguished professors in the
nation. The conference format consists of talks by graduate students, post-docs,
and distinguished faculty. Geometry and Topology are different, but related,
fields of mathematics. While Topology is the study of "coarse" spaces without a
notion of distance, in Geometry, spaces come equipped with a precise way of
measuring length and area. These two fields interact and inform one-another
greatly. Although typically coined as "pure" math, geometry and topology have
important applications to quantum computing, DNA research, and theoretical
physics. This grant is primarily to fund the travel expenses for the expected
160 participants.
