
* 1007096
* Talbot Workshops 2011 - 2013
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 09/01/2010,05/24/2010
* Haynes Miller,MA,Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 08/31/2013
* USD 60,273.00

The Talbot 2010 workshop aims to create an informal and collaborative
environment where students and specialists in representation theory, algebraic
geometry, topology, and mathematical physics work together to understand recent
advances in conformal field theory, K-theory, and loop groups. In particular,
the lectures, given primarily by the participants, will culminate in explaining
the proof of the celebrated theorem of Freed, Hopkins, and Teleman that
identifies the Verlinde algebra of a loop group LG with the G-equivariant
twisted K-theory of the Lie group G. Talbot workshops in 2011, 2012, and 2013
will likewise involve a diverse group of graduate students and postdoctoral
researchers from different institutions and from a wide range of fields to study
a specific subject of contemporary mathematical importance. Possibilities
include, but are not limited to, stability conditions on triangulated
categories, string topology, non-abelian Hodge theory, and topological conformal
field theory. These workshops will introduce aspiring mathematicians in a
variety of disciplines and from many institutions to vibrant areas of research,
fostering collaboration between fields, forming strong pedagogical and research
ties between established mathematicians and young researchers, and thus
promoting future collaboration and research.



The Talbot workshop is an innovative annual mathematical retreat that brings a
group of graduate students and postdoctoral researchers together with a faculty
mentor for a week-long, intensive exploration of a single topic of contemporary
research interest. The topic of study varies from year to year but tends to
focus on current developments in mathematics at the interface of algebraic
topology, geometry, and physics. Each year, the mentor and organizers design a
sequence of approximately twenty lectures, providing background, context, and
future research directions in this mathematical topic. The mentor typically
gives four of the lectures, and participants give the rest. A distinguishing
feature of Talbot is that the living facilities contain the lecture space,
leading to an informal but mathematically intensive atmosphere. The Talbot
workshops will introduce aspiring mathematicians in a variety of disciplines and
from many institutions to vibrant areas of research, fostering collaboration
between fields and forming strong pedagogical and research ties between
established mathematicians and young researchers.
