
* 1007980
* Mathematics Research Communities
* DMS,INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
* 09/15/2010,08/08/2012
* Ellen Maycock,RI,American Mathematical Society
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 08/31/2014
* USD 1,266,264.00

The American Mathematical Society (AMS) has created the Mathematics Research
Communities (MRC) as a national program to support and guide young
mathematicians as they begin their research careers. The goal of the Mathematics
Research Communities program is to create research cohorts of young
mathematicians that will sustain themselves over time, fostering joint research
and coherent research programs that will, eventually, reach all areas of
mathematics.

The Mathematics Research Communities program strives to achieve this goal
through the following activities: summer research conferences, Special Sessions
at the annual AMS-MAA Joint Mathematics Meetings, a mentoring program and a
discussion network. It is the formation of research cohorts that sets this
program apart from any other (national) professional development programs for
mathematicians that currently exist. The creation of three to six new cohorts
per year has the potential to lay a foundation for decades of research, and will
have an extremely positive effect on mathematics research in the U.S. This
proposal is requesting support for an additional three years of this unique
program. Conference topics will include both pure and applied mathematics areas
of research. In 2010, three conferences will be held on the following topics:
Birational Geometry and Moduli Spaces; Model Theory of Fields; and Commutative
Algebra.

Each of these conferences will bring together a diverse group of young
mathematicians. The organizing committee for each conference is composed of
leaders in the field of the conference and includes individuals with previous
experience in organizing successful workshops and conferences. The conferences
and Special Sessions at the JMM will bring together senior and junior
researchers in an ideal environment to establish connections, which often last
for many years after the conference itself. Most importantly, this program will
focus on mathematicians who are beginning their research careers; all program
components will help to train and connect the next generation of researchers in,
eventually, all research areas of mathematics.
