
* 1010995
* Advanced School and Workshops on Discrete Groups in Complex Geometry
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS, ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/2010,04/26/2010
* William Goldman,MD,University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 05/31/2012
* USD 15,360.00

The study of discrete groups in complex geometry originates in the pioneering
work of H. Poincare in the early 20th Century, studying solutions of certain
differential equations on the complex line. This led to the concept of Fuchsian
and Kleinian groups: these are discrete groups of automorphisms of the Riemann
sphere. This turns out to be closely related to hyperbolic geometry, where
Fuchsian and Kleinian groups are groups of isometries of hyperbolic two and
three dimensional spaces. The study of these types of discrete group-actions on
complex spaces, and their generalizations to higher dimensions and to other
geometries, has played for decades a major role in complex geometry and in
holomorphic dynamics. This will be the first conference to bring together
workers in the fields of holomorphic dynamics, higher dimensional complex
Kleinian groups, and the deformation theory of geometric structures on
manifolds.

The aim of this School and Workshop is to introduce young mathematicians to the
foundations of the field, some of its major developments and tools used for its
study. The meeting will start with elementary courses to provide the foundations
of the theory. Then advanced courses and a workshop will lead the participants
to some of the important areas of current research in complex geometry. At the
end of the workshop a problem session will address the future directions of
these fields. This meeting will bring together researchers in diverse, but
related areas, from all over the world. Graduate students and postdocs
especially will benefit from the minicourses being offered in the summer school.
Priority will be given to graduate students, young researchers, under-
represented groups and mathematicians with no other available funding.
Researchers working in the third world countries involved in ICTP and Europe
will have a chance to interact with their counterparts from America.


