
* 1011709
* Conference on Bifurcation Theory, Integrable Systems and the Bispectral Problem
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM, Catalyzing New Intl Collab
* 02/01/2010,02/09/2010
* Plamen Iliev,GA,Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Clancey
* 01/31/2011
* USD 24,800.00

This proposal is to provide support for the participation of US researchers and
graduate students in an international conference on "Bifurcation Theory,
Integrable Systems and the Bispectral Problem" at Sofia University in Sofia,
Bulgaria during May 15-19, 2010.

The conference will stimulate the exchange of ideas between US and foreign
mathematicians in the areas of integrable systems, the bispectral problem and
bifurcation theory. In each of these three areas mathematicians use similar
algebro-geometric, representation theoretic, and analytic methods. By bringing
researchers in these three areas together, the conference will create new
collaborations and strengthen ongoing collaborations between US and European
mathematicians. It will expose a number of young researchers and graduate
students from the US to fundamental research by leading mathematicians. Informal
sessions will provide ample opportunities for junior researchers and graduate
students to interact with experts in the fields. The conference will also
provide a valuable opportunity for the US graduate students to exchange ideas
and education experience with their European peers. This award is co-funded by
the Office of International Science and Engineering.
