
* 1013877
* S4 Conference on Symmetry, Separation, Super-integrability and Special Functions
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2010,07/10/2010
* Peter Olver,MN,University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 08/31/2011
* USD 28,450.00

This award supports travel for junior researchers and invited speakers
participating in the "Conference on Symmetry, Separation, Super-Integrability
and Special Functions," held 17-19 September 2010 at the University of
Minnesota, Twin Cities. The meeting focuses on recent developments and new
challenges in symmetry methods for analysis of mathematical models that arise in
a broad range of physical applications. The conference topics include: -- Linear
and nonlinear Lie symmetries of differential and difference equations: hidden
(higher order) symmetries, differential invariants. -- Separation of variables
theory and its relation to symmetry; applications to spinor equations and
general relativity. -- Super-integrability of classical and quantum systems. --
Exact and quasi-exact solvability for Schrodinger eigenvalue equations. --
Relationship between symmetries and super-integrability of differential systems
(especially hidden symmetries) and the theory of special functions. --
q-algebras and q-special functions; Askey-Wilson polynomials. -- Representation
theory of Lie algebras, quadratic algebras, and cubic algebras.

The conference will assemble leading experts, promising younger researchers, and
graduate students from around the world to assess the rapid advances in the
area, reach a consensus on what are the most important problems, and evaluate
the most promising directions for further advances. The conference will include
a panel discussion that takes stock of the field, to be documented and posted
online. The conference encourages and supports participation by graduate
students, postdocs, junior faculty, women, and minorities.

Conference web site: http://www.math.umn.edu/conferences/s4/
