
* 1014643
* Supporting the Conference Series: CBMS Regional Research Conferences in the Mathematical Sciences
* DMS,INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM, Discovery Research K-12
* 06/01/2010,09/23/2011
* Ronald Rosier,NY,Conference Board Math Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 05/31/2014
* USD 292,105.00

The NSF/CBMS series of Regional Research Conferences in Mathematics is an
ongoing cooperative project administered by the Conference Board of the
Mathematical Sciences (CBMS) and supported continuously by NSF for the past 41
years. CBMS promotes, administers, and provides support services for the series.
Each conference features a distinguished lecturer who delivers a sequence of ten
lectures on a topic of important current research in one sharply focused area of
the mathematical sciences. The local organizer of each conference invites other
established researchers in the field and interested newcomers, including
graduate students and post doctoral fellows, to participate in the conference.
The lecturer promises to prepare a substantial expository monograph based upon
his or her lectures. Through 2009, a total of 320 such conferences have been
held and 198 monographs have been published in the series.

The purpose of these conferences is to promote research in areas of the
mathematical sciences which have recently seen significant new results and which
hold promise for continued significant development. A conference achieves that
purpose by having the principal lecturer, who is both a major researcher in the
area of the conference and a good expositor, deliver 10 lectures over a five day
period to the participants. The lectures typically cover the recent development
of the field and chart the possible new directions and open problems. Thus the
format of the conferences is primarily educational, but at the research level.
Approximately one-half of the participants at these conferences are graduate
students and postdocs and the conferences give them a good perspective on both
the current research and the interesting open problems in an important area of
mathematics. The resulting monograph reaches a broader audience and provides an
introduction to readers who wish to begin research in the field. Moreover, the
conferences are typically held at institutions that are not yet among the top
research institutions, but which are interested in enhancing their local
research activity. Up to six or seven conferences will be offered in each of the
next three years.
