
* 1015193
* Support for US participation in Nordita/Mittag-Leffler conference and programs on quantum information
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, MATHEMATICAL PHYSICS, Catalyzing New Intl Collab
* 08/15/2010,08/03/2010
* Mary Beth Ruskai,MA,Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2011
* USD 35,000.00

This award supports travel for U.S. participants in two programs on quantum
information science in Sweden during the fall of 2010:

* The scientific program on Quantum Information held at the Nordic Institute for
Theoretical Physics (NORDITA), Stockholm, Sweden, from 27 September to 29
October, 2010. (http://agenda.albanova.se/conferenceDisplay.py?confId=1434)

* The program in Quantum Information Theory held at the Mittag-Leffler
Mathematics Institute, Djursholm, Sweden, from 1 September to 15 December, 2010.
(http://www.mittag-leffler.se/programs/future/1011f/)

Both programs share involvement in a common central meeting, the "International
Conference on Quantum Information and Computation," held 4-8 October 2010 at the
Wenner-Gren Center, Stockholm, Sweden.
(http://agenda.albanova.se/conferenceDisplay.py?confId=1440)

Support under this travel grant is targeted to young U.S. scientists, enabling
them to make important contacts in the international scientific community, and
contributing to the training of the next generation of quantum information
scientists. For further information, please contact Dr. Mary Beth Ruskai, Tufts
University [marybeth.ruskai@tufts.edu].

Quantum information science is the study of using quantum effects for
computation, communication, and cryptography. A quantum computer would be more
powerful than existing ones; it could perform tasks which are not feasible with
the classical computers of today. Although building a quantum computer remains a
formidable challenge, much progress has been made, and devices for new quantum
methods of cryptography are now commercially available. Quantum information
science is an interdisciplinary field, whose participants range from
experimentalists working on the physical implementation of quantum computers and
other information processing devices to mathematicians working in abstract
fields which have had unanticipated applications in quantum information theory.

A quantum computer would threaten the security of commonly-used encryption
protocols for tasks ranging from secure transmission of credit card numbers or
medical records to transmission of information vital to national security. It is
essential that the U.S. remain a leader in this rapidly developing field. This
grant will facilitate the participation of U.S. scientists in important
international research programs on quantum information theory.
