
* 1016803
* The Third Conference on Computational and Mathematical Population Dynamics (CMPD3)
* DMS,MATHEMATICAL BIOLOGY
* 04/01/2010,02/03/2010
* Shigui Ruan,FL,University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Rosemary Renaut
* 03/31/2011
* USD 15,000.00

In the last three decades great progress has been made in the interdisciplinary
study of population dynamics combining scientific computation, mathematics, and
biology, which cover a broad range of topics in biology, ecology, environmental
science, epidemiology, immunology, medical sciences, etc. This proposal is for
partial funding for the Third Conference on "Computational and Mathematical
Population Dynamics (CMPD3)", to be held in Bordeaux, France, May 31 - June 4,
2010. The conference will highlight significant recent developments in these
areas and provide a forum for the participants to meet and communicate their
recent work. One of the aims of the conference is to broaden the education and
stimulate the research of young and under-represented researchers, the funds
will principally support young unsupported researchers (graduate students,
postdoctoral fellows, and junior faculty), NSF funding will be vital in
achieving this goal.

The Conference on Computational and Mathematical Population Dynamics (CMPD3),
Bordeaux, France, May 31 - June 4, 2010, is the third joint meeting of the
Conference on Mathematical Population Dynamics and the Conference on
Deterministic and Stochastic Models for Biological Interactions, with a 25-year
history of international meetings. The goal of this international conference is
to bring together leading researchers from different fields (applied
mathematics, biology, computer science, ecology, epidemiology, medicine, etc.)
to communicate with each other about their current work on computational and
mathematical population dynamics. The conference will provide a unique
opportunity for graduate students and postdoctoral fellows to interact with
leading researchers in these areas. The funding requested from NSF will be used
completely to support U.S. participants, including graduate students,
minorities, women and recent doctoral students in an effort to provide young
researchers and under-represented groups exposure to current research topics and
techniques in the interdisciplinary area of computational and mathematical
population dynamics. Also, the work that will be presented at the conference
will help us to study challenging environmental and health problems, such as
pollution, invasion of species, emerging of new diseases, and surging of
existing diseases.
