
* 1016098
* Geometry, topology, and dynamics in negative curvature
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/2010,09/02/2010
* Jean-Francois Lafont,OH,Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2011
* USD 50,000.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-1016098 Principal Investigator: Jean-Francois R. Lafont, Michael W.
Davis, Pedro Ontaneda

This is a proposal to provide funding for the conference Geometry, Topology and
Dynamics in Negative Curvature to be held in Bangalore, India, during the week
of August 2-7, 2010. The conference is an official satellite conference to the
2010 International Conference of Mathematicians (held in Hyderabad, India). The
goal of this conference is to bring together mathematicians working on different
aspects of negatively curved spaces. It will bring together three distinct
communities of mathematicians: geometers, topologists, and dynamicists. It will
provide a forum for sharing the most recent developments in the study of spaces
of negative (and more generally, non-positive) curvature. A selection of topics
that will be touched upon in the conference include: (1) Gromov hyperbolic
groups, CAT(0)-groups, and geometric group theory, (2) spaces of metrics
(Teichmuller space, moduli space, representation varieties), (3) links with
3-dimensional topology (Geometrization conjecture, mapping class groups), (4)
links with high-dimensional topology (Novikov conjecture, Borel conjecture), (5)
analysis on boundaries of groups and spaces, (6) Anosov flows and dynamics, (7)
flows on homogeneous spaces and applications to number theory. We expect the
conference to provide a "snapshot" of the current state of our knowledge in
matters related to nonpositively curved spaces, as well as to provide a roadmap
for future research in this interdisciplinary field.

Curvature is a fundamental notion in geometry. Zero curvature is the most
physically familiar, and corresponds to an ordinary flat surface. Positive and
negative curvature can be described relative to the familiar zero curvature
setting as follows: one tries to "flatten" the surface near a point, and looks
to see if there is too little or too much fabric to achieve the flattening. For
instance, the surface of a cone or of a cylinder can be unfolded to lie flat, so
these also have zero curvature. But if one tries to flatten the surface of a
sphere (think of the skin of an orange), there is not enough fabric to do this
(i.e. the skin of the orange splits), which corresponds to positive curvature.
Alternatively, if one tries to flatten a saddle shaped surface, folds appear.
There is too much fabric, which corresponds to negative curvature. A space of
nonpositive curvature can now be described as one having the property that, near
every point and for every pair of directions, it looks either flat or like a
saddle shaped surface. Surprisingly, such spaces are much more prevalent than
one would initially guess. Aside from the field of geometry, they naturally
appear in numerous other fields of mathematics: topology, dynamics, number
theory, representation theory, etc. Aspects of nonpositive curvature have also
made an increasing appearance in more applied fields, wherever there has been an
interest in understanding the "shape" of objects (special relativity theory,
crystalline structures in organic chemistry, configuration spaces in robotics,
etc). This conference will bring together international experts working on
various aspects of nonpositively curved spaces. The conference web site is
http://www.icts.res.in/program/gtdnc.
