
* 1019634
* The Fourth Erich L. Lehmann Symposium -- Optimality; May 9-12, 2011; Rice University
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/01/2010,07/16/2010
* Javier Rojo,TX,William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2012
* USD 25,000.00

The conference is the fourth of a series of symposia. The goal of the Symposia
is to examine the role that Optimality can play, or should play, in modern
statistics. Due to the advent of high throughput data collection technology and
the parallel development of computing power to analyze such data, it often
happens that statistical theory gives way to raw computing power. Although most
of the new exciting computational/statistical methodologies have provided tools
to make headway in many important scientific problems, a need to generalize and
systematize this knowledge is now quite evident. The Symposia will bring
together a group of experts to discuss cutting-edge research optimality ideas in
the context of modern statistical methodologies. It is believed that, although
much progress has taken place in areas such as data visualization and data
mining and knowledge discovery among others, the subjects are ripe for the
development of an optimality paradigm that allows for objective comparisons of
methodologies. This new paradigm, although still to be defined, is necessary to
push the research frontiers in these important areas. The conference will
showcase new developments by leading researchers in an environment conducive to
the development of new human resources and an opening session will showcase the
work of young investigators.

With the substantial contributions that statistics continues to make to the
analyses of massive high-dimensional data arising in the biomedical sciences,
national security, reliability of urban infrastructures, atmospheric sciences,
etc, the need to synthesize this knowledge to more efficiently and effectively
analyze such data has come to the forefront of the discipline. Current
statistical efforts, for example, leading to a better understanding of the
stochastic behavior of the power grid, should help in the creation of an
intelligent grid that can better respond to changes in the grid's status and
thus avert cascading failures that currently cost in the order of $104 billion
dollars in the United States alone. The symposium will provide a forum to
showcase the exciting and impacting theoretical work that needs to be developed
to better understand the behavior of these complex systems. In addition, the
symposium will provide the environment for the maturing of young researchers and
the development of more human resources in these important areas.
