
* 1019608
* SWIM - Women in Mathematics - Summer Workshop for High School Students
* DMS,INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM, ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 05/15/2010,05/11/2010
* Anna Wienhard,NJ,Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Dean Evasius
* 04/30/2011
* USD 46,700.00

SWIM -- Women in Mathematics -- Summer Workshop for High School Students is a
10-day workshop seeking to retain talented female students, and to encourage
them to pursue a career in science and mathematics, at the crucial transition
point from high school to college. The SWIM program brings together talented
students in an intense workshop in which they learn, earlier than is typically
the case, advanced mathematical topics, and work on their own research project.
It aims to showcase mathematics as a "living discipline", to stimulate the
intellectual curiosity of the participants, and to convey enthusiasm for the
subject. By bringing together as a group female high school students with a
strong talent for mathematics, to study and work together, and introducing them
to female role models at further stages in a mathematical career, the SWIM
program encourages these students to consider such a mathematical career for
themselves.

Participants in the program are predominantly "rising seniors". They are
recruited countrywide, and selected on the basis of their mathematical talent.
The morning sessions of the workshop consist of two courses, which are more
advanced and of a different nature than typical high school courses. In the
afternoon, groups of two to three participants work together on small research
projects based on the material of the courses. At the end of each afternoon all
the participants meet for a "Women in Mathematics" seminar, introducing the
participants to a variety of women who chose to pursue a career in mathematics,
and discussing a wide range of issues with them. Throughout the workshop the
participants interact with undergraduate students, graduate students and faculty
of the Mathematics Department; they are housed in one of the colleges on campus
and thus get a glimpse of life as an undergraduate student.
