
* 1031448
* 2010 Red Raider Mini-Symposium: Mathematical Modeling in Population Biology and Epidemiology
* DMS,MATHEMATICAL BIOLOGY
* 12/15/2010,12/03/2010
* Lih-Ing Roeger,TX,Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 11/30/2011
* USD 20,790.00

Every year for the past nine years, the Department of Mathematics and Statistics
at Texas Tech University has organized a Red Raider Mini-Symposium. A tradition
has been established of showcasing particular areas of current mathematical
importance through talks given by distinguished mathematicians and scientists
and promising early-career researchers. In 2010, a Red Raider Mini-Symposium
entitled Mathematical Modeling in Population Biology and Epidemiology is planned
for October 28-30 at Texas Tech University in Lubbock, Texas. This is the 10th
Annual Red Raider Mini-Symposium organized by the Department of Mathematics and
Statistics. The symposium features seven distinguished speakers and four early
career speakers. Many other young investigators, including graduate students,
are invited.

The theme for this year's symposium is mathematical modeling in population
biology and epidemiology. This interdisciplinary area utilizes mathematical
techniques from dynamical systems, difference equations, ordinary differential
equations, integral equations, and partial differential equations, and applies
them to current problems in population biology and epidemiology. The symposium
speakers and their research areas emphasize a wide variety of mathematical
approaches to several application areas, including emerging diseases such as
influenza, tuberculosis, HIV, MRSA, the effects of relapse, vaccination,
quarantine, and treatment strategies, chaos in structured population models,
evolution of phenotypic traits using game theoretic approaches, computation of
thresholds for population or disease persistence and extinction, cellular
dynamics in tumor and cancer growth, and competitive dynamics in chemostat
modeling. During the symposium, current research problems and important open
problems are addressed. Additionally, interactions among speakers and attendees
lead to new opportunities for collaborations.

The event is a medium for interactions and discussions among senior scholars,
early career investigators, researchers and students. The symposium presents a
high level of mathematical research, provides a stimulus to higher education and
promotes interdisciplinary interaction among mathematicians, public health
professionals, biologists and other scientists in West Texas and the surrounding
region with participants from across the United States, Canada, and Taiwan. The
event engages a diverse mixture of undergraduate and graduate students from the
mathematical sciences as well as students from other research fields. This
symposium provides opportunities for young investigators to learn about current
problems in interdisciplinary research in population biology and epidemiology
and to meet with leaders in the field.
