
* 1034750
* SM: Arithmetic Groups and Their Applications in Combinatorics, Geometry and Topology
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 04/15/2010,04/26/2010
* Andrei Rapinchuk,VA,University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 03/31/2011
* USD 10,000.00

A workshop ``Arithmetic Groups and Their Applications in Combinatorics, Geometry
and Topology" will be held April 15-18 on the campus of the University of
Virginia in Charlottesville. The scientific program of the workshop will be
composed of lectures delivered by the leading experts in the area from the US,
Brazil, France and Israel, and will highlight the most significant results
obtained in the last few years. Special attention will be given to such topics
as the analysis of structural properties of arithmetic groups (virtual
positivity of the first Betti number, congruence subgroup problem, bounded
generation), their applications in algebraic geometry (fake projective planes
and fake versions of other important algebraic varieties), in differential
geometry and topology (hyperbolic 3-manifolds, isospectral locally symmetric
spaces) and in combinatorics (construction of expanders).

Arithmetic groups are special groups whose elements are matrices with integral
entries. This notion, which can be traced back to the work of Gauss on integral
quadratic form, plays a crucial role in many areas of mathematics including
algebra and various parts of number theory (e.g., the theory of automorphic
forms). In recent years, new applications of the theory of arithmetic groups
have emerged in algebraic and differential geometry, Lie theory and
combinatorics. The workshop will showcase important results involving arithmetic
groups. The focus will be placed on making the methods of the theory of
arithmetic groups accessible to researchers, particularly young ones, working in
a variety of areas.
