
* 1040927
* CBMS Regional Conference in the Mathematical Sciences - Global Harmonic Analysis - June 2011
* DMS,INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
* 01/15/2011,03/21/2011
* Peter Perry,KY,University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 12/31/2011
* USD 43,556.00

Global Harmonic Analysis NSF/CBMS Regional Conference in the Mathematical
Sciences University of Kentucky, June 20-24, 2011

Global harmonic analysis may be viewed as an extension of classical Fourier
theory on the line and on the circle to the geometric setting of Riemannian
manifolds. Riemannian manifolds provide models of both com- pletely integrable
and chaotic dynamical systems, and also provide a setting in which the
connection between "classical" and "quantum" behavior can be carefully studied.
Moreover, just as harmonic analysis on the line and the circle are a fundamental
tool in the study of both linear and nonlinear differ- ential equations in these
settings, so global harmonic analysis is fundamental to the study of di¤erential
equations, such as the wave and Schrödinger equa- tion, on manifolds. On a
general Riemannian manifold, harmonic analysis is the study of eigenfunctions of
the Laplacian in the given Riemannian metric.

Global harmonic analysis refers to the use of the global dynamics of geo- desic
fow on the manifold to study the large-eigenvalue asymptotics of the
eigenfunctions and eigenvalues of the Laplacian on a manifold. Since global
eigenfunctions of the Laplacian on a manifold are eigenfunctions of the wave
group, and the wave group propagates singularities along geodesics, the high-
frequency properties of eigenfunctions are connected to the long-time dy- namics
of the geodesic flow. Two cases of particular interest are quantum complete
integrability, where the underlying geodesic flow is completely in- tegrable,
and quantum chaos, where the underlying geodesic flow is ergodic.

Professor Steve Zelditch of Northwestern University will given ten lectures on
global harmonic analysis. He will begin with basic examples (constant curvature
spaces), develop material on pseudodi¤erential and Fourier inte- gral operators,
derive trace formulas including the celebrated Duistermaat- Guillemin trace
formula, and discuss applications to properties of eigenfunc- tions and
eigenvalues and inverse eigenvalue problems. Completely integrable and ergodic
systems will be considered in depth.
