
* 1040883
* CBMS Regional Conference in the Mathematical Sciences-"Radial Basis Functions: Mathematical Developments and Applications"
* DMS,INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
* 12/01/2010,11/22/2010
* Saeja Kim,MA,University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 11/30/2011
* USD 35,000.00

NSF/CBMS Regional Conference on Radial Basis Functions: Mathematical
Developments and Applications June 20 - 24, 2011 University of Massachusetts
Dartmouth

RBF methods for the solution of partial differential equations have generated
enthusiasm among researchers and made RBF methods an emerging topic. RBF methods
have become popular for their mesh-tolerance, simplicity of implementation, and
dimension-independence. The impact of RBF methods is evident by the large number
of publications on RBF methods, which have appeared in the past decade in
mathematics, physics, and engineering journals. It is a field, which has grown
through significant collaborations across disciplines, and the open and free
exchange of ideas and MATLAB research codes. RBF methods have also been
successfully applied to large-scale geophysical computations, which demonstrate
their great potential in simulation of physical problems.

Despite their growing popularity, there have been few, if any, conferences
dedicated to RBF methods. We propose to host the regional conference entitled
*Radial Basis Functions: Mathematical Developments and Applications *. The
mission of our RBF conference is to educate and motivate researchers (at all
levels) and students in RBF methods, and to stimulate and inspire research in
this field.

The conference will feature ten talks by two leading researchers in this field,
Bengt Fornberg at the Applied Mathematics Department of the University of
Colorado at Boulder and Natasha Flyer at the Institute for Mathematics Applied
to Geosciences of National Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR). In addition,
supplementary forty-minute talks will be given by attendees who are emerging
leaders in this field, who will focus on topics ranging from the numerical
analysis of RBF methods to their applications to large-scale physical problems.
Additionally, an expository monograph based on ten lectures will be prepared and
made available for non-participants, and a web site devoted to the conference
will make it accessible to those who could not attend. The talks will be
designed to appeal to both experts and novices, and to stimulate discussion and
collaboration between the speakers and attendees about recent advances and open
problems in RBF. This conference will provide an environment to communicate the
latest research and development of RBF methods in recent years, and will attract
a wider and more diverse group of researchers to undertake research in RBF
methods and build a supportive community of RBF researchers.
