
* 1040754
* NSF/CBMS Research Conference in the Mathematical Sciences - "Ergodic Methods in the Theory of Fractals" - "6/18/11 - 06/23/11"
* DMS,INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
* 11/01/2010,10/25/2010
* Dmitry Ryabogin,OH,Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 10/31/2012
* USD 40,000.00

NSF/CBMS Regional Conference in the Mathematical Sciences, Ergodic Methods in
the Theory of Fractals, June 18-23, 2011

Fractal geometry studies closed compact subsets of a Euclidean space. The usual
notion of a dimension which is an integer number is replaced by Hausdorff
dimension. Fractals play an important role in complex dynamics, mathematical
physics, Diophantine approximation and many other areas of mathematics. Ergodic
theory studies the behavior of a dynamical system (a compact metric space with a
homeomorphism) when it is allowed to run for a long time. Under certain
conditions (ergodicity), the time average of a function converges to its space
average. Ergodic theory is widely used in many areas of mathematics such as
combinatorial number theory, mathematical physics, Lie groups and others.

The main focus of this CBMS conference is to develop Ergodic methods to solve
geometric, analytic, probabilistic and combinatorial problems, to call attention
of undergraduate and graduate students to a number of topics of common interest
to analysts and geometers, and to provide basic instruction in these areas with
an emphasis on the fundamental ergodic ideas involved. Particular attention will
be drawn to applications of Ergodic Theory to Fractal Geometry (questions
involving behavior of fractal sets, measures with uniform scaling scenery, CP
processes, Ramsey type results). The interest in the subject is based upon its
importance in order to achieve progress in solving different problems related to
the Fractal geometry and additive combinatorics.

Hillel Furstenberg is widely known for his application of probabilistic and
ergodic methods to other areas of mathematics, including number theory and Lie
groups. His talks are true masterpieces that are absolutely self-contained and
accessible to anyone - from specialists to graduate and undergraduate students.
