
* 1041217
* LOW-DIMENSIONAL MANIFOLDS AND HIGH-DIMENSIONAL CATEGORIES
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 09/01/2011,08/24/2011
* Ian Agol,CA,University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2012
* USD 40,000.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-1041217 Principal Investigator: Ian Agol, Robion C. Kirby

This award will provide funding for a conference "Low-dimensional manifolds and
high-dimensional categories". The title is somewhat ironic, in that the low and
high dimensions are in fact the same: 3 and especially 4. The conference
celebrates the occasion of Michael Freedman's 60th birthday and some of the
current mathematical achievements and challenges influenced by Freedman's work.
For manifolds of dimension 5 and higher, there is a well-established
classification scheme, the so called surgery theory which includes the
celebrated s-cobordism theorem that produces diffeomorphisms between manifolds
from homotopy theoretic data. Dimensions below 5 are more difficult because
there is less room to maneuver and, as a consequence, the s-cobordism theorem
fails. For n-categories, dimensions n greater than 2 are difficult because of
the complexity of the combinatorial relations which describe the various ways
n-balls can be cut, glued and rotated. Thus dimensions 3 and 4 represent a
shared frontier of the two subjects, though this frontier is approached from
different directions. One of the main goals of this conference is to promote
cross-fertilization between experts on 4-manifolds and experts on higher
categories and quantum field theories.

Michael Freedman made groundbreaking contributions to the study and
classification of 4-dimensional spaces (manifolds), which are a central topic in
the study of topology, and have connections with algebra, geometry and physics.
Ideas from physics, in particular quantum field theory, imply that there ought
to be certain constructions which describe the topology of 4-dimensional spaces,
that is, intrinsic properties which do not depend on the measure of length or
angles on the space. Mathematically, these theories are formulated in the
algebraic language of category theory and require substantial new developments
in that area. The object of the conference is to bring together experts on 3-
and 4-dimensional manifolds together with experts in category theory and quantum
field theory to explore the interactions between these topics. Additional
geometric structures, such as broken Lefschetz fibrations, contact and
symplectic structures, smooth structures, and gauge theories will also be
explored at the conference.
