
* 1045050
* AMS-SOMACHI Joint Meeting Travel Grants
* DMS,INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM, Catalyzing New Intl Collab
* 12/15/2010,12/03/2010
* Ellen Maycock,RI,American Mathematical Society
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 11/30/2011
* USD 29,260.00

First International Meeting of the American Mathematical Society (AMS) and La
Sociedad de Matemática de Chile (SOMACHI) will take place in Pucón, Chile on
December 15-18, 2010. This grant will fund the travel and subsistence expenses
of eleven U.S.-based mathematicians (nine early-career and two senior
mathematicians) to attend this Joint International Meeting, with the object of
forming longer-term north-south research collaborations in mathematics. All of
the funded mathematicians will participate actively in the mathematical agenda
of the meeting; the two senior mathematicians will also serve as mentors for
research teams. The amount of each travel grant will be US$2,600. The American
Mathematical Society will administer the grant, and requests US$60 per travel
grant to cover its administrative costs. The total amount of the grant is
US$29,260.

The project will be overseen by Professor Herb Clemens of Ohio State University
and Professor Rubí E. Rodríguez of Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile in
consultation with the AMS-SOMACHI program committee. Professors Clemens and
Rodríguez will form six research teams, with each research team consisting of a
senior mentor, one to two younger mathematicians (advanced graduate students or
young professionals) based in Latin America and one to two younger
mathematicians (advanced graduate students or young professionals) based in the
U.S. Each research team will be brought together around a research problem of
common interest related to one of the Special Sessions at the Joint
International Meeting in Chile. Team mentors will be asked to frame the
continuing contact and collaboration of his/her research team throughout 2011.
Outcomes will include both research and advanced expository publications. This
project will be a vehicle for strengthening longer-term research relations
between the Latin American and U. S. mathematical communities.

This award is co-funded by the NSF Office of International Science and
Engineering.
