
* 1047530
* Conference: Derived Categories of Algebro-Geometric Origin and Integrable Systems
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 11/01/2010,10/19/2010
* Roman Bezrukavnikov,MA,Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 10/31/2011
* USD 35,000.00

This proposal is to provide travel support to US participants to the conference
Derived Categories of Algebro-Geometric Origin and Integrable Systems to be held
in Jerusalem, Israel, December 19-24, 2010. The conference is organized by the
PI together with Dennis Gaitsgory (Harvard) and David Kazhdan (Hebrew
University). The purpose of this conference is to bring together leading experts
in related directions at the borderline of representation theory, algebraic
geometry, and quantum field theory, with the goal of uncovering the nature of
observed connections and promoting progress in each of the subjects. This
conference will cover the following topics: 1) Wall-crossing phenomenon in
algebraic geometry and representation theory; generalizations of Kazhdan-Lusztig
theory and their relation to Bridgeland stability and quantum cohomology. 2)
Categorical dualities and their relation to quantum field theory: geometric
Langlands duality, homological mirror symmetry. Higher categorical structures
arising in algebraic geometry, representation theory and quantum field theory.
3) New questions of representation theory coming from gauge theory and Liouville
theory. These topics cover recent new development of representation theory and
algebraic geometric approach to questions in geometry and mathematical physics.

Interactions of different mathematical science research fields and other science
areas always stimulate new discoveries. This research conference is to interact
researchers in several different areas of mathematical and physical sciences.
Recent new discoveries in the fields have further strengthened such
interactions. Several young US scientists will participate this conference and
it will help them to establish themselves in these fields to be the future
leaders in the fields.
