
* 1048132
* Conference for African American Researchers in the Mathematical Sciences (CAARMS)
* DMS,INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
* 03/01/2011,01/21/2016
* William Massey,NJ,Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 02/28/2017
* USD 114,405.00

The Conference for African-American Researchers in the Mathematical Sciences
(CAARMS) is an annual conference that allows minority researchers and students
in the mathematical sciences from across the country to interact with each other
as research mathematicians. Lectures are given by 12 invited speakers who are
primarily African-American but not exclusively. The format of the conference
allows all of them to give single hour, non-parallel lectures over at three day
period. This is to ensure that all the participants of the conference are
exposed both to the breath of African-American researchers in the mathematical
sciences as well as the breath of the mathematical sciences themselves. Students
are encouraged to attend and contribute to the intellectual activity of the
conference by making poster presentations on the first day.

Young researchers attending the conference serve as judges for the posters.
Awards are given to the students on the second day. On the third day, the
winning students give short lectures about their work. Finally, there are
refereed proceedings for some of the conferences. Five have been published to
date. Future plans are to have a pre-conference workshop for undergraduate
students who are beginning to learn about doing research in the mathematical
sciences and one for young faculty on research collaborations and proposal
writing. A permanent CAARMS website (www.caarms.net) is being developed that
will encourage research collaborative activity throughout the year. The schedule
for the next three CAARMS conferences is as follows:

CAARMS17 (2011)--Institute for Pure and Applied Mathematics (IPAM), June 1-4,
2011. Chairs: Prof. William A. Massey (Princeton University) and Prof. Russel
Caflisch (IPAM, UCLA)

CAARMS18 (2012)--Stanford University, June 2012. Chairs: Prof. William A. Massey
(Princeton University) and Prof. Peter Glynn (Stanford University)

CAARMS20 (2013)--Princeton University, June 2013. Chair: Prof. William A. Massey
(Princeton University)
