
* 1057486
* US-Hungarian Mathematics: Summer Study Program in Combinatorics, July 2011, Budapest, Hungary
* DMS,Other Global Learning & Trng, Combinatorics
* 03/15/2011,03/09/2011
* Bela Bollobas,TN,University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 02/29/2012
* USD 35,000.00

In recent decades, combinatorics has matured into a major branch of mathematics,
demonstrating important connections with probability theory, number theory,
geometry, computer science, and other fields. This two-week summer program in
July 2011 will introduce fifteen U.S. PhD student participants to some core
areas of modern combinatorics through an internationally mentored program of
study at the Eötvös Loránd University, in Budapest, Hungary.

The program will be led by U.S. principal investigator, Professor Bela Bollobas
of the University of Memphis, in cooperation with faculty in the Department of
Computer Science at Eötvös University. As a foundation for the student-centered
activities, there will be four lecture series: "Random Geometric Graphs" by
Professor Paul Balister of the University of Memphis, "Percolation" by Professor
Bela Bollobas, "Algebraic and Geometric Methods in Additive Combinatorics" by
Professor Gyula Karolyi of Eötvös University, and "Ramsey Theory" by Professor
Imre Leader of the University of Cambridge. The lecturers will present
fundamental and recent results as well as open problems central to advancing
these topics--topics which have important applications to internet and wireless
technology and offer insights into the science of neural networks.

The daily schedule will consist of morning lectures and afternoon workshops.
Throughout this summer program in combinatorics, the students will present
papers on topics related to the courses, give informal seminars, and work in
small groups. There will be ample opportunity to attend seminars given by
established mathematicians. In the summer school, the junior U.S. participants
will interact with international student counterparts and senior researchers,
not only from Eötvös University, but also from the Alfréd Rényi Institute and
the Computer and Automation Institute of the Hungarian Academy of Sciences
(SZTAKI), as well as the University of Cambridge and other centers of learning
in Europe. Overall, the well integrated program will promote learning in both
theoretical and applied contexts. Broader impacts include an early career
introduction for the U.S. PhD students to an international professional network
consisting of renowned European experts in combinatorics.
