
* 1059160
* Travel Support: Infinite Dimensional Lie Algebras, Quantum Groups and their Applications
* DMS,Catalyzing New Intl Collab
* 10/01/2010,09/20/2010
* Nicolai Reshetikhin,CA,University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 09/30/2013
* USD 32,000.00

The proposed project is to support eight graduate students in Berkeley to travel
to the Center for Quantum Geometry of Moduli Spaces in Aarhus, Denmark. Graduate
students will participate in research workshops, attend master-classes and other
research activities as well as to work together with their peers in Europe.

The research topics lie at the interface of representation theory and
mathematical physics. More specifically, it aims at problems in the
representation theory of quantum groups at roots of 1, on invariants of
3-manifolds, certain problems in local quantum field theory (such as the
construction of perturbative Chern-Simons theory), and on problems in integrable
systems and solvable models of statistical mechanics. One of the central
questions in modern theoretical physics is the construction of the model of
fundamental interaction which is consistent with experiment and mathematically
adequate. The framework of local quantum field theory is the main concept behind
the standard model. However the framework of quantum field theory still largely
remains a mathematical puzzle. Part of the research will focus on understanding
this puzzle in the context of semi-classical quantization. The goal of other
parts of the proposal is the construction of topological and integrable quantum
field theories combinatorially and the study of emerging algebraic and
analytical problems.
