
* 1063558
* 2011 Cold Spring Harbor Conference on Computational Cell Biology
* DMS,Cellular Dynamics and Function, MATHEMATICAL BIOLOGY, Systems and Synthetic Biology
* 03/15/2011,03/03/2011
* David Stewart,NY,Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 02/29/2012
* USD 20,950.00

In the last several decades a great deal of effort has gone into identifying the
proteins and genes that respond to specific inputs and assembling them into
consensus signal transduction pathways. These pathways, which control all
aspects of cell physiology, have turned out to be very complex, with many
interactions and feedbacks between different parts of the network. How can we
move beyond identifying new network components and interactions and develop a
detailed, quantitative understanding of their behavior? How can we translate the
static biochemical description of molecular regulatory networks into a dynamic,
functional one? Questions like these gave birth to the interdisciplinary field
of computational cell biology, which applies the mathematics of dynamical
systems with computer simulations to develop new insights and understanding of
fundamental biological processes. This discipline is focused on combining
quantitative experimental data with mathematical models and simulation of the
molecular machinery (genes-proteinsmetabolites) that underlie the physiological
behavior of living cells. The proposed conference on Computational Cell Biology
is intended to bring together a diverse group of scientists, studying various
molecular, structural, and functional aspects of cellular processes, using
computational approaches. This meeting is intended to provide a forum for the
exchange of ideas, information, and approaches, and to discuss the latest
research findings and technical advances towards understanding cells at a
quantitative and theoretical level. The size and location of this meeting
facilitates interactions between experimentalists and theoreticians, which are
vital for an interdisciplinary field such as computational cell biology.
Researchers will join together to discuss the latest breakthroughs obtained
using novel experimental and theoretical approaches in diverse model systems.

The broader impacts of the proposed activity are manifold. First, they include
the scientific implications for other fields beyond computational cell biology,
as discoveries in this field will continue to foster a rapid pace of fundamental
discoveries and insights that impact efforts to model the dynamical behavior of
living systems. Second, they also include elements of education, training,
resource sharing, and opportunities for interaction and collaboration. In
particular, the meeting will provide: (i) training opportunities for junior
scientists that will promote the development of presentation skills as well as
overall scientific quality and analytical rigor; (ii) an intimate setting that
will foster meaningful scientific interactions among scientists at all career
levels; (iii) the dissemination of knowledge among multiple strata of research
and educational institutions; (iv) sharing of resources, both material and
informational; and (v) opportunities for the initiation of collaborations, which
can benefit scientists from smaller labs and/or from primarily undergraduate
(teaching) institutions who may have fewer resources and more limited access to
cutting-edge technologies than do scientists from major research institutions.
