
* 1064104
* The 2011 Gene Golub SIAM Summer School
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 03/01/2011,01/24/2011
* Laurent Demanet,MA,Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* James Alexander
* 02/29/2012
* USD 25,000.00

Support for US-based graduate students to attend the 2011 Gene Golub SIAM Summer
School (G2S3), to take place on the two weeks of July 4-15 on the campus of the
University of British Columbia, in Vancouver, Canada. In 2011 the topic of the
summer school will be "Waves and Imaging." The funds would be used to cover
transportation, lodging, and meals for participating graduate students from
institutions in the United States. The goal of the 2011 G2S3 is to offer four
accessible mini-courses on the mathematical background of tomographic imaging,
recent research developments, and applications to important industrial problems.
The proposed topics are not normally found in doctoral courses: they represent a
recent convergence of mathematical notions and interdisciplinary advances that
has yet to appear in textbook format. The lecturers and the topics are as
follows: Margaret Cheney, RPI, Foundations of scattering, Radar Imaging; Frank
Natterer, U Muenster, Computerized Tomography, Medical Imaging; Laurent Demanet,
MIT, Seismic Imaging, Compressed Sensing; Josselin Garnier, Paris VII, Imaging
in Random Media, Time Reversal, Passive Imaging. The topic of the summer school
--tomography--is the essential concept under the hood of such imaging modalities
as CT scans in medicine; synthetic aperture radar for defense applications; and
seismic imaging for the oil and gas industry. The acquisition hardware and the
datasets are evolving fast, but our ability to perform tomography is not. The
summer school aims to interest a new generation of graduate students with
quantitative backgrounds in the significant computational challenges associated
with tomography. NSF support for US-based participants would have a positive
impact on the continued strong competitiveness of the US in this important field
of mathematical engineering with major industrial and defense applications.
