
* 1101503
* Special Meeting: Galois Representations, Diophantine Equations, and Automorphic Forms
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 09/15/2011,03/24/2011
* Matthew Emerton,IL,Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 08/31/2012
* USD 80,000.00

During the Winter and Spring of 2012, the Fields Institute will mount an
intensive program on the subject of Galois Representations, Diophantine
Equations, and Automorphic Forms, and this will be one of the principal
activities of the Institute during that period. The proposed activity will
provide support for the participation of early career U.S. mathematical
researchers in the program. There has been a very rapid development of ideas and
techniques in the area of modularity of Galois representations and its
connections with the Langlands program, following the pioneering work of Wiles
and Taylor-Wiles on the Shimura-Taniyama conjecture; recent examples include the
proof of the Sato--Tate conjecture by Clozel, Harris, Shepherd-Barron, and
Taylor, and the proof of Serre's modularity conjecture by Khare, Wintenberger,
and Kisin. There is every indication that these results are only the beginning
of the potential harvest. The consequences of new progress in the theory of
automorphic representations (e.g. the fundamental lemma, proved by Ngo), the
emerging theory of a p-adic local Langlands correspondence, the theory of p-adic
modular forms, and new ideas in deformation theory and the local structure of
Shimura varieties, have only begun to be explored, and significant developments
can be expected in the next few years. All of these developments, both existing
and potential, will be explored as part of the Fields program, and early career
U.S. mathematicians will benefit greatly from the chance to learn about, and
indeed to participate in, these developments.

Number theory is the branch of mathematics that studies phenomena related to
properties of whole numbers. A typical number theoretic question is to determine
the number of whole number solutions of some equation of interest. The answers
to such questions can often be encoded in certain mathematical functions known
as L-functions. The mathematician Robert Langlands has developed a series of
conjectures (or mathematical predictions) regarding L-functions, which predict
that any L-function should arise from another kind of mathematical function
called an automorphic form. (Number theorists refer to Langlands conjectured
relationship between L-functions and automorphic forms as a ``reciprocity
law''.) Langlands developed an array of powerful representation theoretic
methods to study his conjectures. These are methods that exploit the many
symmetries of automorphic forms and L-functions to analyze their mathematical
properties; these methods have been incorporated into a body of mathematics
known as ``the Langlands program'', which is one of the central areas of modern
number theory, and, indeed, of modern pure mathematics. In Winter and Spring of
2012, the Fields Institute will run a thematic program, titled Galois
Representations, Diophantine Equations, and Automorphic Forms, which will be
dedicated to studying the Langlands program. The present activity will provide
support for early career U.S. mathematician to participate in the Fields
program, who will thereby be provided with the opportunity both to learn about
recent developments in the Langlands program, and to develop the skills
necessary to help contribute to the next wave of developments.
