
* 1102029
* Special Meeting: Discrete Geometry and Applications
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/2011,08/03/2011
* Robert Connelly,NY,Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2012
* USD 50,000.00

The Fields Institute in Toronto will host and fund ($400,000 CAN) a Thematic
Program on Discrete Geometry and its Applications, July-December 2011. This
project shall provide support for two postdoctoral participants and a graduate
student to the Fields thematic program. The goal of the program is to advance
the understanding of discrete geometry and its relation to other parts of
mathematics including packings and coverings of disks, expansive
reconfigurations of spherical disks, visibility problems, optimization problems,
algebraic geometry, topology, arrangements, polytopes, rigidity theory both
local and global, rigidity and symmetry, geometric probability theory, and
convexity as well as engineering problems related to the stability of
structures, computational geometry, computational topology, computational
structural biology, coding problems, and solid modeling to name a few. The
common thread is the role that geometry plays and how a geometric viewpoint
provides vital, often the critical insight, into the understanding of discrete
structures. The program organizers have scheduled three roughly one-week focus
workshops along with a Coxeter Lecture series and a Distinguished Lecture
series. In addition, during July and August 2011, the Fields Institute will
sponsor a program to introduce undergraduates, in the spirit of the Research
Experiences for Undergraduates (REU), to many of the subjects that will be
studied during the rest of the semester. Graduate courses will also be offered
for students who will be attending during the semester. Significant numbers of
senior and junior researchers and postdoctoral fellows will reside long-term
with the program: others will make shorter visits.

This program capitalizes on the rapid development of several related areas in
discrete geometry and comes at a time that is excellent for their interaction
and common growth. The experienced and highly respected mathematicians,
promising younger postdoctoral fellows and graduate students will have the
diversity, creativity, and energy to make a significant impact on discrete
geometry and its many applications for many years to come. This grant supports
the training of two junior U.S. researchers and a graduate student by providing
travel support and living expenses, making it possible for them to participate
in the program. The participants will experience a wide range of activities
including workshops, distinguished lecturer series, courses both specialized and
for a general audience, day-to-day interactions for the people there, all
connected with top researchers to provide guidance and direction for junior
researchers and nonspecialists to provide synergy and excitement for all. The
organizers, guided and overseen by the directorate of the Fields Institute will
have a priority of making possible the participation and inclusion of qualified
students, junior researchers, women, minorities, people with disabilities and
under-represented groups. In addition, with the help of the Fields Institute
infrastructure, the proposed activities will be communicated widely
internationally.
