
* 1105825
* Conference on Lie Theory and Its Applications
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 01/15/2011,01/07/2011
* David Meyer,CA,University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 12/31/2012
* USD 26,717.00

Conference on Lie Theory and Its Applications. Intellectual merit: In recent
years, the representation theory of Lie groups has received a great deal of
attention. This is a reflection of the depth of the ideas surrounding Lie theory
and the consequent breadth of its applications. Representation theory is,
however, only a small part of the mathematics touched by Lie theory. Lie
theoretic ideas are influential in geometry and physics?important results by
Nolan Wallach and others on quantifying entanglement of quantum states using
invariant theory constitute one of their newest applications in physics, and
have prompted new developments in invariant theory. In pure mathematics, Nolan
Wallach and his collaborators have found significant applications to
combinatorics, and to the theory of automorphic forms provides a central point
of view in modern number theory that is becoming a leading application of Lie
theoretic ideas.

Broader impact: These recent results in Lie theory demonstrate the potential
impact of a conference emphasizing the applicability of Lie theory to other
areas of mathematics and physics. We plan to begin the conference with two
expository talks aimed at students and non-experts, in support of the goal of
broadening participation in the mathematical sciences by members of under-
represented groups, and to provide a foundation for research talks on the most
beautiful and exciting work currently being done by both senior and junior
mathematicians. By co-hosting one or more of the talks with the UCSD chapter of
the Association for Women in Mathematics we expect to attract attendance from
members of the quite diverse population of UCSD graduate students, in addition
to participants from around the country and the world.
