
* 1105279
* International workshop "Conformal field theories and tensor categories".
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, MATHEMATICAL PHYSICS
* 05/01/2011,01/31/2011
* Yi-Zhi Huang,NJ,Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 04/30/2012
* USD 20,000.00

Two-dimensional conformal field theory arose in both condensed matter physics
and string theory and is being formulated, constructed and studied
mathematically. It is now a deep, rich and beautiful mathematical theory and has
already led to new ideas, surprising results and solutions of many mathematical
problems in mathematics and physics. On the other hand, various recent
developments in different areas of mathematics and physics can be recognized to
be related when the language of tensor categories is used as a unifying concept.
One example is modular tensor categories which appear naturally in the study of
conformal field theories and also in other related algebraic and analytic
structures. Further study of the connection between conformal field theories and
tensor categories will benefit the developments of both conformal field theory
and the theory of tensor categories.

Two dimensional conformal field theories and tensor categories are mathematical
theories studied intensely in recent years by both mathematicians and
physicists. It is believed that many important phenomena observed in nature and
in laboratory, such as critical phenomena, quantum Hall effects, disorder
phenomena and so on, can be described by these theories. More importantly, a
deep understanding of these theories might lead to the development of new
technologies, for example, new technology for the design of chips for what
people call quantum computers, which, if constructed, are computers running much
much faster than the computers we have now. This award provides support for
mathematicians and physicists, including graduate students, junior faculty,
women and members of underrepresented minority groups, in the United States to
attend the workshop ``Conformal field theories and tensor categories'' from June
14 to June 18, 2011, at the Beijing International Center for Mathematical
Research in Beijing. The purpose of this workshop is to bring together
researchers in the United States, China and other countries working on conformal
field theories, tensor categories and related topics to discuss new results,
exchange ideas and initiate new collaborations and research projects. In
particular, one of the main goals of the workshop is to make a wealth of
mathematical results and concepts that are ready to use accessible to a larger
part of the theoretical physics community and to find new applications of these
results. It is believed that mathematicians and physicists in the United States,
China and other countries can all benefit a lot from communicating their results
and from initiating new collaborations and research projects.
