
* 1106203
* Conference on Nonassociative Algebra in Action: Past, Present, and Future Perspectives
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 05/01/2011,01/10/2011
* Weiqiang Wang,VA,University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 04/30/2012
* USD 13,000.00

This conference brings together researchers who have contributed to diverse and
unanticipated applications of nonassociative algebras and nonassociative methods
in mathematics, including Zelmanov's solution of the restricted Burnside problem
using quadratic Jordan algebras , the use of Poisson brackets by Shestakov and
Umirbaev in settling Nagata's conjecture on polynomial algebra symmetries, and
Griess's construction of the Monster finite simple group through automorphisms
of a new nonassociative algebra. Other areas of impact represented at the
conference include include extended affine Lie algebras, and the arithmetic
study of algebraic groups, and somewhat more classical applications include
finite and continuous geometry, such as projective planes and bounded symmetric
domains.

To most mathematicians or physicists, Lie algebras are the most familiar
examples of nonassociative algebra, known for over a hundred years as an
efficient way of algebraically dealing with rules of constraint imposed by
interactions in physics. Later, another type of nonassociative algebras, called
Jordan algebras, was proposed as part of a possible alternative foundation for
quantum physics . Soon, it was realized there were many different types of
nonassociative algebras that might be worth studying, and in the 60s and 70s
there was a serious study of these algebras for their own sake, an effort
including mathematicians from Yale, Chicago, MIT, as well as the former Soviet
Union. Though this original activity impacted mainly Lie algebras and bounded
symmetric domains, the subject slowly began to have surprising new applications.
This new activity took place over a period of about thirty years, beginning in
the 80s, in areas not obviously related to the problems which had given it
birth. While there have been, of course, conferences in the many separate areas
where nonassociative algebras have been used, there have been none attempting to
draw together so many of these disparate applications, and compare them for the
benefit of new generations of mathematicians. It is the purpose of this
conference to help these new generations and all present better understand the
ways in which nonassociative algebras might be used even more broadly, to foster
possible new collaborations, and to help discover the most productive directions
for future research.
