
* 1110585
* KUMUNU 2011
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 03/01/2011,02/25/2011
* Susan Cooper,NE,University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 02/29/2012
* USD 17,000.00

This project is to support the 2011 KUMUNU conference which will be held at the
University of Nebraska-Lincoln, April 2-3. KUMUNU is an annual weekend
conference anchored by the Universities of Kansas (KU), Missouri-Columbia (MU)
and Nebraska-Lincoln (NU), promoting interaction among researchers, post docs
and graduate students in commutative algebra and related disciplines (such as
algebraic geometry, K-theory and coding theory) at regional schools (which in
2009 included 23 different institutions). Although the KUMUNU triad has
significant strength in these areas, geographic separation raises a hurdle to
taking the most advantage of this strength. The aim of the KUMUNU conference
series is to provide a cost-effective annual venue for regional researchers at
various stages of their careers, including graduate students, recent Ph.D.s and
faculty at non-Ph.D. granting institutions, to interact with each other, with
experienced researchers based at KU, MU, NU and with a limited number of invited
experts from outside the region. Travel and lodging support to facilitate
participation, especially for graduate students, is a key element for KUMUNU to
achieve its main goals. These include: playing a strong regional mentoring role
at all levels by showcasing the research of postdocs and young faculty and by
helping recent Ph.D.s and graduate students in commutative algebra and related
disciplines enrich their research programs by meeting senior researchers based
at KU, MU, NU and elsewhere; and promoting research in commutative algebra by
providing a venue for discussion of the latest developments in the field, for
exchanging ideas and for setting the basis for future research collaborations.

The typical KUMUNU conference comprises 6 to 8 plenary talks accessible to
graduate students by speakers representing a geographically diverse mix of
senior researchers, young faculty and postdocs, with plenty of time reserved
outside of talks for additional interaction. The relatively small size of the
meeting and its geographic and disciplinary focus also encourage participants to
establish productive collaborative relationships. In addition to enhancing the
research careers of the students and early career participants, participants
from non-Ph.D. granting institutions will take ideas from the conference back to
their colleagues and students to enrich teaching and research at their home
institutions. The 2011 meeting is special as it will be held in conjunction with
the Howard Rowlee Lecture, an endowed public lecture hosted annually by the
Mathematics Department at the University of Nebraska. The 2011 Rowlee Lecture
will be given by David Eisenbud, past president of the American Mathematical
Society, on April 1.
