
* 1129626
* Conference on 'Imaging, Communications and Finance: Stochastic Modeling of Real-world Problems'
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2011,06/21/2011
* Martin Lindquist,NY,Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2012
* USD 12,000.00

The conference "Imaging, Communications and Finance: Stochastic Modeling of
Real-world Problems" is scheduled to be held on June 24-25, 2011 at Columbia
University in New York, NY. The purpose of the conference is to bring together
scientists, from diverse research areas and career stages, in order to identify
and discuss key emerging areas of interdisciplinary research where mathematical
sciences promise to play an important role in the coming years. The diversity of
the conference participants, which will include researchers from the fields of
mathematics, statistics, radiology, engineering and finance, will help
strengthen the connection between mathematical sciences and other science and
engineering disciplines, as well as between established researchers and junior
researchers in the start of their careers. This will have the effect of
advancing knowledge both within and across different fields of research by
sharing knowledge, identifying specific research problems of particular
importance and helping to facilitate new collaborations between individuals and
institutions.

Statistics and probability play an increasingly important role in a variety of
interdisciplinary research areas including neuroscience, genetics, physics,
finance and engineering. The goal of this conference is to focus on a number of
important and emerging interdisciplinary areas of research, such as imaging,
telecommunications and finance. Though the individual topic areas are diverse, a
unifying theme for the conference is the use of probabilistic, combinatorial,
and statistical analysis of models for problems arising in the real world. The
conference will highlight important contributions already made through the use
of statistics and probability, including the development of new reconstruction
algorithms for medical imaging; stochastic models in risk analysis and finance;
and methods for analyzing complicated network data arising from social, energy,
traffic, communication, and computer problems. In addition, the conference will
attempt to identify emerging issues where statistics and probability promise to
play an important role in the future and help facilitate collaborations between
researchers in these areas and the mathematical sciences.
