
* 1141166
* Support for Young Scientists to Participate in a Meeting on Continuum Mechanics Modeling of Biological Phenomena
* DMS,MATHEMATICAL BIOLOGY
* 09/01/2011,08/22/2011
* Thomas Pence,MI,Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 08/31/2012
* USD 8,500.00

This grant supports the travel of both students and early career researchers to
attend the meeting entitled, "Coupled Processes in Continuum Mechanics Motivated
by Biological Phenomena," being held at Michigan State University in October
2011. Such processes involve biomechanical effects related to bearing load,
swelling, growing, and remodeling that are coupled to biochemical effects
related to transport of ionic species, electrical transduction, and chemical
reaction. Such processes operate on a variety of time and length scales, and are
severely compromised upon transitioning from in-vivo operation to in-vitro
examination. The meeting will address the underlying partial differential
equation formulations, the variational structure of equilibrium and steady state
models, the treatment of dissipative phenomena, and the handling of multiple
time and space scales including consistent coupling to atomistic treatments in
the fast and small limit at which the continuum assumption breaks down.

The meeting, to be held on the campus of Michigan State University, is organized
under the auspices of both the Society for Natural Philosophy (the 49th such
annual meeting since 1963) and the Institute for Mathematics and its
Applications (under its Participating Institution program). These organizations
are noted for bringing together mathematicians, engineers, biologists, and
physical scientists in a workshop atmosphere for the purpose of exploring new
directions in mathematical modeling. The focus of this meeting is on coupled
biological processes such as those governed by a combination of mechanical and
chemical factors. A more sophisticated modeling treatment of these processes is
essential to transforming scientific understanding into cost effective medical
care. For example, recent ideas for modeling swelling in the context of
continuum mechanics show great promise for a more accurate description of soft
tissue response in both normal function (birth) and abnormal function (edema,
asthma). More accurate mathematical models for describing such processes provide
useful analytical tools that contribute to the creation of improved diagnostic
procedures and medical therapies.
