
* 1200801
* Wabash Seminar and Miniconference
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/2012,11/17/2011
* Zhong-Jin Ruan,IL,University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Edward Taylor
* 05/31/2017
* USD 45,000.00

This award provides support to defray expenses of participants in the Wabash
Seminar and associated annual Miniconferences during the period 2012-2014. The
Wabash Seminar will meet four times each year at the Wabash College in
Crawfordsville, Indiana, two in spring and two in fall. The associated
Miniconference will be held each fall at the IUPUI campus in Indianapolis. The
Wabash Seminar and Miniconferences bring together both experienced and junior
researchers, including graduate students, and postdocs to discuss recent work
and advances in analysis. The meetings take advantage of the presence of strong
groups of operator algebraists and operator theorists in the Midwest region.

The Wabash seminar series offers an excellent opportunity for junior researchers
and graduate students to be exposed to, and informed about, the latest major
mathematical developments in Modern Analysis. This exposure often serves to
develop their mathematical taste and to influence very beneficially the future
directions of their research. The seminar has also helped develop collaborative
efforts between the specialists invited to address it and researchers in this
geographical area. Scientifically, there is potential for advances in operator
algebras and operator theory and their related disciplines.
