
* 1203175
* Texas Algebraic Geometry Symposium: TAGS 2012
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 03/01/2012,12/08/2011
* Laura Matusevich,TX,Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 02/28/2014
* USD 13,820.00

The Texas Algebraic Geometry Symposium (TAGS) is an annual conference that is
hosted on a rotating basis by Rice University, Texas A&M University, and the
University of Texas at Austin. TAGS 2012 will take place on April 27 - 29, at
Texas A&M University, in College Station, TX. TAGS provides an opportunity for
local researchers to meet and interact, as well as learn the latest advances in
Algebraic Geometry, interpreted in its broadest sense. There will be a Special
Lecture aimed at graduate students. In addition, young mathematicians (graduate
students and postdocs) will have the opportunity to present their work in a
Poster Session. More information about this meeting is available at:
http://www.math.tamu.edu/~laura/TAGS2012/

Many phenomena in Nature can be modeled using systems of polynomial equations.
The study of such systems is an important area of Mathematics, called Algebraic
Geometry. This grant will fund a conference in this area, where investigators
from Texas and the neighboring states may learn the newest developments in this
field from distinguished invited speakers. This conference is also an important
opportunity for local researchers, especially graduate students and postdocs, to
meet and interact, gaining exposure for their work and potentially establishing
new collaborations.
