
* 1205909
* Everything Disperses to Miami: The Role of Movement and Dispersal in Ecology, Epidemiology and Environmental Science
* DMS,MATHEMATICAL BIOLOGY
* 08/15/2012,08/08/2012
* Robert Cantrell,FL,University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 07/31/2013
* USD 15,000.00

Cantrell DMS-1205909

The investigators organize a meeting entitled "Everything Disperses to Miami:
The Role of Movement and Dispersal in Spatial Ecology, Epidemiology, and
Environmental Science" at the University of Miami in December 2012. The
investigators invite seven leading experts to give plenary talks highlighting
emerging mathematical and applied aspects of movement and dispersal in ecology,
epidemiology, and environmental science, augmented by special sessions on the
evolution of dispersal, epidemiology through the lens of ecology, non-local
dispersal in ecology and epidemiology, the impact of global change in ecology
and epidemiology, recent advances in nonlinear analysis and partial differential
equations arising from models of dispersal, and recent synergies between state-
of-the art empirical and theoretical advances in the study of dispersal. The
meeting culminates with a panel discussion of new directions of research at the
interface of mathematics and biology on the role of dispersal in ecology,
epidemiology, and environmental science. The special sessions include a mix of
junior and senior investigators as a means of encouraging the upcoming
generation of new researchers to focus on issues related to movement and
dispersal in ecology, epidemiology, and environmental science. The scientific
outcome of the meeting is the basis for a special issue of the journal Discrete
and Continuous Dynamical Systems - Series B, edited by the conference
organizers, which will include an essay by the organizers giving an overview of
the meeting, including most particularly the key emerging challenges identified
in the panel discussion.

The investigators organize a meeting entitled "Everything Disperses to Miami:
The Role of Movement and Dispersal in Spatial Ecology, Epidemiology, and
Environmental Science" (EDM) to promote research on the role of movement and
dispersal in mathematical modeling in ecology, epidemiology, and environmental
science, to further intellectual synthesis and integration therein, and to
influence the direction of future investigation in these fields and by extension
mathematical biology at large. Due to the range and complexity of the potential
effects of dispersal, mathematical modeling is essential to the understanding of
these effects. Movement and dispersal have long been recognized as crucial
features of ecological systems. They influence the persistence and interactions
of populations and drive range expansions, biological invasions, and
colonization of empty habitats. More recently, as epidemiology has become
increasingly understood through the lens of ecology, they have also come to
occupy a central place in epidemiological modeling. Consequently, understanding
movement and dispersal is indispensable for effective decision-making on
numerous significant policy issues related to ecology, epidemiology, and
environmental science, such as the conservation of biodiversity as habitats are
altered by environmental change, the evaluation of risks of biological invasions
by exotic or genetically modified organisms, the impact of human movement on
vector-borne diseases, the effect of global movement in communicable diseases,
and the development of strategies for controlling pests and disease vectors. The
meeting brings together experts and young scientists to enhance the capacity of
science to address these important questions.
