
* 1205036
* Automorphic Forms: L-Functions and Related Geometry
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 02/01/2012,12/12/2011
* Roger Howe,CT,Yale University
* Standard Grant
* tara smith
* 01/31/2013
* USD 49,560.00

This conference is planned to take place 23 - 27 April, 2012, at Yale University
in New Haven, CT. It will summarize, synthesize, and project into the future,
the work of I.I. Piatetski-Shapiro in the area of automorphic forms, especially
L-functions. The conference will be of five days duration, with five talks per
day. The talks will investigate 5 main themes that reflect Piatetski-Shapiro's
main areas of investigation: functoriality and converse theorems, explicit
constructions and periods, p-adic L-functions, geometry, and analytic number
theory. Each theme will continue throughout the conference. A volume of
proceedings, intended to make these results more accessible and applicable, will
be produced. Additional information can be found at the conference website:
http://www.math.yale.edu/automorphicforms2012

Automorphic forms are one of the most fascinating and mysterious of the many
branches of number theory. Despite their complexity, they have had remarkable
and widely varied applications. Results from the theory of automorphic forms
were used in the recent proof by A. Wiles and R. Taylor, of "Fermat's Last
Theorem" -- the statement that the sum of two perfect nth powers of whole
numbers cannot be a perfect n-th power, if the power n is greater than 2 -- a
problem that had been unsolved for over 300 years. Automorphic forms and
L-functions are deeply related to prime numbers, which are whole numbers larger
than one that have no factors except 1 and themselves. They are the building
blocks for multiplication of whole numbers. Prime numbers have recently been
used decisively in "public key cryptography", which is the basis of secure
transactions on the internet. Prime numbers occur very irregularly among all
whole numbers, and the subject of their distribution has attracted an immense
amount of research. The Riemann zeta function, which offers a path to a refined
understanding of the distribution of prime numbers among all positive integers,
is the first example of an L-function. L-functions also provide a means of
expressing subtle "reciprocity laws" that govern the solutions of polynomial
equations. Automorphic forms are also the source of some of the most beautiful
formulas in mathematics, for example, Jacobi's formula for the number of ways to
express a whole number as a sum of four perfect squares. Finally, there are
remarkable connections between the theory of automorphic forms and physics. The
same mathematical structure that is foundational to quantum mechanics (the
Heisenberg Canonical Commutation Relations), is also the setting for one of the
most important methods for constructing automorphic forms. In addition, a
variety of formulas from theoretical physics and related mathematics have been
discovered in recent years to have strong connections to the theory or
automorphic forms. I. I. Piatetski-Shapiro was a world leader in the theory of
automorphic forms. The heart of his contributions involved establishing close
connections between automorphic forms and L-functions, especially through his
"Converse Theorem", which gave detailed conditions for a family of L-functions
to be related to an automorphic form. This conference offers an opportunity to
synthesize, disseminate, and build on Piatetski-Shapiro's work, to increase our
understanding of these fascinating ideas.
