
* 1205125
* Perspectives in Representation Theory
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 02/01/2012,12/12/2011
* Gregg Zuckerman,CT,Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sommers
* 06/30/2013
* USD 49,900.00

The conference "Perspectives in representation theory" will be a meeting of
mathematicians working in representation theory, with an emphasis on its
relations to other subjects (notably, topology, algebraic geometry, number
theory, and mathematical physics). The conference will be held on May 12-17,
2012 at Yale University, in honor of the 60th birthday of Prof. Igor Frenkel.
The speakers have made and continue to make major contributions to the field,
and are responsible for a vast web of connections of representation theory with
other areas of mathematics and physics. The aim of the conference is to present
current progress on the following (interrelated) topics: vertex operator
algebras and chiral algebras, conformal field theory, the (geometric) Langlands
program, affine Lie algebras, Kac-Moody algebras, quantum groups, crystal bases
and canonical bases, quantum cohomology and K-theory, geometric representation
theory, categorification, higher-dimensional Kac-Moody theory, integrable
systems, quiver varieties, representations of real and p-adic groups, and
quantum gauge theories. Thus the conference will be an occasion to discuss
representation theory in the context of its connections with numerous other
subjects, and to discuss some of the most recent advances in representation
theory, including those which occurred thanks to application of techniques in
other areas of mathematics and physics, including ideas from quantum field
theory and string theory. Further details can be found on the conference website
at

http://www.math.yale.edu/frenkel60

Algebra is one of the oldest areas in mathematics. It encompasses a wide range
of subjects from simple algebraic equations and polynomials to linear and
abstract algebra. The study of symmetries is related to a branch of algebra
called 'representation theory'. Representation theory has a vast array of
applications in other areas of mathematics and physics. It is often through the
study of representations that we learn about the innermost workings of our
physical universe. While the origins of representation theory are algebraic,
modern representation theory incorporates ideas from other branches of
mathematics such as geometry, combinatorics, and category theory (a theory whose
aim is to organize mathematical structure). These connections to new fields have
both increased our knowledge in the area of representation theory as well as
developed new applications of its ideas. The conference "Perspectives in
representation theory" will be a gathering of some of the world's leading
experts in this exciting field.
