
* 1209471
* Conference on Finite Groups
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 09/01/2012,04/17/2012
* Robert Guralnick,CA,University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 08/31/2014
* USD 20,000.00

There will be a conference on finite groups and related areas held at the
University of Cambridge on September 27 - 30, 2012. See www-
bcf.usc.edu/~guralnic/JGT80 for more details. The conference is timed to mark
the 80th birthday of John Thompson. The study of local group theory proved of
fundamental importance in the study of finite groups; it has recently resurfaced
in the study of fusion systems and related topological ideas. The classification
of finite simple groups is having profound influence in a number of areas of
mathematics. At the same time, there is considerable amount of work on the
revision of the classification, with significant streamlining and new ideas
being brought to bear. The connections to algebraic groups have played central
role in the study of groups of Lie type, as well as representation theory in the
study of groups and algebras. Developments in all these subjects will be
discussed at the conference.

Thompson revolutionized group theory, starting in the late fifties and having
central influence ever since then. His odd order paper with Feit, his series of
N-group papers and other papers of lasting importance introduced new concepts
and ideas which played essential role in the monumental achievement in the
subject, the classification of finite simple groups. Thompson won a number of
awards, including The Fields Medal, The Abel Prize, and the National Medal of
Science. The aim of this research conference is to bring together leading
researchers and young mathematicians in these areas. The speakers will include
Aschbacher, Capdeboscq, Glauberman, Kessar, Liebeck, Malle, Robinson, Serre,
Sin, Smith, Tiep and Thompson. It will be an excellent opportunity to discuss
recent developments and plan the way forward for the future.
