
* 1211184
* Workshop: The Stability of Coherent Structures and Patterns
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 06/01/2012,02/27/2012
* Bernard Deconinck,WA,University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Annalisa Calini
* 05/31/2013
* USD 23,000.00

The workshop on "The stability of coherent structures and patterns"
(http://depts.washington.edu/bdecon/workshop2012/) will educate graduate
students on important aspects of stability. It will take place at the University
of Washington in Seattle, June 11-12, 2012. The workshop will consist of three
different mini-courses, taught by three noted experts in the field of stability.
Margaret Beck(Heriott-Watt and Boston University) will present introductory
lectures providing a common background to the audience members. Bjorn Sandstede
(Brown University) will demonstrate the use of the softwareAUTO for stability
applications, and Walter Strauss (Brown University) will examine different
aspects of nonlinear and orbital stability.

Stability plays an essential role in many branches of science and engineering,
including several aspects of fluid mechanics, high-speed transmission of
information, and feasibility of MHD fusion devices. The objective of the
workshop is to give an overview of current state-of-the-art methods for
examining stability, as well as to present some widely applicable new
techniques. The format will consist of three invited speakers giving a series of
lectures at a level aimed at graduate students but useful for researchers from a
variety of disciplines, such as mathematics, engineering, biology, etc.
