
* 1212830
* International Conference on Advances in Interdisciplinary Statistics and Combinatorics
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 09/01/2012,02/14/2012
* Sat Gupta,NC,University of North Carolina Greensboro
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2014
* USD 20,000.00

The proposed project is a statistics conference "International Conference on
Advances in Interdisciplinary Statistics and Combinatorics (AISC 2012)". The
plan is to hold the conference on the campus of The University of North Carolina
at Greensboro, Greensboro, NC during October 5-7, 2012. The main objective of
the conference is to promote interdisciplinary research involving statistical
techniques. These techniques are becoming increasingly important in all fields
of scientific discovery. A unique feature of the proposed conference is to bring
together nationally recognized researchers from many fields such as
anthropology, biology, economics, education, environmental science, information
systems, insurance, mathematics, medicine, psychology, and public health. The
common thread is the statistical methods used in their respective research
programs. The statisticians benefit by getting exposed to real problems from
other disciplines and researchers from other disciplines benefit by learning
more about various statistical techniques. The PI and both Co-PIs are currently
involved in several collaborative research grants and have experienced firsthand
the significance of interdisciplinary research. An important objective of the
conference is to groom young researchers by providing them an opportunity to
interact with established researchers in their respective fields. These young
researchers include undergraduate researchers, graduate student researchers and
new PhDs specializing in statistical sciences. They are given the opportunity to
make oral presentations as opposed to poster presentations. The investigators
are specifically trying to attract women and minority candidates by giving them
higher priority in awarding financial support. The organizers plan to contact
appropriate departments at North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State
University in Greensboro, Winston-Salem State University in Winston-Salem, and
North Carolina Central University in Durham, all historically black
universities. They also plan to place conference announcement on the web pages
of the Committee on Women in Statistics and the Committee on Minorities in
Statistics (both committees of the American Statistical Association).The
organizers also plan to make special efforts to accommodate the needs of the
participants with disabilities. More details about the conference are available
at the website http://www.uncg.edu/mat/aisc/
