
* 1216197
* 2012 International Conference on Robust Statistics (ICORS2012)
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 08/01/2012,03/26/2012
* Huixia Wang,NC,North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2013
* USD 8,000.00

The International Conference on Robust Statistics (ICORS) has been an annual
international conference for the past 12 years. The ICORS meeting for 2012
(ICORS2012) will be held in the University of Vermont, Burlington, Vermont from
August 5-August 10, 2012. The conference will span five days with double
sessions for most of the days. The lectures will include invited speakers,
chosen with the help of suggestions from the steering committee; theme based
invited sessions organized by the individual organizers, contributed sessions
and poster sessions. The funds from NSF are primarily to support approximately
15 junior researchers and graduate students from within the United States. The
conference is cosponsored by the Minerva Foundation.

The aim of the ICORS conferences is to bring together researchers interested in
robust statistics, data analysis and related areas. This includes theoretical
and applied statisticians as well as data analysts from other fields, and
includes leading experts as well as junior researchers and graduate students.
The ICORS conferences create a forum to discuss recent progress and emerging
ideas in the area and encourage informal contacts and discussions among all the
participants. The ICORS2012 will be the first such conference to be held in the
United States. This is important since it will encourage a larger participation
of researchers, and in particular young researchers, from the United States, to
engage in research interaction and exchange of ideas with their colleagues from
other countries. It is anticipated that the conference will continue to also
have a large international representation. The ICORS2012 will contribute to the
enhancement and improvement of scientific activities through presentations of
latest research results, intensive discussion after presentations, and informal
exchange of ideas. The meeting will help collaboration among researchers of
diverse backgrounds and geographic locations. The meeting will also contribute
to educational activities, as it will attract a substantial number of junior
researchers and students to interact with senior researchers in the field. The
conference Web site is http://www.rci.rutgers.edu/~dtyler/ICORS2012/ .
