
* 1217525
* International Conference on Stochastic Processes in Systems Biology, Genetics and Evolution
* DMS,MATHEMATICAL BIOLOGY
* 08/15/2012,08/08/2012
* Marek Kimmel,TX,William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 07/31/2013
* USD 20,000.00

The International Conference on Stochastic Processes in Systems Biology,
Genetics and Evolution, to be held at Rice University on August 21-25, 2012,
will focus on emerging trends within the field of systems biology with a focus
on the statistical methodologies and probability models that are most valued
within the field. Special attention will be given to emerging challenges in
systems biology, such as exploring the role of cancer stem cells in tumor
development and progression, characterizing the systems pathways in inflammation
which trigger sepsis, models of antibiotic resistance, and many other challenges
in genetics and evolution. Symposia Topics: Systems Biology, Genetics and
Evolution: New Challenges for Stochastic Dynamics Stochastic Processes for New
Biology, Stochasticity of Cell Differentiation and Cell Fates, Stochastic Models
of Cancer, Stochastic Gene Expression and Intracellular Signaling Pathways,
Self-Organization, Epigenetics & Evolution, Branching Processs in Population
Biology and Genetics, Stochastic Theory for Biochemical Systems. Junior
researchers, students and under-represented groups are offered travel and
subsistence assistance.

Recent years witnessed an explosion of biological data, which allow accurate
insight into functioning of living beings at the levels ranging from genetic
code to biomolecules, cells, tissues and organisms. Due to these new data, it
became possible to understand how different levels of organization (scales) of
living beings interact. This new science is called systems biology. From the
very outset, systems biology has been more mathematically inclined than
traditional disciplines of biology. In particular, it is attempting to
understand the role randomness (or stochasticity) plays in functioning of living
beings. For example, how is it possible that individual biological cells respond
in very different ways to environmental stimuli, whereas the organism as a whole
is capable of mounting a coherent response? Answers to this and other related
questions are the subject of the conference.


