
* 1242322
* Conference on Geometric Methods in Representation Theory
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 11/01/2012,10/22/2012
* Calin Chindris,MO,University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 10/31/2014
* USD 10,000.00

The Conference on Geometric Methods in Representation Theory will be held at the
University of Missouri-Columbia on November 17-19, 2012.

The conference brings together experts working on geometric methods in the
representation theory of finite dimensional algebras and related topics, and
beginning researchers in this area, such as graduate students and postdocs.
There will be expository and other research talks on topics such as:
degenerations of modules and the geometry of orbit closures in module varieties;
generic representation theory of quivers with relations; moduli problems for
finite dimensional algebras; semi-invariants for quivers with or without
relations; universal deformation rings and their connection to moduli spaces;
commutative/non-commutative desingularizations. This conference will help
strengthen and advance the interaction of geometry and representation theory.

One of the main objectives of the proposed Conference on Geometric Methods in
Representation Theory is to introduce beginning researchers in representation
theory to the power of geometric methods. These methods have become more and
more fundamental in many areas of mathematics, and in particular in the
representation theory of finite dimensional algebras. The key note speaker for
this conference will be Birge Huisgen-Zimmermann who will give two one-hour
lectures which will be accessible to graduate students and postdocs. There will
also be several expository lectures given by well-known experts. The remainder
of the lectures will be research talks given by both senior and junior
mathematicians. This will include several talks given by graduate students and
postdocs related to their theses. The conference will provide an inviting
atmosphere in which new collaborations can be formed and young researchers have
the possibility to learn about cutting-edge geometric methods in representation
theory. Moreover, the conference will enable junior representation theorists to
present their work and interact with the broader community, which are crucial
activities in the pre-employment season in the fall.

More information about the Conference on Geometric Methods in Representation
Theory at the University of Missouri-Columbia can be found at
http://www.math.uiowa.edu/~fbleher/CGMRT2012.html
