
* 1248406
* 2013 Interdisciplinary Summer School: Data Assimilation in Geoscience
* DMS,OPPORTUNITIES FOR RESEARCH CMG
* 09/01/2012,08/08/2012
* Kayo Ide,MD,University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2013
* USD 30,000.00

The "2013 Interdisciplinary Summer School: Data Assimilation in Geosciences" to
be held June 3-14, 2013, at the Center of Scientific Computing and Mathematical
Modeling (CSCAMM), University of Maryland (UMD), College Park, MD, targets
graduate students and scientists at an early stage of their career. The
mathematical problem of data assimilation is both fundamental and challenging in
that it aims at the monitoring and prediction of unknown true state of time-
evolving system. This two-week intensive summer school is designed to build a
solid foundation for data assimilation through the tutorial lectures and the
computational laboratory, while providing an exposure to the current state-of-
the-art of the US operational Numerical Weather Prediction (NWP), advanced
methods, and new ideas. It is organized and taught by the leading scientists in
the field, who are experienced with data assimilation schools for young
researchers as well as workshops for specialists. Geographical proximity of UMD
to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's (NOAA) National Centers
for Environmental Prediction (NCEP) and NASA Goddard Space and Flight Center
(GSFC) provides a unique one-of-the-kind experience to visit these centers.
CSCAMM at UMD has a track record for successful summer schools and workshops.
Entire summer school is carefully structured to take advantages of all these
features. Lecture notes and presentations of the summer school will be
disseminated through the CSCAMM website for the broader impact.

In essence, data assimilation is a complex interdisciplinary subject that
involves scientific prediction using computational models and observations. The
most familiar practice of data assimilation may the weather forecast, performed
and provided to public by NOAA and other operational NWP centers in the world.
To forecast the weather by the NWP, data assimilation adjusts the current
condition of the atmosphere represented in the sophisticated computational model
by fusing the contemporary atmospheric observations. Quality of the forecast
largely depends on that of the data assimilation system in use. Data
assimilation is thus at the very interface of science and operational technology
that has significant societal impact. Improving the prediction of extreme
weather events can help better support the decision making processes and lead to
the positive socio-economic impact. Moreover, data assimilation has a wide range
of important application areas within and beyond geosciences. One such area is
the climate change projection and monitoring. Another is the design of the
future observing systems and networks. This summer school aims to provide an
ideal venue for young scientists to brainstorm and initiate their future career.
