
* 1249258
* Sydney International Workshop on Mathematical Models of Tumor-Immune System Dynamics
* DMS,MATHEMATICAL BIOLOGY
* 02/01/2013,01/22/2013
* Amina Eladdadi,NY,College of Saint Rose
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 01/31/2015
* USD 30,000.00

This project is for support for US participants to participate in a workshop
entitled, "Mathematical Modeling of Tumor-Immune System Dynamics" to be held in
Sydney, Australia from January 7-10, 2013. The workshop aims at bringing
together applied mathematicians, biologists, and clinicians actively working in
the field of cancer immunology in order to share their current research and
exchange ideas, as well as increasing awareness of the innovative mathematical
tools that are available and suitable for the growing field of cancer
immunology. The workshop will include keynote tutorials by leading experts in
the field of cancer immunology, group discussions, poster sessions,
senior/junior presentations, and a summary panel discussion. A major objective
of this workshop is to explore opportunities for future collaborative
interaction and educational exchange amongst cancer immunology practitioners
across Asian Pacific and North American countries.

Recent progress in cancer immunology and the advances in immunotherapy suggest
that the immune system plays a fundamental role in host defense against tumor,
and could be utilized to prevent or cure cancer. The purpose of this workshop is
to: (1) share new advances in the field of mathematical and computational models
of tumor-immune dynamics, (2) catalyze and identify potential areas for future
collaborative opportunities between US and Australian researchers in the field
of the cancer immunology, (3) establish novel approaches for interdisciplinary
research, data sharing and ways of applying computational approaches to cancer
immunology, and (4) explore innovative methods of combining mathematical and
computational modeling of biological processes with undergraduate and graduate
student education.

This workshop includes US and international mathematicians, biologists and
clinicians, and participation will catalyze new collaborations, and energize
existing international collaborative research among these scientists. In
particular, the workshop will involve junior researchers and students from Asian
Pacific and North American countries, providing opportunities for new and early-
career mathematicians and biologists to enter this fast growing
interdisciplinary field of cancer immunology. To stimulate new interests in this
kind of interdisciplinary work, the workshop will schedule a panel discussion on
how to cultivate a sustained collaboration between US, Australian and
international scientists. The workshop will also have an educational impact by
providing training to graduate students, early-career scholars and clinicians in
cancer-immune dynamics. This workshop will serve as a platform for facilitating
interdisciplinary interactions between experienced and beginning researchers in
tumor-immune dynamics. In addition, the workshop will identify opportunities for
overseas training and exchange programs for US investigators and graduate
students motivated by the challenging problems in cancer immunology in Australia
and elsewhere. Five of the plenary speakers are female, and two of them are
minority. The organizers plan to post lectures online, and publish proceedings
in an internationally recognized journal in math biology.
