
* 1259098
* Tech Topology Conference II
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 12/01/2012,11/01/2012
* John Etnyre,GA,Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 11/30/2015
* USD 54,072.00

The Tech Topology Conference is an annual conference held at the Georgia
Institute of Technology and the second edition of the conference will run form
December 7 to 9, 2012. This new conference in geometry and topology has an
emphasis on highlighting and enhancing research being done in the Southeast US.
We will have seven speakers, in the areas of contact topology, Heegaard-Floer
theory, 4 manifold topology, and knot theory; and we will have participants from
across the southeast as well as the rest of the country. Over the past few
years, there has been an incredible amount of cross-fertilization between the
fields of surface topology, contact topology, knot theory, and 4 manifold
theory. At this conference, we will have specialists in each of these areas,
whose work lies at the interface of two more more of these areas. As such, the
conference will be a fertile ground for new ideas in geometry and topology.

The main goals of the conference are (1) To provide a high-profile geometry-
topology conference to the Southeast that brings leaders of the field to the
area as well as showcases the high quality mathematics being done in the
Southeast, and (2) To provide a convenient meeting place for Southeastern
researchers and students to gather, discuss, research, and interact with leading
mathematicians from across the country. This conference will be a valuable
learning environment for graduate students and junior faculty in the Southeast,
and will help raise the profile of the region. We will provide ample time for
the participants to meet, formally and informally, for example during long
breaks between talks and organized discussion sessions. We plan to post notes
from all the talks on the conference web site. More information can be found on
the conference web site: http://ttc.gatech.edu.
