
* 1261596
* Collaborative Research: Expanding Links with Industry through Collaborative Research and Education in Applied Mathematics
* DMS,INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
* 04/01/2013,03/01/2018
* Linda Cummings,NJ,New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 03/31/2019
* USD 61,353.00

The project is a collaborative program of research, education and training based
on the Mathematical Problems in Industry (MPI) Workshop and the Graduate Student
Mathematical Modeling (GSMM) Camp. These annual meetings, held during successive
weeks in June, attract graduate students, postdoctoral fellows and faculty from
universities, and applied mathematicians, scientists and engineers from
industry. This award funds the MPI and GSSM for the summer of 2013, 2014, and
2015. The MPI Workshop will be held in 2013 at Worcester Polytechnic Institute
in Worcester, MA; in 2014 at New Jersey Institute of Technology in Newark, NJ;
and in 2015 at the University of Delaware in Newark, DE. The GSSM Camp will be
held each year at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute in Troy, NY. The focus of the
MPI Workshop is a set of problems brought by contributing participants from
industry. These problems span a wide range of areas of applications, often in
fluid and solid mechanics but also in mathematical biology, data analysis, and
mathematical finance, among others. Recent problems have included, for example,
mathematical models for electromagnetic wave interactions with nanostructures,
mathematical problems related to drawing of glass sheets, medical ultrasonic
imaging, and automatic defect recognition in industrial inspection applications.
The work on the problems is done in vertically integrated teams consisting of
the representatives from industry, senior and junior faculty, postdocs and
graduate students. The scientific objective of the activity generated by the
Workshop and its intellectual merit is the study of mathematical problems of
significant interest for industrial applications. The GSMM Camp is held during
the week prior to the Workshop, and graduate students attending the Camp also
attend the Workshop. The main objective of the Camp is graduate student
education and training. At the Camp, graduate students work together in teams,
with the guidance of invited faculty mentors, on interdisciplinary problems
typically inspired by industrial applications. The problems are carefully chosen
to promote a rich set of problem-solving skills, both analytical and numerical,
and to provide a warm-up for the challenging problems considered at the
Workshop. The two meetings complement each other and form a comprehensive
program of interdisciplinary research, education and training that is unique
amongst universities in the United States.

The project is an ongoing effort organized by the principal investigators at
RPI, WPI, NJIT and UD. The MPI Workshop has run annually for the past 27 years
with the principal aim of promoting research and education in applied
mathematics and of developing links between mathematicians at universities and
scientists and engineers from industry for the mutual benefit of both sides. For
the past 9 years, the research and educational activities of the Workshop have
been enhanced by the introduction of the GSMM Camp. In addition to these
established meetings, the project involves a number of new activities associated
with the Workshop and Camp designed to further advance the research and
educational objectives of the collaborative program. These activities include
the introduction of a graduate student fellowship program, support for early-
career mathematicians to attend the meetings, and the development of a graduate
student exchange program in cooperation with the Oxford Center for Collaborative
Applied Mathematics. Overall, the Workshop and Camp, and its associated
activities, have a broad impact on the education and development of early-career
mathematicians, and on the interdisciplinary research and educational activities
of participating faculty. The Workshop also promotes collaborations with
industry and has an impact on the development and analysis of new technologies
in industry.
