
* 1261203
* Support for US participation in Mathematics for Planet Earth 2013 events in Canada
* DMS,INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM, MATHEMATICAL BIOLOGY
* 02/01/2013,01/23/2013
* Alan Hastings,CA,University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 01/31/2015
* USD 91,350.00

This proposal will support U.S. participation in the activities of the
Mathematics for Planet Earth 2013 thematic program in Canada focusing on Models
and Methods in Ecology, Epidemiology and Public Health. U.S. researchers and
students will participate in ten workshops and three summer schools. The first
workshop will be held at the Centre de recherches mathématiques in Montréal in
February 2013 and is entitled "Models and Methods in Ecology and Epidemiology."
Mathematical models have a long tradition in exploring dynamical aspects of
ecology and epidemiology on a number of different temporal and spatial scales.
While ecological and epidemiological applications are often studied separately
for historical reasons, both fields are faced with similar challenges of model
complexity, model-data fitting and accurate predictions. Recently, advances in
data collection (e.g. GIS), availability of large-scale simulation tools (e.g.
agent-based modeling), development of statistical tools to fit mechanistic
models, and new mathematical techniques (e.g. multiscale methods) have
highlighted the many commonalities between ecological and epidemiological
models. Successful applications of these models to pressing issues in population
and ecosystem health combine techniques and insights from all fields.

The main goal of the pan-Canadian thematic year on Models and Methods in
Ecology, Epidemiology and Public Health is to tackle pressing and emerging
challenges in population and ecosystem health, to stimulate cross-disciplinary
research between all the disciplines involved and to foster tighter links
between the research community, government agencies and policy makers, and to
train a new generation of researchers in this priority research area. The wide
range of topics includes questions of how global change will impact vector-borne
diseases and biodiversity, how aquatic ecosystems can be managed sustainably, or
how modeling and surveillance can be integrated for public health decision-
making. All of these questions are very active areas of research around the
world; and the Canadian mathematics community plays a leadership role. The
purpose of this pan-Canadian program is to bring together the international
community of researchers who work on these topics in a series of workshops and
to foster exchange between the different disciplines involved, to discuss
perspectives and directions for future advances in the field, including new
models and methods. In addition, several summer schools are aimed to train the
next generation of researchers in the most recent tools and techniques and
enable them to build novel tools in the future in these research areas. The
funds from this grant will allow promising junior researchers from a diverse set
of backgrounds, including early career professors, postdoctoral fellows and
graduate students, from the United States to participate in the workshops and
summer schools of this program. Understanding the mechanisms and effects of
ecosystem function, ecosystem service, disease transmission and disease spread
rests on mathematical models on different spatio-temporal scales. Effective and
efficient management and policy decisions are based on these insights. Advancing
research into the required tools, techniques and applications will provide us
with better understanding and guidance for policy makers and management.
