
* 1262034
* 9th Conference on Bayesian Nonparametrics
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 04/01/2013,03/18/2013
* Subhashis Ghoshal,NC,North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 03/31/2014
* USD 20,000.00

The 9th Conference on Bayesian Nonparametrics is going to be held in Amsterdam,
The Netherlands, from June 10 to 14, 2013. Bayesian nonparametrics has evolved
as one of the fastest growing areas of research in modern statistics. Its
applications areas include genetics, finance, survival analysis, sociology,
networks and machine learning. The conference is the most important meeting of
researchers working in theory, methodology and all types of applications of
Bayesian nonparametrics all over the world. This grant supports junior
researchers currently working in U.S. institutions (graduate students,
postdoctoral researchers and junior faculty generally within three years of
completion of their terminal degree) to participate in the conference.
Participation in this meeting is critical for junior researchers working in this
area. The primary objective of this conference is to bring together experts and
young researchers, as well as theoreticians and practitioners, who use Bayesian
nonparametric techniques. The conference has a well-structured balanced program
covering various areas of the subject. The scientific committee of the
conference consists of renowned international experts on Bayesian nonparametrics
and related topics. The meeting will include four overview plenary talks, forty-
two invited talks, six contributed talks and a contributed poster session. Many
of the invited speakers including a plenary speaker are women.

Providing support for junior researchers who do not have access to other sources
of funding to attend the important international gathering of scientists working
on one of the fastest growing areas of statistical sciences is key to
maintaining the current leadership of American institutions in this field. These
workshops in the past were always characterized by a congenial atmosphere
particularly supportive of junior researchers. The conference will include a
series of activities especially designed to maximize the active participation of
young researchers and to provide them with many opportunities for interaction
with other young researchers and with more senior colleagues. The conference
will also provide American researchers opportunity to exchange ideas with
leading researchers from elsewhere in the world such as Europe, Asia and Latin
America. In addition, the conference will provide opportunities for young
researchers to disseminate widely the results of their work, not only through
contributed talks and posters, but also by facilitating the publication of peer-
reviewed papers and a proposed conference volume to be published by a leading
publisher. The extensive poster session and some slots for contributed talks are
especially reserved for young researchers. Women and minorities are highly
encouraged to take part in the conference with the help from the travel support.
