
* 1301652
* Ergodic Theory and Dynamical Systems Workshop
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 03/01/2013,12/20/2012
* Idris Assani,NC,University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 02/28/2014
* USD 29,100.00

The ``Ergodic Theory and Dynamical Systems workshop" is to be held at the
University of North Carolina-Chapel Hill on March 21-24 2013. It will highlight
recent developments in ergodic theory and dynamical systems. The conference
focuses on the important theme of smooth dynamical systems. The main talk, given
by the colloquium speaker will address the question of genericity of
the``ergodic" assumption among classes of continuous dynamical systems. Several
of the topics covered are central in extremely active areas of current research
in this field.

This mathematics conference will provide support for participants, especially
women, graduate students, postdoctoral fellows and junior faculty. Young
researchers are given ample opportunities to speak, to talk and to participate
in the conference activities. At the same time this conference serves as a
platform to recruit graduate students from developing countries like Africa to
graduates program at US-based academic institutions. The conference aims at
improving the participation of women (the colloquium speaker is a woman) and,
more generally, of members of under-represented groups. Collaborations between
participants are encouraged, and it is anticipated that the resulting research
papers will be published in a proceedings volume.
