
* 1301675
* 2nd International Workshop on Nonlinear and Modern Mathematical Physics
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 01/15/2013,01/07/2013
* Wenxiu Ma,FL,University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 06/30/2014
* USD 31,500.00

The ``2nd International Workshop on Nonlinear and Modern Mathematical Physics"
will take place March 9-11, 2013, at the University of South Florida. The
primary goals of this mathematics research conference are to survey recent
advances on a wide range of topics of current interest in the field of nonlinear
mathematical physics, to promote new collaborations in the research community,
and to bring together mathematicians and physicists to understand nonlinear
phenomena and solve nonlinear problems. The topics of the main lectures will
reflect the major current developments in the areas of solvability and
integrability of nonlinear problems in mathematical physics, which include, but
are not limited to, integrable and near-integrable equations, physical and
engineering applications such as nonlinear optics, Bose-Einstein condensates and
fluid dynamics, numerical aspects of nonlinear phenomena, and related areas.
This conference will bring a unique international forum to the South Florida
region, and will be a catalyst for new, cross-disciplinary synergies in this
flourishing research area.

Nonlinear phenomena occur everywhere in daily life, but the so-called nonlinear
mathematical problems that model such phenomena are very difficult to solve
either theoretically or numerically. Two important settings for nonlinear
problems are global warming and communication systems. The ``2nd International
Workshop on Nonlinear and Modern Mathematical Physics" aims to make progress in
the understanding and solution of nonlinear problems by promoting new synergies
among researchers in different fields. The workshop will feature
multidisciplinary lectures on emerging topics and arising challenges of broad
scope, from classical mathematical physics to contemporary mathematical physics.
Emphasis will be placed in involving junior faculty and graduate students,
including members of under-represented groups, women and minorities. The
workshop will provide significant opportunities for education and public
outreach to a broad audience from various branches of mathematics, physics and
engineering sciences.
