
* 1309391
* Texas Analysis and Mathematical Physics Symposium
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/2013,05/14/2013
* David Damanik,TX,William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 05/31/2014
* USD 20,565.00

The 2013 TeXAMP Symposium takes place at Rice University during the Fall 2013
semester, with a thematic focus on the intersecting area of dynamical systems,
spectral theory, and PDE's. The website of the meeting is
http://www.math.utexas.edu/users/tc/TeXAMP/TeXAMP-2013.html. Speakers who have
tentatively agreed to participate are: Giovanni Forni (University of Maryland),
Rupert Frank (Caltech), Vojkan Jaksic (McGill University), Svetlana Jitomirskaya
(UC Irvine), Rowan Killip (UCLA), Alexander Kiselev (University of Wisconsin),
Alexei Poltoratski (Texas A&M University), Israel Michael Sigal (University of
Toronto). Moreover, there will be a poster session for graduate students to
disseminate their research findings. This will provide graduate students with an
opportunity to obtain feedback from senior faculty from other departments. We
strongly believe that the networking activities made possible by TeXAMP will
prove to be a valuable experience for young researchers.

The Texas Analysis and Mathematical Physics Symposium (TeXAMP) is a regional
weekend meeting held annually, hosted in turn by Rice University, and the
University of Texas at Austin. It is intended for the participation of around 50
people (including 25 non-local graduate students). The workshop brings together
many senior mathematicians from Texas and neighboring states, who may not
otherwise have a chance to discuss mathematics together throughout the year. We
take great interest in the advancement of graduate students and recent Ph.D.s.;
they are a main focus of this funding proposal.
