
* 1315268
* The Third Graduate Student Research Conference in Algebra and Representation Theory
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 04/01/2013,02/06/2013
* Natalia Rojkovskaia,KS,Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 03/31/2014
* USD 15,000.00

The Third Graduate Research Conference in Algebra and Representation Theory will
be held at Kansas State University in April 12-14, 2013. The webpage of the
conference is http://www.math.ksu.edu/events/grad_conf_2013 The conference will
feature invited lectures given by experts in algebra and representation theory
and 20-minute to 40-minute talks by graduate students. The keynote speakers are
Professor V. Futorny (Universidade de Sao Paulo), and Professor E. Poletaeva
(University of Texas, Pan American). There are several schools in the region
with strong research traditions in algebra and representation theory, and
participation of graduate students from those schools will support the
development of their research programs. The range of topics in algebra and
representation theory that will be presented at the conference is expected to be
very wide and will include representations of finite groups, representations of
Hecke algebras, symplectic reflection algebras, algebraic groups, quantum
groups, quantizations, Lie algebras, Hopf algebras, Bethe subalgebras of
integrable systems, cohomology over commutative rings, Langlands correspondence,
unitary duals, vertex operator algebras, D-modules. The focus topic of the
invited lectures is graded algebras, superalgebras, and their connection to
representation theory.

Participation in the conference is open to a very broad audience. One of the
main goals of the conference is to increase the interaction among graduate
students from different universities. The conference provides the participants
with the opportunity to communicate their research progress, to develop
presentation skills, and to get acquainted with future colleagues. It opens
connections for collaboration among future researchers. The event will be very
beneficial for research projects on the level of graduate programs.
Participation in the conference stimulates research, helping to prepare results
for Ph.D theses and publications. In the long run, the conference will increase
interest among students in US graduate programs and fundamental mathematical
research, in particular in the programs offered in the Midwest region and by
mid-sized universities. The organization of the conference is undertaken by a
committee of graduate students and one undergraduate student. The event serves
as training for a team of graduate students in organizing professional meetings
in mathematics.
