
* 1324288
* Filamentation Workshop
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 11/01/2013,07/31/2013
* Jerome Moloney,AZ,University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 07/31/2014
* USD 20,450.00

International Workshop on: MATHEMATICAL METHODS AND MODELS IN LASER
FILAMENTATION

Location: Montreal, Canada

Dates. December 9-13th 2013, from Monday AM to Friday Noon.

Web Address: http://www.crm.umontreal.ca/cal/en/liste.shtml#2008-2009-autres

The proposed international workshop on "Mathematical Methods and Models in Laser
Filamentation" aims to bring leading experts from within the multi-disciplinary
fields of applied mathematics, experimental and theoretical laser physics
together in a forum which aims to identify new opportunities and challenges
facing the mathematics community in particular in elucidating new mathematical
tools that address the emerging field of extreme nonlinear optics. Specific
topics to be addressed will include the development of asymptotic approaches to
derive mathematical reductions of optical carrier resolved few-cycle laser pulse
propagation models that describe singular blow-up and optical carrier shocks
under such extreme conditions, quantum based light-matter regularization
mechanisms, novel numerical analysis tools and the development of new
computational approaches to solving the resultant integro differential equation
models that result from such asymptotic reductions. Specific plans to
disseminate the outcome of the workshop include publication of extended chapters
on the plenary lectures in a book, advertise the workshop online with
registration information for students /postdocs and post online links to
lectures after the workshop.

Filamentation science covers a broad swath of emerging scientific endeavors that
relate to the interaction of very intense, ultra-short duration laser light
pulses with gaseous and solid materials. Femtosecond pulse propagation in
gaseous media varies from multi-kilometer propagation paths in the atmosphere
using multi-terawatt (TW) pulsed laser sources to short few centimeter path
propagation in high pressure (multi-atmosphere) capillaries whereby higher
harmonic cascades beyond the 5,000-th harmonic of a fundamental generate
coherent soft X-ray pulses. The former are being employed to detect atmospheric
pollutants and molecular species at ranges up to 30 kilometers in the upper
atmosphere and are exhibiting the potential to detect chemical and biological
warfare agents. Further societal impacts of new discoveries in this emerging
field include: direct observation of the ultrafast motions of the electrons
controlling the molecules of life, the dynamics of proteins or the motion of
atoms in semiconductors and compact sources of intense particle beams for
physics research and medical applications.
