
* 1332369
* The Annual UNCG Regional Mathematics & Statistics Conference
* DMS,INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
* 09/01/2013,06/28/2013
* Jan Rychtar,NC,University of North Carolina Greensboro
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 08/31/2017
* USD 42,000.00

This award supports the University of North Carolina Greensboro Regional
Mathematics and Statistics Conference which will be held annually for a three
year period. The first conference which will be held at UNCG on November 2,
2013. The main goal of the UNCG Regional Mathematics and Statistics Conference
is to provide a venue for students at all levels to share and experience
research in the field of mathematics and statistics. This conference started as
an annual undergraduate student conference in 2005 and has now expanded to
include graduate researchers since 2009. The conference is completely focused on
student research. The conference has established a tradition of attracting
active student researchers and their faculty mentors from North Carolina and
Virginia. The NSF support will allow participants from the entire Southeastern
Atlantic region to participate.

The opportunity for personal interaction among students and between students and
faculty is a hallmark of this conference. These interactions enhance the
research infrastructure and are essential for the success of student research
and for training a new generation of mathematicians and statisticians. Moreover,
due to the funding of NSF, the group has been able to support women and
minorities, currently underrepresented in mathematical research. Students from
these underrepresented groups accounted for about half of the supported
participants.
