
* 1332693
* WORKSHOP ON TRAINING STUDENTS TO EXTRACT VALUE FROM BIG DATA
* DMS,INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM, STATISTICS, Information Technology Researc, CDS&E-MSS
* 08/15/2013,08/08/2013
* Michelle Schwalbe,DC,National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2015
* USD 150,000.00

The National Academies will plan and organize a cross-disciplinary public
workshop to explore perspectives on the training that students from diverse
fields need in order to extract value from Big Data. The workshop will identify
key skills that are needed to prepare students for analyzing Big Data. It will
consider the needs of industry, academia, and government and build on the
experience gained from emerging courses and curricula for this topic. Invited
participants to the workshop will include experts in statistics, machine
learning, databases, large-scale computing systems, streaming computing, user
domains, health and biological informatics, and industry.

Many traditional methods for data analysis do not work, or do not work well,
with the massive amounts of data emerging in numerous endeavors. In order to
reliably extract insight from Big Data, students need to learn new skills, and
many of those skills cut across multiple disciplines and, thus, are not
necessarily accessible through standard courses and curricula. During the
academic year 2012-2013, a number of courses were introduced at various
universities to impart the needed understanding. The planned workshop will
enable educators to share insights gained from these courses and make
adjustments. A summary report of the workshop will make these insights available
more broadly.
