
* 1338413
* Training the Next Generation of Mathematical and Statistical Sciences Professionals: A Workforce Development Project
* DMS,OFFICE OF MULTIDISCIPLINARY AC, WORKFORCE IN THE MATHEMAT SCI
* 04/15/2013,02/15/2017
* Linda Braddy,DC,Mathematical Association of America
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 03/31/2015
* USD 299,786.00

This award supports a forward-looking community discussion on the challenges
facing the U.S. mathematical sciences workforce, through a series of on-line
thematic discussions leading up to an in-person workshop to be held at the
headquarters of the American Statistical Association in Alexandria, VA, from
July 14-July 17, 2013. The mathematical sciences are central to the STEM
enterprise -- the range of business, industry, and academic positions that
require mathematical and statistical skills is expanding as more and more
disciplines encounter the challenges and opportunities of large-scale data
analysis and mathematical modeling. The mathematical sciences communities
recognize that there are significant challenges in ensuring that adequate
numbers of graduates with expertise in the mathematical and statistical sciences
at the bachelor's, master's, and doctoral levels enter the U.S. workforce. This
activity reassesses the training of future generations of mathematical
scientists in light of the increasingly cross-disciplinary nature of the
training they need.

The proposed project will bring together thought leaders to develop strategies
for future investments in training the next generation of professionals in the
mathematical sciences. This project will establish a community of stakeholders
from academic institutions, professional societies, government agencies, and
industry to analyze issues that include recruitment and retention,
sustainability, and assessment, and to plan strategically around workforce
challenges facing the mathematical and statistical sciences communities. The
project will also make exemplary prototype initiatives visible to the broader
mathematical and statistical sciences communities and propose metrics that
demonstrate the value of such initiatives in order to (1) broaden adoption of
effective practices to improve student recruitment, retention, degree
completion, and job placement, and (2) ensure that successful practices are
sustained beyond initial implementation. This award is jointly supported by the
Division of Mathematical Sciences and the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities
within the Directorate of Mathematical and Physical Sciences.
