
* 1339299
* Foliation Theory in Algebraic Geometry
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 09/01/2013,12/11/2014
* James McKernan,MA,Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 08/31/2015
* USD 30,000.00

This grant will fund the participation of early career mathematicians at a
conference on Foliation theory in algebraic geometry to be held at the Simons
Foundation's Gerald D. Fischbach Auditorium in New York City, September 3rd-7th,
2013. There will be lectures on recent advances in birational geometry,
foliations, hyperbolicity and related subjects. This conference will give
experts a chance to disseminate the many recent advances to young people working
in these areas.

Algebraic geometry is the study of the solutions to a collection of polynomial
equations. This began more than two thousand years ago, with the study of the
geometry of conic sections, such as circles. However we still cannot completely
answer many simple and fundamental questions, such as find the number of
solutions. We know this number in many special cases, and these cases have
interesting applications in engineering and biology. Foliation theory studies
the solutions, or flow lines, to collections of differential equations. As
differential equations model physical phenomena, foliation theory is useful in
physics and engineering. When the collection of differential equations have
polynomial coefficients, there is a rich interplay between algebraic geometry
and foliation theory.
