
* 1341263
* International Conference on Spectral and High Order Methods 2014
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 03/01/2014,08/13/2014
* Janis Morey Naugle,AZ,Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 02/28/2015
* USD 35,000.00

This NSF grant provides funds in support of the International Conference on
Spectral and High Order Methods which will be held in June 2014, in Salt Lake
City, Utah. This conference series brings together researchers and practitioners
with an interest in the theoretical, computational and applied aspects of high-
order and spectral methods for the solution of differential equations impacting
increasingly diverse and important applications. Subjects of the meeting
include, but are not limited to spectral methods, high-order finite difference
methods, p- and h-p type finite element methods, discontinuous Galerkin methods,
ENO/WENO methods, high order methods for integral equations, wavelet-based
methods, stochastic methods, efficient solvers and preconditioners for high
order methods, efficient time-stepping methods, as well as computational aspects
for modern hardware environments. The format of the meeting includes both
invited papers as well as submitted contributions in order to encourage wider
participation especially from young scientists and under-represented minorities.
Target of funding to women and minorities facilitates their engagement in this
important field of computational mathematics.

This NSF grant provides funds in support of the International Conference on
Spectral and High Order Methods which will be held in June 2014, in Salt Lake
City, Utah. The conference engages a broad group of researchers at all career
stages representing the mathematical sciences and engineering, as well as
practitioners from multiple industrial and government communities, with research
interests impacting a number of important scientific domains. These include
topics such as aeroacoustics, bioengineering, electromagnetics, ocean and
climate modeling, seismology, turbulent flows, non-Newtonian flows, nonlinear
optics, plasma dynamics, image processing and uncertainty quantification. The
format of this moderately-sized conference provides an opportunity for
networking and career advancement for junior academics. NSF funding is targeted
to provide fellowships for minorities and women, particularly those who are at
early career levels and facilitates their exposure to important application
areas for research.
