
* 1341843
* Travel Grants for Presentations by Undergraduates at National Meetings
* DMS,INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
* 10/01/2013,08/28/2018
* Charlotte Simmons,DC,Mathematical Association of America
* Continuing Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 09/30/2019
* USD 799,768.00

This award funds travel for undergraduate students to present their reserach at
the annual winter Joint Mathematics Meetings (JMM) and Mathematical Association
of America (MAA) summer MathFest meeting for a five-year period beginning in
2014. In 2014, the JMM will be held in Baltimore, MD from January 15 - January
18, and the MathFest meeting will be held in Portland, OR from August 7 - August
9. A dramatic increase in the number of undergraduates participating in research
in mathematics has occurred over the past twenty-five years. Consequently,
contributed talks and poster presentations by undergraduates have become an
integral part of the MAA summer MathFest and the winter JMM, organized by the
MAA and the American Mathematical Society. Participation in such settings offers
undergraduates the opportunity to become part of the mathematical community at a
national level while interacting with both practicing mathematicians and peers.
Learning new mathematics and sharing experiences with others can provide strong
motivation for continued study of mathematics. Despite the positive effects of
the experience, lack of travel funding remains a significant barrier to
participation in national meetings for many students, particularly at
institutions with large populations of underrepresented students. The proposed
project will provide travel grants to nearly 1400 undergraduates over a five-
year period, affording them the opportunity to present their work at MAA
MathFest or the JMM, with priority in funding given to students from
underrepresented groups and institutions with less funding.

The value of involving undergraduates in research is well documented and the
potential benefits are numerous. Indeed, a growing body of literature suggests
that participation in undergraduate research increases retention rates and
student engagement and is beneficial for students from many backgrounds.
Moreover, several studies have indicated that students who participate in
undergraduate research are significantly more likely to attend graduate school
than those who do not. Research has also shown, however, that the communication
of results through oral or written presentations is an essential feature of an
effective undergraduate research experience. The MAA, with its focus on
advancing mathematics at the undergraduate level, provides a mathematically rich
and diverse program at its annual meetings, making the JMM and MAA MathFest
ideal venues for undergraduates to disseminate their research results while
interacting with both peers who are similarly engaged in research and practicing
mathematicians. The experience of participating in a national meeting,
particularly the largest annual mathematics meeting in the world (JMM) and the
largest summertime annual gathering of mathematicians (MAA MathFest), can help
students identify with becoming a professional mathematician and may motivate
them to continue the study of mathematics. The proposed project will support
increased engagement with mathematics and is expected to ultimately increase the
number of students who pursue graduate studies in the mathematical sciences.
Project results will be widely disseminated.
