
* 1342467
* Workshop on Dimension Reduction and High-dimensional Inference: Theory and Applications
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 01/01/2014,11/15/2013
* Zhihua Su,FL,University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 12/31/2014
* USD 7,500.00

The workshop on "Dimension Reduction and High-Dimensional Inference: Theory and
Applications" will be held on January 17-18, 2014, on the campus of the
University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA. The project will provide travel
support for 25 young researchers and two invited speakers. The field of
dimension reduction has a long history, but the overarching aim is to reduce the
dimension of a family of multivariate random vectors in such a way that the
information deemed relevant is preserved. Today, with high-throughput
technologies and fast computing, high dimensionality in data is pervasive.
Dimension reduction is now a prevalent theme throughout the applied sciences,
including genetics, food science, biomedical engineering, economics and computer
science. The area of dimension reduction is quickly evolving and expanding to
adapt to this new reality. In this workshop, twelve distinguished individuals
who work in dimension reduction and high-dimensional inference will review the
current state of the field and present their recent work. A number of young
researchers will participate in the workshop and present their work in poster
sessions.

Dimension reduction offers an appealing avenue for dealing with high dimensional
problems. In effect it transforms a high dimensional data set to a low
dimensional one by identifying and combining a small set of important variables
which give as much or nearly as much information as the original large set of
variables. Then one can build models and perform estimation or prediction based
on the low dimensional data set. Many existing models and approaches, which do
not apply to high dimensional data, can be applied to the reduced low
dimensional data. In addition, effective reduction in dimension often makes it
possible to visualize the data, which can facilitate subsequent model
development. Dimension reduction is now an active research area, but many
unsolved problems remain. The workshop provides an excellent opportunity for
established researchers in the field, as well newcomers, to discuss the
significant developments that have taken place recently; to discuss what works
and what does not; and to identify important problems and new research
directions.
