
* 1343125
* 10th Workshop on Algorithms and Models for the Web Graph (WAW 2013)
* DMS,Combinatorics
* 01/15/2014,01/10/2014
* Michael Mitzenmacher,MA,Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Qing Xiang
* 06/30/2014
* USD 8,630.00

The 10th Workshop on Algorithms and Models for the Web Graph (WAW 2013) took
place at Harvard University in Cambridge, MA, December 15-16, 2013. The focus of
these meetings is to present recent research and to explore directions for
future research on areas involving networks relating to the World Wide Web and
related complex networks. Topics of interest include algorithmic research, data
analysis, the modeling of complex networks, and specific applications to
understanding the web graph. This is an annual meeting, which is traditionally
co-located with another related conference; in this case WAW 2013 was co-located
with the 9th Workshop on Internet & Network Economics (WINE 2013).

In the rapidly growing world of Internet infrastructures, the research areas of
WAW represent major efforts from the theoretical and practical communities to
address the challenging problems that we face today. The WAW series of workshops
have established themselves by bringing together researchers in a variety of
interrelated areas, as these questions require interdisciplinary efforts. The
choice of the plenary speakers and co-location with WINE highlights the
important themes of the conference. The speakers, organizers, and conference
history combine the experience to plan a successful conference, along with the
reputation to attract a strong and diverse group of participants. The
proceedings were published in a Lecture Notes in Computer Science volume.
Selected papers will also be disseminated in journal form, in a special issue of
the journal Internet Mathematics.
