
* 1346466
* AWM-SIAM Workshop and Kovalevsky Lecture, 2014
* DMS,INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
* 04/15/2014,10/21/2015
* Ruth Charney,RI,Association for Women in Mathematics, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 03/31/2016
* USD 19,997.00

This project will fund a named lectureship and a workshop for early-career women
at the 2014 Annual Meeting of the Society of Industrial and Applied Mathematics
(SIAM) in Chicago, Illinois. The Sonia Kovalevsky Lectureship features
significant contributions by women to applied areas of the mathematical
sciences. These lectures reach a broad audience, highlight important
contributions by women, and serve as inspiration for those entering the
profession. The workshop, organized by the Association for Women in Mathematics
(AWM), is part of a series of interconnected conferences and workshops designed
to create sustainable networks, encourage mentoring relationships, and promote
research collaborations. The 2014 AWM-SIAM workshop will focus on numerical
algorithms for nonlinear partial differential equations (PDEs). Nonlinear PDEs
arise in many different fields and have been a core research area of theoretical
and numerical analysis for many decades. Due to the nonlinearity, solutions to
these PDEs may have singularities and thus cannot satisfy the equations in the
classical sense. In recent years, numerical simulations have dramatically
enhanced our understanding of the properties and behaviors of such solutions.
The workshop will focus on numerical methods for some of the most widely studied
PDEs.

This project is designed to address issues that frequently cause women in the
mathematical sciences to leave the profession or fail to thrive. Studies show
that increasing the visibility of women scientists, providing mentoring and
networking opportunities to combat isolation, and offering resources for
launching careers are key to combating this problem. The AWM workshops, which
include both research talks and panel discussions on career development, provide
a natural environment for establishing mentoring relations and research
collaborations. Contacts formed at these meetings lead to greater integration of
the participants into the broader research community. The Kovalevsky Lecture is
an opportunity to display outstanding work by accomplished female
mathematicians, providing both role models for younger women and visual
reminders to the broader community of the significant contributions being made
by female mathematicians.
