
* 1347163
* CBMS Conference: Algorithms for solving elliptic PDEs on modern computers---fast direct solvers, randomized methods, and high order discretizations,
* DMS,INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 03/01/2014,02/14/2014
* Alexander Barnett,NH,Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 02/28/2015
* USD 37,968.00

The award supports an NSF/CBMS regional conference that will be held at
Dartmouth College in June of 2014 on the topic of so called "fast methods" for
numerically solving linear partial differential equations (PDEs). This field of
research has recently seen very rapid progress, and the purpose of the
conference is to introduce recent results to junior researchers, and to engage
them with current research. In particular, the conference will describe (1) new
"direct" (as opposed to "iterative") solvers that in a single sweep construct an
approximate solution to the equation under consideration, (2) new randomized
methods for accelerating certain linear algebraic computations, and (3) the
interplay between direct solvers and high-order discretization techniques that
allow the solution of PDEs to ten digits of accuracy or more, even on
complicated geometries.

The broader motivation for the research to be discussed during the conference is
the growing importance of computational simulations of physical phenomena in
science and engineering. The ability to perform rapid virtual experiments rather
than real (expensive) ones is a key driver of technological progress. While more
powerful computers are important, development of efficient numerical algorithms
that run well on modern hardware is equally crucial. The CBMS conference
supported will disseminate knowledge about newly developed powerful algorithms
that are designed from the ground up to minimize communication, which is
emerging as the most important computational bottleneck. The conference will in
addition to traditional lectures also give participants an opportunity for
hands-on computational experimentation using tutorial style software. The
lectures will be recorded and will be posted online along with the lecture
slides, and the tutorial software. A monograph will be produced to create an
integrated set of resources that will maximize the impact and reach of the
conference. This project will be jointly supported by the Infrastructure Program
and the Computational Mathematics Program within the Division of Mathematical
Sciences.
