
* 1358171
* Representation Theory and applications to Combinatorics, Geometry and Quantum Physics
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 12/01/2013,11/19/2013
* Pavel Etingof,MA,Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 11/30/2015
* USD 30,000.00

The conference 'Representation Theory and Applications to Combinatorics,
Geometry and Quantum Physics' will be held on December 13 through 19, 2013, at
the Independent University of Moscow in Russia. It will be a major gathering of
the leading mathematicians and young scholars whose work fits in the realm of
representation theory. The conference has a broad scope and it aims to present
some of the most important recent developments and techniques in this field, in
particular the rich web of interconnections between representation theory,
combinatorics, geometry, and physics, which has emerged in recent years and has
greatly helped to advance each of these fields. The topics to be covered in the
conference include algebraic groups, geometric representation theory, vertex
algebras, infinite dimensional Lie algebras, combinatorics of plane partitions,
conformal field theory and enumerative algebraic geometry. Many talks will
involve applications of representation theory to mathematical physics,
combinatorics and algebraic geometry. The organizers expect the conference to be
a major gathering of researchers in these fields and one of the most important
mathematical events to take place in Moscow in the last few years. We expect
that it will attract many graduate students and postdoctoral fellows, especially
from the USA.

In quantum physics, which describes the world of small objects (such as atoms,
electrons, nuclei, etc) the state of a physical system is random and not
definitively determined, unlike classical physics. In other words, states are no
longer definite points of the classical space of states, but rather functions on
the space of positions of the system, whose squared magnitude represents the
chance the system will be found in that particular state. Such functions can be
added and multiplied by numbers; that is, they form what is called a linear
space. Symmetries of the system act by linear transformations of this space and
therefore play an important role in studying quantum systems. The part of
mathematics which studies actions of symmetries in linear spaces is called
representation theory since we represent symmetries by linear transformations.
Representation theory is thus extremely useful in quantum physics and other
areas of physics, while physics, in turn, constantly provides deep insights into
representation theory and other areas of mathematics. For example, in recent
years the development of the representation theory of infinite-dimensional
symmetries, coming from quantum field theory, has been an active area of
research. During the conference leading mathematicians and mathematical
physicists, many from the United States, will discuss the connections between
representation theory and related fields in mathematics, as well as the
connections to physics, especially in light of recent breakthroughs. The
conference will be very useful for young mathematicians and graduate students
who will attend the conference. The money from this award will support the
travel and local expenses of US-based speakers and participants. Conference
materials will be disseminated through the conference website http://bogomolov-
lab.ru/rep2013/, which will allow the ideas presented at the conference to be
accessed by a wide audience in the US and around the world. NSF support from
this award will be advertised on the website, and US-based participants will be
able to apply for this support.
