
* 1361934
* Cornell's Fifth Conference on Analysis, Probability and Mathematical Physics on Fractals
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 04/01/2014,12/27/2013
* Robert Strichartz,NY,Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Edward Taylor
* 03/31/2015
* USD 49,500.00

The fifth Conference on Analysis, Probability and Mathematical Physics on
Fractals will be held at Cornell University Mathematics Department from June
11-15, 2014. There are many ways in which fractals appear in current
mathematical research. The topics of this conference are those where the
underlying space is fractal, and the subjects studied include the analogs of
differential equations, random processes and models of physical interactions
taking place on these fractal spaces. Due to the pioneering work of Barlow,
Perkins, Bass, Kusuoka, Zhou and Kigami there is a well-established, rigorous
mathematical framework for discussing such problems.

The conference will contribute to the study of processes in disordered media
(fractals), which have many applications in physics, chemistry, biological
sciences and engineering. Diffusion processes in percolation clusters,
vibrations of fractal objects, signal propagation in channels with random
obstacles, electro-magnetic waves in fractal antennae, Rossby waves in
oceanography, models of financial markets, neural structures are just a few of
many examples of such processes. There are many important scientific questions
involving modeling physical systems on fractal spaces. Participation of
theoretical physicists helps foster the growing interactions between the
mathematics and physics communities with interests in these areas. This
conference will help inform the physics community of the infrastructure being
developed by mathematicians, and will give mathematicians interesting feedback
on the interests and questions of other scientists. These Cornell conferences
have been held every three years starting in 2002. The previous four conferences
in this series have had a major impact in the development of these areas by
bringing together leading contributors, young researchers and mathematicians in
related disciplines to learn about recent work and plan joint projects. The
fifth conference is expected to continue in this tradition. The five day meeting
will be structured in three parts: half-hour talks in the mornings by leading
researchers in the field to describe recent important advances; mini-courses in
the early afternoons to enable advanced undergraduates, graduate students, and
researchers from related fields to learn some of the foundations of the area and
discuss important open problems; and twenty minute talks in parallel sessions in
the late afternoons to allow all attendees to present their research. A
significant part of the conference is the mini-courses, which are directed
primarily at the training of future mathematicians. A large number of junior
researchers, including minorities, members of underrepresented groups and
undergraduate students from both the Cornell and University of Connecticut REU
programs, are expected to benefit from these courses.
