
* 1362273
* South-Eastern Logic Symposium
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS
* 09/01/2014,08/23/2016
* Jindrich Zapletal,FL,University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 08/31/2018
* USD 45,000.00

The PIs will organize an annual weekend conference at University of Florida in
Gainesville. The conference will concentrate on set theory, computability and
their interactions. The expected audience will consist of three or four senior
speakers and a greater number of graduate students and postdoctoral researchers,
with geographical emphasis on the southeastern region, currently underserved by
similar events. The purpose of the proposal is to provide a forum for set
theorists and computability theorists to meet on a regular basis. After the end
of series of Southeast Logic Symposia in 2006, no such forum exists; indeed, in
the southeastern region no regular mathematical logic meetings take place. At
the same time, the conversation of the two fields has received new impetus with
the study of countable equivalence relations similar to the Turing equivalence.

The proposal will fund a series of weekend annual conferences concentrating on
set theory, computability, and their interactions. The series will take place at
University of Florida in Gainesville, at the center of the under-served
southeastern region. The funding will in its greater part enable young
researchers to attend the conference, improving their communication and
networking; a smaller part of the funding will be spent on senior speakers,
whose lectures should attract broadest possible audience. New lines of
interaction between set theory and computability appeared in the last couple of
years, and they will be at the focus of the conference series.
