
* 1404899
* 2014 Barrett Lectures
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 01/01/2014,11/26/2013
* Joan Lind,TN,University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Edward Taylor
* 12/31/2014
* USD 24,480.00

The 2014 Barrett Lectures will be held June 16-19, 2014 at the University of
Tennessee in Knoxville, Tennessee. This year's conference, entitled "Complex
Analysis in Probabilistic Settings," will focus on exciting recent developments
in the intersection of these fields. Over the last two decades, there has been
productive interplay between the fields of complex analysis and probability,
with further connections to discrete mathematics, conformal geometry, and
theoretical physics. Examples of this include Schramm-Loewner Evolution and
random triangulations. The conference will feature leading researchers, Grégory
Miermont and Steffen Rohde, who will each give a three-talk survey lecture
series. Additionally, the conference format includes invited plenary talks by
senior researchers, shorter communications by early-career participants, and
poster and computer demonstration sessions. This project is NSF funding to
support travel and other participant costs for approximately 30 participants,
especially early-career researchers and graduate students.

The 2014 Barrett Lectures will be the 44th installment of a highly regarded
lecture series that began as a tribute to the distinguished scientist John H.
Barrett, head of our Mathematics Department at the time of his death in 1969.
The past conferences have attracted a distinguished series of speakers and
participants. This year's conference topics highlight two notable trends in
mathematics, the penetration of probabilistic methods into classical areas and
the impact of computer experimentation in studying emergent phenomena.
Participants will include established senior mathematicians and the early-career
researchers who will push these trends. Early-career mathematicians will have
the opportunity to learn from and interact with an international slate of highly
regarded researchers.
