
* 1412493
* Conference on Inverse Problems and Spectral Theory, October 17-19, 2014
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 03/15/2014,03/21/2014
* GREGORY BERKOLAIKO,TX,Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 02/28/2015
* USD 26,455.00

The award supports the travel and local expenses of 23 participants in the
conference "Inverse Problems and Spectral Theory," which will be held at the
Texas A&M University, October 17-19, 2014. The primary goal of the conference is
to facilitate cooperation between researchers working in various areas of
inverse problems and spectral theory, and in applications of these techniques in
physics, biomedicine, and engineering. The majority of the award funds are
reserved to support the participation of junior mathematicians, graduate
students, and women and other members of underrepresented groups.

Both inverse problems and spectral theory have been rapidly developing during
the last several decades, with a number of deep connections emerging between
these areas of mathematics. Inverse Problems are problems in which causes for a
desired or an observed effect are to be determined. They play an ever increasing
role in medicine and biology, in search for oil and mineral deposits, in
studying the earth's substructure and creating astrophysical images from
telescope data, in finding cracks and interfaces within materials, and in
homeland security applications. Spectral theory has been in the mainstream of
mathematical development for a long time. It has led to fascinating developments
in various areas of science and engineering and the research in this field is
still in an extremely active phase. The interaction between the two fields have
given rise to a special subclass of problems, the inverse spectral problems.
However, those are only one aspect of the deep connection between inverse
problems and spectral theory and spectral-theoretical methods find many
applications in seemingly unrelated inverse problems. For example, significant
progress in studying some of the emerging multi-physics modalities of medical
imaging was achieved through the study of the spectral properties of the
operators governing the wave propagation in the living tissue. The supported
conference will feature invited lectures from leading specialists in Inverse
Problems and Spectral Theory, with special emphasis on the interaction of the
two fields.

Conference web site: www.math.tamu.edu/~berko/ipst/
