
* 1413574
* Conference on Stochastic Asymptotics and Applications, September 25-27, 2014
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/15/2014,07/02/2014
* Michael Ludkovski,CA,University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 03/31/2015
* USD 19,900.00

Ludkovski DNS-1413574

The investigators organize the Conference on Stochastic Asymptotics at
University of California, Santa Barbara during September 25-27, 2014. The
Conference focuses on new developments in stochastic asymptotics, especially
motivated by applications in mathematical finance. A special emphasis of the
meeting is on novel applications of probability and applied mathematics for
ongoing regulatory-risk innovations, and study of systemic risk in the global
financial system. To highlight these connections, the meeting is also joint with
the 6th Western Conference on Mathematical Finance (WCMF). The WCMF series
promotes the community of researchers from Western U.S. who work in the areas of
financial mathematics, insurance, and statistics. A key mission of WCMF is to
help in the training of young faculty and stimulate the careers of the next
generation of scientists. The conference features 12 plenary talks by senior
researchers and 10 presentations by invited junior participants, gathering a
total of sixty researchers and graduate students. The meeting encourages and
supports participation by students, early-career researchers, and members of
under-represented groups.

The objective of the Conference is to address cutting-edge topics in stochastic
perturbation methods, which have emerged as a powerful tool in wide ranging
areas of probability, applied mathematics, operations research, and materials
science. The applications that are discussed include analysis of waves in random
media, large deviations and rare event computation, systems of interacting
agents, large-scale stochastic games, and multi-scale stochastic processes. A
special focus is placed on novel applications of perturbation techniques within
financial mathematics, such as pricing short-maturity financial derivatives
(e.g. options or credit default swaps), in studying systemic risk in the inter-
bank asset flows and credit relationships, and for investigating multi-scale
models of asset dynamics (such as stochastic volatility or market microstructure
in high-frequency trading). All of these areas have experienced very rapid
developments in the past several years, opening up entire new directions of
research in the field. The conference assembles an international and multi-
disciplinary group of experts to encourage new interactions and draw new
researchers to these topics. Conference web site: http://www.pstat.ucsb.edu/sa-
wcmf6
