
* 1417056
* Advances in Interdisciplinary Statistics and Combinatorics, October 10-12, 2014
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 06/01/2014,04/21/2014
* Sat Gupta,NC,University of North Carolina Greensboro
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 05/31/2015
* USD 10,000.00

This award supports the participation of junior researchers in the international
conference "Advances in Interdisciplinary Statistics and Combinatorics," held at
The University of North Carolina at Greensboro on October 10-12, 2014. The
conference brings together statisticians and researchers from other disciplines
to discuss the use of statistical techniques in research programs in a variety
of disciplines including anthropology, biology, computer science, economics,
education, education research methodology, environmental science, information
systems, medicine, psychology, and public health. A major emphasis is on
training young researchers through two workshops, one on Big Data and Machine
Learning, and the other on Mathematical Biology and Game Theory. In addition to
these two workshops, the conference includes a variety of sessions on topics
that highlight the use of statistical methods in other disciplines.

The main goal of the workshop on Mathematical Biology and Game Theory is to
introduce undergraduates and graduate students to the mathematical modeling that
is an essential part of any research in applied mathematics, mathematical
biology in particular. The workshop focuses on game theoretical models that are
used for situations where several entities interact (directly or indirectly)
with one another and where each entity acts in its own interest (potentially in
conflict with the interests of others). The workshop on Big Data and Machine
Learning, designed for graduate students, will provide a forum for researchers
from academia and industry to exchange information and develop new research
directions in areas of big data and machine learning focusing on scalability,
reliability, and security. These workshops will help to advance the next
generation of researchers on some of the most important contemporary topics in
statistical science. The meeting also offers an opportunity to students from
underrepresented groups to be part of a high profile conference to broaden their
vision of research in mathematical sciences and advance their career goals. More
details are available at the conference website
http://www.uncg.edu/mat/aisc/2014/index.html
