
* 1418827
* 16th Meeting of New Researchers in Statistics and Probability, July 31- August 2, 2014
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 04/01/2014,04/16/2014
* Edoardo Airoldi,MA,Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 09/30/2014
* USD 20,000.00

This award supports participation in the 16th New Researchers Conference, a
conference series organized by, and held for, junior researchers under the
auspices of the Institute of Mathematical Statistics (IMS). The meeting will
take place over three days, July 31 to August 2, 2014, at Harvard University in
Cambridge, Massachusetts. The primary objective is to provide a much needed
venue for interaction among new researchers in statistics and probability. The
meeting will be held immediately preceding the Joint Statistical Meetings (JSM)
2014 in Boston, Massachusetts. Participants will have received their Ph.D.
within the past five years or are expecting to receive their degree within the
same year. Each participant will present a short expository talk and a poster.
Topics will cover a variety of areas in statistics and probability, from theory
and methods to applications. Senior speakers will give plenary talks for
inspiration and take part in four discussion panels covering topics of
importance for young people embarking on an academic/research career: teaching,
mentoring, publishing and funding.

This conference series is explicitly aimed at training the future leaders and
workers in statistics and probability. In helping to create networks of new
researchers, it lays the groundwork for future collaboration and informal
exchange of ideas and knowledge. It is also critical for building professional
cohesion within the fields of statistics and probability and setting new
frontiers for research. Meeting people outside of one's research specialty area,
and learning about their research, favors a more comprehensive view of research,
which is important when taking editor positions and other professional service
activities. The conference attracts participants with different backgrounds and
nationalities, and underrepresented groups (women, minorities and people with
disabilities) are explicitly encouraged to attend. The conference website is
available at http://www.stat.harvard.edu/NRC2014/.
