
* 1418490
* 2014 Pingree Park Dynamical Systems School: Foundations and Frontiers of Symbolic Dynamics
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/2014,03/12/2014
* Nicholas Ormes,CO,University of Denver
* Standard Grant
* Edward Taylor
* 05/31/2015
* USD 25,000.00

This award supports participation in the conference "2014 Pingree Park Dynamical
Systems School: Foundations and Frontiers of Symbolic Dynamics" held at Colorado
State University on the dates of July 13-18, 2014. This conference, which is an
extension of dynamical systems conferences given at the same site during the
summers of 2008-2011, is dedicated to the study of classical and
multidimensional symbolic dynamics. A particular area of focus will be on recent
developments in active study of Z^d-symbolic dynamics. Three mini-courses are
planned to give graduate students and junior faculty an opportunity to learn
foundational material in the subject, as well as to learn of important recent
developments. Plenary lectures are also to be given.

Symbolic dynamics is part of the mathematical subject known as dynamical
systems. In addition to its significance in mathematics, symbolic dynamics has
applications in computer science and other subjects involving time evolution
through discrete time steps. The meeting provides an excellent opportunity for
students and junior researchers to learn about the state of the art in this
field, to interact with experts in the topic area, and to develop research
collaborations. It is planned that there will be thirty-six participants, of
which a significant number will be junior faculty. Particular emphasis is given
to recruiting women and members of underrepresented groups.

Conference web site: www.math.du.edu/~normes/PP2014
