
* 1419217
* Workshop: Stability of solitary waves, May 25-30, 2014
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 05/01/2014,05/03/2014
* Atanas Stefanov,KS,University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 04/30/2015
* USD 19,955.00

The project is aimed at facilitating participation of US mathematicians in the
workshop "Stability of Solitary Waves" to be held May 25-May 30th, in Pisa,
Italy. Solitary waves are ubiquitous in a broad range of physical phenomena,
from rouge waves in the ocean to the signal propagation in optical fibers.
Stability of solitary waves is of paramount importance for the physical
processes, with direct relevance to engineering applications. For example,
transmission of a signal through an optical channel is feasible only if the
shapes of the corresponding pulses do not deteriorate during the transmission,
i.e., when they are stable. The workshop will provide a venue to stimulate
exchange of ideas among the leading US and European mathematicians in the areas
of stability of solitary waves. It will expose a number of young researchers and
graduate students from the US to fundamental research by leading mathematicians.
The informal sessions will provide ample opportunities for junior researchers
and graduate students to interact with experts in the fields. A special effort
is made to attract participants from the groups underrepresented in mathematics.

The workshop will have three main focus areas - existence of solitary waves, the
spectral/linear stability, and their respective nonlinear stability. The
specific information provided by the studies in each of these areas contributes
crucial information to our understanding of solitary waves.
