
* 1430456
* Young Topologists Meeting 2014, June 30 - July 4, 2014
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 06/01/2014,04/14/2014
* Soren Galatius,CA,Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 11/30/2015
* USD 34,268.00

This award supports US-based participants in the Young Topologists Meeting (YTM)
2014 held at the University of Copenhagen, Denmark from Monday, June 30th to
Friday, July 4th, 2014. This international meeting will bring together junior
researchers in the mathematical fields of algebraic and geometric topology, and
provide an opportunity for them to speak publicly about their research and to
learn about recent developments by their future colleagues. Mini-courses will
give broader introductions to two important subjects in the field, as seen
through the eyes of more experienced researchers. The conference provides
opportunities for networking, for meeting future research colleagues, and for
forming research collaborations. Previous instances of the YTM have had mostly
participants based at European institutions; support from this award will
enhance opportunities for international collaboration by allowing more
significant participation of US-based junior researchers. The diverse atmosphere
at the conference and among the speakers and participants will also encourage
people from underrepresented groups to pursue research careers in topology.

The YTM is an annual event, alternating between Copenhagen and Lausanne,
Switzerland, organized mainly by graduate students and postdocs. The meeting
will consist mainly of talks given by junior topologists, in addition to two
mini-course lecture series given by distinguished senior researchers. The
lecture series this year will be given by Jacob Lurie (Harvard University, US),
who will speak about Tamagawa numbers via algebraic topology, and Lars
Hesselholt (Nagoya University, Japan and University of Copenhagen, Denmark), who
will speak about trace methods in algebraic K-theory. The conference web page is
available at: http://www.math.ku.dk/english/research/conferences/2014/ytm2014
