
* 1432918
* Contact Topology in Dimension Three and Higher, July 28 - August 1, 2014
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/2014,05/30/2014
* John Etnyre,GA,Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2015
* USD 24,870.00

This grant supports US participants expenses in the workshop "Contact Geometry
in Dimension Three and Higher" to be held at University College London, from
July 28 to August 1, 2014. This workshop aims to bring together researchers and
students from around the world working in contact geometry and related areas in
symplectic topology. There are large groups of researchers in both the U.S. and
Europe working in contact topology; and to foster further developments in the
field it is important that there is good communication between these research
groups. This conference will help provide some of that communication.

The workshop includes topics such as pseudo-holomorphic curves, h-principles,
symplectic dynamics and Stein manifolds, with the specific goal of introducing
higher-dimensional techniques to participants who might be more familiar with
low dimensions, or vice versa. The program will be a mixture of ordinary
research talks with more in-depth mini-courses on topics of recent interest. The
mini-courses will be "Orderability and Rabinowitz Floer theory" by Peter Albers
(Munster) and Will Merry (ETH Zurich), "Flexibility in higher-dimensional
contact geometry" by Patrick Massot (École Polytechnique) and Emmy Murphy (MIT),
and "Intersection theory of punctured holomorphic curves and applications" by
Richard Siefring (MPI Leipzig) and Chris Wendl (UCL). The exact list of research
talks will be determined closer to the time of the workshop to reflect the
latest developments in the field.

Details can be found on the workshop web page at

http://www.homepages.ucl.ac.uk/~ucahcwe/workshop.html
