
* 1434941
* Southeastern-Atlantic Regional Conference on Differential Equations (SEARCDE)
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2014,07/19/2014
* Gisele Goldstein,TN,University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 04/30/2015
* USD 26,000.00

This award supports participation in the thirty-fourth Southeastern-Atlantic
Regional Conference on Differential Equations (SEARCDE) conference, held at the
University of Memphis in Memphis, TN on October 11 and 12, 2014. The SEARCDE,
initiated by members of the Department of Mathematics at the Virginia
Polytechnic Institute and State University, has met annually since 1981. Since
then, the meeting has rotated among various research institutions in the
Southeast. The primary objective of SEARCDE is to promote research and education
in the field of differential equations by bringing together established and
beginning researchers, including advanced undergraduate and graduates students
as well as recent PhDs. In addition to the four plenary lectures given by
outstanding internationally recognized scholars, there are twenty minute
contributed talks given in parallel sessions. SEARCDE provides opportunities for
all participants to present their own work in these twenty minute contributed
talks. The sessions are organized so that talks by established researchers are
interspersed with talks by beginning researchers. Detailed information about the
conference can be found at the conference's website, http://www.searcde.org .

The principal goal of the SEARCDE meeting is to provide a platform to exchange
ideas, to discuss recent developments in the field, and to provide important
opportunities for networking and the creation of new research collaborations.
The meeting provides a platform to exchange ideas and to discuss recent
developments in both theoretical and applied differential equations. SEARCDE
particularly encourages the participation of beginning researchers who get to
meet and hear renowned plenary speakers plus leading regional experts. This
typically has led to new contacts, collaboration opportunities, and broader
interests. These features are important for young researchers, especially those
from traditionally underrepresented groups. For the past three decades, SEARCDE
has been the setting for many talks given by graduate students on the topics of
their dissertation research. Often this is their first experience giving a
formal conference presentations. NSF funding ensures that many talented young
researchers will have the opportunity to participate in SEARCDE 2014.
