
* 1439922
* Conference on Knot Theory and its Applications to Physics and Quantum Computing
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 09/01/2014,08/26/2014
* Mieczyslaw Dabkowski,TX,University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2015
* USD 37,060.00

Abstract

Award: DMS 1439922, Principal Investigator: Mieczyslaw K. Dabkowski, Tobias
Hagge, Viswanath Ramakrishna

A conference on Knot Theory and its Applications to Physics and Quantum
Computing is to be held at the University of Texas at Dallas in October 2014.
Knot theory is the branch of topology that studies the many ways that a circle
can be placed within three-dimensional space - a motivating question is whether
an apparently knotted circle is genuinely knotted, or whether it looks more
complicated than it really is. Techniques that are currently used and under
development have been shown to be capable of making that distinction between
knotted and unknotted circles, and are opening up new challenges in algebra as
well as topology. Connections of knot theory to physics often involve quantum
theory, and one of the topics of this conference is quantum computing, the
effort to apply the distinctive properties of quantum mechanical systems such as
entanglement to obtain computational speedups that greatly exceed the
limitations of current hardware. Speakers at this conference are expected to
include some of the leading researchers in topological aspects of quantum
computing.

Some of the main topics for the planned conference include: (1) connections
between knot theory and quantum computing - such as Temperley-Lieb recoupling,
unitary representations of the braid group and entangled states, unitary
solutions to the Yang-Baxter equations, GHZ states and extra special 2-groups,
fusion algebra of Majorana fermions, (2) invariants of knots and 3-manifolds,
including Khovanov homology, skein modules, and related ideas; and (3)
applications of knot and link invariants to finding higher order invariants and
sharper energy bounds for energy for magnetic and vorticity fields.
