
* 1441641
* Cincinnati Symposium on Probability Theory and Applications 2014, September 19-21, 2014
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 07/01/2014,06/18/2014
* Robert Buckingham,OH,University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2015
* USD 20,000.00

The Cincinnati Symposium on Probability Theory and Applications 2014 will take
place September 19 to 21, 2014 at the University of Cincinnati with a focus on
current research in limit theorems for dependent structures. Dependent
structures are ubiquitous in physical applications, yet present many
mathematical challenges. Several important breakthroughs have been made in
recent years by combining ideas from two or more of the Symposium focus areas.
The Symposium will provide a platform to showcase recent developments and
stimulate new cross-disciplinary investigations and collaborations. In order to
stimulate new ideas and assist with the professional development of young
probabilists, the Symposium will emphasize the participation of graduate
students and recent PhD recipients. Besides invited talks by senior researchers,
there will be ample opportunities for young investigators to present their
research in shorter talks and at a poster forum. By providing travel support,
especially to junior probabilists, this award will facilitate interactions and
potential collaborations between junior and more established researchers, and
encourage the infusion of new ideas across probability and related fields.

Recently, significant progress has been made in understanding how classical
limit theorems persist or break down when the assumption of weak dependence is
not valid. At the same time, models with complex dependence structures, notably
arising from random matrix theory and mathematical physics, present new
challenges to probabilists. The Symposium will bring together experts and junior
researchers working on 1) almost sure limit theorems via martingale
approximations, 2) long-range dependence phenomena and infinite ergodic theory,
and 3) spectra of large-dimensional random matrices.

Symposium website: http://math.uc.edu/probability
