
* 1456767
* US-Poland International Workshop: Micro and Macro Systems in the Life Sciences, Polish Academy of Sciences, Bedlewo, Poland, June 8-13, 2015
* DMS,MATHEMATICAL BIOLOGY
* 06/01/2015,06/04/2015
* Urszula Ledzewicz,IL,Southern Illinois University at Edwardsville
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 11/30/2016
* USD 29,992.00

An international workshop entitled, "Micro and Macro Systems in Life Sciences",
will take place June 8-13, 2015, at the Stefan Banach International Mathematical
Center of the Institute of Mathematics of the Polish Academy of Sciences (IM
PAN), in Bedlewo, Poland. The workshop's goals are to bring together applied
mathematicians and researchers working on various levels of systems describing
phenomena in the life sciences along with some medical doctors and biologists in
order to exchange ideas and initiate and promote collaborations.

Understanding problems in the life sciences is a complex issue and involves the
analysis of systems on a variety of micro and macro levels. The topics under
consideration will include micro and macro systems in cancer biology, multi-
scale modeling in physiology, intracellular and intercellular signaling as well
as epidemiology and infectious diseases. Over the past years, the list of
mathematical tools that has proven useful in analyzing and understanding
biological phenomena has grown tremendously. They include new multi-scale
techniques in system theory that bridge across different spatial and temporal
scales, new directions in dynamical systems, partial differential equation,
control theory and computational techniques. The workshop will emphasize the
mathematical tools currently available as well as focus on new tools to be
developed in order to address current challenges in the life sciences. The
workshop will also bring together researchers from the United States and Europe
which will facilitate the establishment of more sustained relationships and
catalyze new collaborations. A special effort is made to ensure participation of
Ph.D. students and postdoctoral researchers who are in the early stages of their
careers to expose them to the wealth of possibilities of research in this field
and to discuss career and funding opportunities. The workshop will have
substantial participation of women and minorities. Proceedings of the workshop
will be published as a special issue in the journal "Mathematical Biosciences
and Engineering"
