
* 1459887
* Copper Mountain Conference on Multigrid Methods
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 06/15/2015,06/03/2015
* Steve McCormick,CO,Front Range Scientific Computations, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 05/31/2016
* USD 10,000.00

Copper Mountain Conference On Multigrid Methods, Copper Mountain, Colorado,
March 22-27, 2015.This grant is to support participation in the 2015 Copper
Mountain Conference on Multigrid Methods. The funding from this award is
specifically for students, women, and scientists who are members of
underrepresented groups. The Copper Mountain Conferences have graduate students
forming a very large fraction of the attendees (typically 30%-40%), many of them
full participants who co-author papers and give presentations. Women and
minorities are growing fractions of the attendees, but further increases are
desired, so this award also targets their participation. Support for the
students, women, and minority scientists from this award is in the form of
reduced registration fees and local and travel expenses. A hallmark of this
conference is a "Student Paper Competition," which draws entries from a
significant fraction of the student attendees and results in extraordinarily
high-quality papers on scientific discovery from the students, working in tandem
with and under the guidance of their faculty advisors. These results, like the
conferences as a whole, span wide-ranging and important theoretical and
applications areas, such as techniques of convergence analysis, implementation
and development of mathematical software, and use of such ideas in novel
settings, including advanced computer architectures and new applications such as
uncertainty quantification. The aim here is to continue the increase in
participation by members of these underrepresented groups so that the multigrid
discipline and science in general are improved by the professional development
of these talented researchers.

The Copper Mountain Conferences form arguably the premier conferences in two
closely related mathematical fields: iterative and multigrid methods. These two
fields provide computational support for numerical simulation of a very wide
host of human endeavors, including environmental and energy research, medical
and biological applications, and many other areas critical to the U.S. and
international science and engineering community. This award supports the
participation of students, women, and scientists who are members of
underrepresented groups at the 2015 Conference. The Conferences traditionally
work to ensure the future vitality of the fields of iterative and multigrid
methods by facilitating development and nurturing of a community of capable
graduate students and entry-level scientists. Through their egalitarian
structure, with no invited speakers and all talks of equal length, the
Conferences provide mechanisms for young people to meet each other and all
participants in a relaxed yet scientifically rigorous setting; these mechanisms
include topical tutorials, themed evening workshops, and access to the broad
representation of participants from academia, national laboratories, and
industry. The Conferences have a tradition of a very high level of student
participation (typically 30-40% of attendees), and will cultivate this through
supporting students' local and travel expenses. Emphasis is also placed on
engendering diversity through support of women and minority scientists. These
conferences bring together the world's leading practitioners in these critical
fields and result in high-level publications, effective applications codes, and
the establishment of long-term collaborative research partnerships.
