
* 1460337
* SIAM Conferences in the Mathematical and Computational Sciences
* DMS,INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
* 09/15/2015,07/09/2017
* James Crowley,PA,Society For Industrial and Applied Math (SIAM)
* Continuing Grant
* Nandini Kannan
* 08/31/2018
* USD 648,825.00

Under this grant, the Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics (SIAM) will
organize and run a series of conferences and workshops in the mathematical and
computational sciences during the three-year period between October 2015 and
September 2018. These SIAM conferences form an important part of the research,
education and technology transfer infrastructure for applied and computational
mathematics. The funding of this grant will support travel of students and early
career professionals, facilitating the integration of education with research.
The funding will also support the travel of invited speakers to the conferences
and the dissemination of invited conference presentations and tutorials to the
wider community on SIAM's audio/slide service. The first event in the series is
the SIAM Conference on Applied Linear Algebra to be held October 26-30, 2015 in
Atlanta, GA.

SIAM conferences and workshops are highly interdisciplinary and foster the
communication of the latest fundamental and applied research and applications to
mathematical and computational scientists, physical and social scientists, and
engineers from academia, industry and government. SIAM conferences are designed
to identify and disseminate knowledge of emerging areas of research. Conferences
to be held in the first year of the award include the following: SIAM Conference
on Applied Linear Algebra, SIAM Conference on Geometric and Physical Modeling,
Analysis of Partial Differential Equations, SIAM International Conference on
Data Mining, SIAM Conference on Imaging Science, SIAM Conference on Mathematical
Aspects of Materials Science, SIAM Conference on Discrete Mathematics, SIAM
Conference on the Life Sciences, and SIAM Conference on Nonlinear Waves and
Coherent Structures.
