
* 1500607
* KUMU PDE Conference Proposal
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 04/01/2015,03/27/2015
* Milena Stanislavova,KS,University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 03/31/2016
* USD 15,500.00

This award will provide support for participants, especially graduate students,
junior researchers, women and mathematicians from under-represented groups in
the sciences, to attend the regional conference "KUMU Conference in PDE,
Dynamical Systems and Applications" to be held at the University of Kansas from
April 18-19, 2015, co-organized by faculty from the University of Kansas (KU)
and the University of Missouri (MU). Nearly all important physical phenomena are
governed by fundamental laws and design principles that directly relate rates of
change of some quantity to that of some other quantity. Indeed, given the
initial conditions and the physical laws of motion one seeks to predict the
future and reconstruct the past. This important observation naturally leads to
the idea of a differential equation, thus providing the key to understanding
many real-world problems. Differential equations are widely used as models in
mathematical physics and have potential applications to many fields including
Bose-Einstein condensates, fluid dynamics, pattern formation, gas dynamics and
for modeling signals in optical communication networks. This conference will
facilitate greater interaction between researchers in differential equations and
its related fields from the area close to Kansas and Missouri. Planned as the
first of a series of annual meetings, the conference will provide a venue for
regional junior and established researchers, as well as graduate students to
discuss the recent advances and challenges in their respective fields. In
addition, young researchers will be given the opportunity to present their own
work and to gain insights into this important subject through interactions with
senior experts in the field. The conference website:
https://www.math.ku.edu/conferences/2015/KUMUPDE/index.html

Complex nonlinear systems abound in science and engineering, and their behavior
is often modeled by systems of nonlinear partial differential equations (PDE).
Any progress towards understanding the behavior of their solutions is of
paramount importance for a variety of practical applications, including fluid
flow, flame front propagation and fiber optical communication. Many PDE can be
conveniently described as infinite dimensional dynamical systems, allowing for
the use of tools and methodologies from dynamical systems theory to make
qualitative and quantitative predictions about the solutions of these systems.
Objects like invariant manifolds have been a great aid in understanding the
behavior of finite-dimensional dynamical systems, but the connections between
nonlinear PDE's and dynamical systems is still an area active current research.
In the last few decades, collaborations between researchers in these fields, as
well as with those working in their applications, have provided tremendous
progress in our understanding of the dynamical behavior, stability and
robustness of coherent structures in such nonlinear PDE. The main themes of this
conference include (i) fluid dynamics, water waves and dispersive PDE's, (ii)
existence, dynamics, and stability of nonlinear waves in dissipative systems,
and (iii) dynamical systems and 2d-Navier Stokes equations.The techniques used
to solve many challenging problems in these broad areas often combine ideas and
methodologies from dynamical systems and partial differential equations together
with probability theory, spectral and functional analysis, Evans functions, and
geometric singular perturbation theory, to name a few.
