
* 1501062
* Workshop in Analysis and Probability
* DMS,INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM, ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/2015,06/16/2017
* David Kerr,TX,Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 05/31/2019
* USD 239,997.00

This award supports participation in the Workshop in Analysis and Probability
held at Texas A&M University during the period from July 1 to August 2, 2015,
and during similar periods in the summers of 2016 and 2017. The Workshop brings
together senior and junior researchers and advanced graduate students in
analysis and probability and related fields of mathematics in order to broaden
the education of the younger participants and to promote interaction among
researchers working in different areas. It sponsors a yearly three-day
conference (SUMIRFAS - Informal Regional Functional Analysis Seminar),
Concentration Weeks, and mini-conferences. In 2015 SUMIRFAS will be held from
July 31 to August 2, and the Concentration Week "From Commutators to BCP
Operators" will take place July 27 to 31. In addition to advanced lectures for
experts, Concentration Weeks include introductory lectures designed to acquaint
junior researchers and non-experts with the basics of a topical area of current
interest. All Workshop participants will be invited to disseminate their work
through seminars, and past experience suggests that most will take advantage of
this opportunity.

The Workshop activities have a wide impact by providing intellectual stimulation
for all participants as well as giving an opportunity to a diverse group of
junior participants to increase the breadth and depth of knowledge and to
interact with senior researchers in several areas of mathematics. There is also
significant outreach to applied mathematics and computer science. Indeed, an
important goal of the Workshop is to promote cooperation among researchers in
different fields, and every Concentration Week involves participants from two or
more research areas. The website of the Workshop is located at
<http://www.math.tamu.edu/~kerr/workshop>.
