
* 1501137
* Rocky Mountain Mathematics Consortium Summer School: The Structure of C*-Algebras
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 05/01/2015,02/26/2015
* Zhuang Niu,WY,University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 04/30/2016
* USD 35,213.00

This award provides funding to help defray the expenses of participants in the
"Rocky Mountain Mathematics Consortium Summer School: The Structure of
C*-Algebras" that will be held from June 1-5, 2015, on the campus of the
University of Wyoming. Operator algebras were introduced by John von Neumann and
his collaborator Murray during the 1930's, when mathematicians and physicists
began the development of a rigorous description of matter on the atomic scale.
The physical theory developed for that description was quantum theory.
Mathematically, the possible configurations or states of matter (an electron
moving around an atom, for example) are described by certain vector spaces.
Performing an experiment on the physical system corresponds mathematically to
applying an operator to the vector space of possible states. The collection of
such operators is described mathematically as an algebra of operators. Nowadays,
the study of operator algebras has become an important mathematical pursuit with
applications to many other branches of mathematics and theoretical physics. The
study of operator algebra itself also has been developed into several closely
related subareas, of which one is structural investigation of the important
class called C*-algebras. The classification of C*-algebras has developed
rapidly in the past few years, with several exciting results. One goal of this
summer school is to pull together these recent results to get a clear picture of
the current status of the classification of C*-algebras.

The Rocky Mountain Mathematics Consortium (RMMC) has run a summer school, in
which topics vary widely from year to year, for over thirty years. The theme of
the 2015 installment in the series is the structure of C*-algebras. The set of
topics includes the following: von Neumann algebra techniques in the
classification of C*-algebras; an introduction to the K-theory of operator
algebras; and higher-rank graph C*-algebras. The event's lecturers include four
of the world's leading authorities on C*-algebras: George Elliott, Guihua Gong,
Yasuhiko Sato, and Alex Kumjian. The choice of topic was motivated by the
secondary purpose of the activity; namely, to prepare the summer school's
participants, especially the junior ones, for the regional conference sponsored
by the Conference Board of the Mathematical Sciences (CBMS) that will follow it
during the second week of June and that has as its focus the so-called basic
homotopy lemmas and the asymptotic uniqueness theorem, one of the key
ingredients in the recent breakthroughs in the classification of C*-algebras.

Summer school web site: http://www.uwyo.edu/math/additional-learning-
opportunities/rmmc-summer-school/
