
* 1501219
* Graduate Student Combinatorics Conference 2015
* DMS,Combinatorics
* 02/01/2015,01/31/2015
* Carl Lee,KY,University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 01/31/2016
* USD 15,000.00

The University of Kentucky Department of Mathematics will host the 11th annual
Graduate Student Combinatorics Conference (GSCC 2015) in Lexington, Kentucky,
March 27 - 29, 2015. The GSCC provides a unique and invaluable opportunity for
graduate students whose research focuses on combinatorics to experience the
benefits of taking part in a research conference. Apart from the keynote
lectures, the GSCC focuses solely on graduate student talks. Furthermore, with
only graduate students, undergraduates, and local professors in attendance, the
conference provides a low pressure environment in which students can present
their research and improve upon their presentation and teaching skills. The GSCC
also provides an opportunity for graduate students to network by meeting other
young mathematicians with similar research topics. These conferences can lead to
potential joint research projects and opportunities for future collaboration.
This award defrays travel costs for graduate student participants.

The first GSCC was hosted by the University of Minnesota in 2005, with
subsequent conferences held at the University of Wisconsin (2006), the
University of Washington (2007), UC-Davis (2008), the University of Kentucky
(2009), Auburn University (2010), Penn State University (2011), the University
of Illinois-UC (2012), the University of Minnesota (2013), and again at Auburn
University (2014). Two keynote speakers have been invited to each give a one
hour lecture at the 2015 GSCC. Topics discussed will include extremal and
probabilistic combinatorics, with focus on graphs and hypergraphs, and a range
of combinatorial topics such as partition theory, lattice point enumeration, and
permutation statistics. The website for the conference is
https://sites.google.com/site/gsccuk2015.
