
* 1506217
* New Techniques in Birational Geometry
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 03/01/2015,02/06/2015
* Christian Schnell,NY,SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 02/29/2016
* USD 23,750.00

The conference "New Techniques in Birational Geometry" will be held in the
Department of Mathematics at Stony Brook University on April 7-11, 2015; it will
be preceded by a one-day mini-school for graduate students and postdoctoral
researchers. The conference is centered around recent advances on the
"rationality problem" in algebraic geometry. Algebraic geometry studies systems
of polynomial equations -- ubiquitous in mathematics, science, and engineering
-- by looking at the geometry of the set of solutions. A system of polynomial
equations is called "rational" (respectively "unirational") if there is a
polynomial function whose outputs always give solutions of the system, and such
that a general solution occurs among the outputs of this function exactly once
(respectively only a finite number of times). This property is of great
practical value, but unfortunately it is notoriously difficult to tell whether a
given system is rational or unirational. The conference will bring together
experts to discuss recent progress on this open problem; it will foster
interactions between experts in different fields, and it will train young
mathematicians in these important techniques. This award supports participation,
primarily by junior researchers, in the conference.

Specifically, the conference will explore four themes related to rationality
questions: (1) Algebraic cycles and Hodge theory (2) Derived categories (3)
Bridgeland stability conditions (4) Birational geometry The conference will
feature presentations by leading experts in these areas. Throughout the history
of algebraic geometry, the "rationality problem" has been a touchstone,
motivating major progress in Hodge theory (the Clemens-Griffiths theorem
disproving the Lüroth conjecture), the minimal model program (the Iskovskikh-
Manin theorem and Mori's proof of the Hartshorne conjecture), invariant theory
(Saltman's negative solution of Noether's problem), and étale cohomology (the
Artin-Mumford theorem solving the stable Lüroth problem). Although the problem
has many direct applications, its main value has been inspiring new techniques
and serving as a point of contact between different areas. There have been major
recent advances on the rationality problem in several parts of algebraic
geometry, and this is a rare moment of opportunity to bring together researchers
with complementary expertise. Indeed, a complete solution, for instance in the
case of cubic fourfolds, likely requires multiple approaches, and there are few
mathematicians expert in all these areas. There will be a number of activities
specifically for junior participants (such as a one-day mini-school introducing
some of the topics), and an effort will be made to recruit a diverse body of
participants. More details about the conference can be found at its website:
http://www.math.sunysb.edu/AlgebraicGeometry/Birational2015/.
