
* 1507908
* Recent Developments in Positive Characteristic Methods in Commutative Algebra: Frobenius Operators and Cartier Algebras
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 02/15/2015,02/04/2015
* Yongwei Yao,GA,Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 01/31/2016
* USD 24,530.00

This award supports participation in the conference Recent Developments in
Positive Characteristic Methods in Commutative Algebra, held during March 13-15,
2015, at Georgia State University, Atlanta, Georgia. The motivation behind the
conference is to bring together researchers, including postdoctoral researchers
and graduate students, in commutative algebra and related areas, in order to
exchange ideas and discuss recent developments in positive characteristic
methods. Top researchers in the field as well as postdocs and graduate students
will be invited to speak at the conference. To make the conference accessible to
all participants, introductory talks are scheduled. The conference will provide
a platform for the participants to start exploring research aspects related to
the highlighted topics, and it is anticipated that they will contribute research
progress in these areas within a few years. More information can be found on the
conference web site: http://www2.gsu.edu/~matfxe/gsu-usc/foca.html

The conference will focus on recent developments in positive characteristic
methods. Research on positive characteristic methods has seen tremendous
developments in recent years via using concepts related to the Frobenius
homomorphisms. This includes the tight closure theory in characteristic p,
singularities derived via tight closure theory, as well as the corresponding
singularities in characteristic zero (via reduction to characteristic p) in
algebraic geometry. The highlights of the conference, Frobenius operators and
Cartier algebras, also involve the Frobenius homomorphisms in very fundamental
ways. Both of them have intricate connections with the tight closure theory,
birational geometry, F-modules, F-stability, test ideals, jumping numbers, anti-
canonical covers, etcetera. Very recent research also includes the invariant
"Frobenius complexity" being defined in order to measure whether a ring
Frobenius operators is finitely generated. This conference will provide an
opportunity for the participants to get exposed to the topics, exchange ideas,
forge collaborations, and contribute to these research areas.
