
* 1507428
* 10th Conference on Bayesian Nonparametrics
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 05/01/2015,04/22/2015
* Subhashis Ghoshal,NC,North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 04/30/2016
* USD 15,000.00

The 10th Conference on Bayesian Nonparametrics is going to be held during June
22-26, in Raleigh, NC. Providing travel support to junior researchers who do not
have access to other sources of funding to attend the conference is key to
maintaining the current leadership of American institutions in this field. The
conference will also provide American researchers opportunity to exchange ideas
with leading researchers from elsewhere in the world such as Europe, Asia and
Latin America. Many of the invited speakers including a plenary speaker are
women. More women and minorities will be highly encouraged to take part in the
conference by providing them local support obtained through funding from the
National Science Foundation.

Bayesian nonparametrics has evolved as one of the fastest growing areas of
research in statistics. Its application areas include genetics, finance,
survival analysis, sociology, networks and machine learning. The primary
objective of the conference is to bring together experts and young researchers,
theoreticians and practitioners, who use Bayesian nonparametric techniques. The
conference has a well-structured balanced program covering various areas of the
subject. The scientific committee of the conference consists of renowned
international experts on Bayesian nonparametrics and related topics. The meeting
will include three overview plenary talks, twenty four invited talks, several
contributed talks and two large contributed poster sessions. The poster session
and some slots for contributed talks are especially reserved for young
researchers. In addition, the conference will provide opportunities for young
researchers to disseminate widely the results of their work by facilitating the
publication of peer-reviewed papers and a proposed special issue of a leading
statistics journal. Funding from the National Science Foundation will support
participation of students, post-doctoral scholars and junior faculty members
working in U.S. institutions to participate in the conference.
