
* 1521103
* Maurice Auslander International Conference
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 05/01/2015,04/18/2016
* Gordana Todorov,MA,Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 04/30/2018
* USD 48,000.00

This award supports participation in the 2015 and 2016 meetings of the Maurice
Auslander International Conference series, held at the Woods Hole Oceanographic
Institute, Quissett Campus in Woods Hole, Massachusetts. The first will be held
on April 29 - May 4, 2015, and the second in May, 2016. The conference is a
combination workshop/conference/student presentation event. Each day of the
conference starts with expository lectures by known international experts in
various fields. There will also be student presentations explaining their own
results. The rest of the lectures will be traditional conference talks. The goal
of the expository talks and student talks is to make current research in algebra
accessible to graduate students and postdocs and to give beginning researchers a
platform to display their achievements. The meetings also introduce
international leaders in the field to young US researchers, who become better
known in the world and make outside contacts. The conference will help make
current topics in new branches of algebra more accessible and more popular in
the US. This successful yearly event will continue to expand its participation
and extend support to more young researchers.

In the twenty-first century, Auslander-Reiten theory has had considerable new
impact in many fields; particularly important is the fact that the cluster
theory of Fomin and Zelevinsky, which is connected to so many different fields,
is also intimately related to the representation theory of finite dimensional
algebras. The Maurice Auslander International Conference is intended to be a
center of activity for this area of algebra in the United States. The meeting
brings together mathematicians from representation theory and related areas of
algebra, geometry, combinatorics, and mathematical physics. This conference
places special emphasis on: Representation theory of algebras, usually
noncommutative; Relation of representation theory of algebras to other fields
such as representations of groups, vector bundles over weighted projective
space, the topology of surfaces, Poisson geometry, and cluster structures on
Grassmannians; Application of techniques from the representation theory of
algebras to related fields such as invariant theory and combinatorics;
Applications of results from other fields in order to motivate new methods in
the representation theory of algebras in terms of both problem solving and
development of new questions, in particular for cluster algebras, which were
invented to study Lusztig's canonical bases arising from quantized enveloping
algebras, and applications to quantum field theory such as the Cecotti-Vafa
theory of BPS quivers.

More information can be found at the conference web site
www.northeastern.edu/martsinkovsky/p/MADL/MADL.html
