
* 1522981
* Conference: Manifolds and Groups: Towers of Covers; September 7th - September 12th, 2015, Ventotene, Italy
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 08/01/2015,04/27/2017
* Kate Juschenko,IL,Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 07/31/2018
* USD 42,000.00

This project supports participation of US based mathematicians in the
international workshop "Manifolds and Groups: Towers of Covers" which will take
place from September 7th until September 12th, 2015, in Ventotene, Italy. A
major goal of the workshop is to train and support the next generation of
mathematicians in the field of geometric analysis. The conference will help to
educate graduate students and recent PhDs on the latest developments in the
field. The conference will introduce junior mathematicians to various topics in
geometric group theory and bring them up to the forefront of research. A part of
the conference will be devoted to three mini-courses, taught by experts known
also for their ability to give enlightening lectures. In parallel to the
minicourses, there will be research talks. The speakers will be prompted by the
organizers to aim their lectures at a broad audience of mathematicians. The
majority of funding will support junior participants coming from USA. The
organizing committee will encourage and support broad and diverse participation.
In particular, women mathematicians and members of other under-represented
groups are especially encouraged to apply for support.

The workshop consists of the following three minicourses on different aspects of
"Towers of Covers": "Invariant Random Subgroups in rank one and higher rank Lie
groups" (Tsachik Gelander, Hebrew University and Weizmann Institute), "Coverings
and expanders" (Emmanuel Kowalski, ETH Zurich), and "L^2-invariants and growth
of homology in towers of finite coverings" (Roman Sauer, Karlsruhe Institute of
Technology). The workshop will also feature research talks and informal
discussions. Participants will include leading U.S. and European researchers
from different areas relevant to the centerpiece of the workshop (3-manifold
topology, probability and analytic group theory) as well as junior researchers,
both graduate students and postdocs.

More infromation can be found at the website http://www.ventotene2015.net/
