
* 1523379
* Shape constraint inference: Open problems and new directions
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 09/01/2015,06/04/2015
* Wolfgang Polonik,CA,University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2016
* USD 7,000.00

The international conference on "Shape constraint inference: Open problems and
new directions" will take place October 5 - 9, 2015, at the Lorentz Center,
Leiden, The Netherlands. The topic of this conference is the study of the
performance of a certain category of statistical methodologies. These
methodologies distinguish themselves from related methods by their goal to
explicitly incorporate a certain type of structural prior knowledge about the
target object. Many examples of practical importance exist, for instance, in
finance, economics, genomics and medicine. A simple example is given by the
reasonable statement that older cars tend to have a higher risk of failure. Thus
when predicting the risk of failure of a car at different ages, the statistical
methodology should explicitly use this prior knowledge. Ideally this should be
achieved without imposing any further constraints that are difficult to justify
in practice. The structural assumption just described, i.e. being increasing
over time, is classical. Modern statistical challenges are much more complex.
For instance, the object of interest might not just be influenced by one factor
("age" in the above example), but by a large number of factors, and the
influence of these factors might differ. While some of them might increase the
risk, some others might decrease it, for instance. There are many other
important types of structural constraints for which statistical methodology
needs to be developed. It is of crucial importance to gain a thorough
understanding for the behavior of these methods. Answering questions such as
"When do these methods work, and when do they not work?" is crucial. There are
also computational challenges associated with the development of these
methodologies that need to be tackled. The conference will provide a forum to
advance this field of statistics. Participants will consist of both senior and
more junior researchers, as well as postdocs and PhD students. Special emphasis
will be given to increase female participation.

Shape and order constraints can be considered as a way to regularize an
underlying problem in a more explicit and verifiable way, which in particular is
useful in multi and high-dimensional situations. Despite the intuitive appeal
often inherent in shape constraint methods, their analysis and the computations
involved tend to be challenging. Thus tackling such problems in complex
situations (e.g. high-dimensional) often requires novel ideas. Recent promising
advances exist and they will guide the organization of this conference.
Moreover, the connection of shape constrained inference to related geometrically
motivated statistical approaches, including the investigation of modality and of
related ideas from topological data analysis (persistent homology) deserve being
explored in more depth. The conference will serve as a catalyzer for further
developments in these fields, including novel developments for shape constraint
estimation in high-dimensional situations, computational and methodological
ideas for log-concave estimation in multivariate settings, distributional
results for multivariate order restricted non-parametric maximum likelihood
estimators, and more.
