
* 1531461
* Temple University Graduate Student Conference in Algebra, Geometry, and Topology
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 05/01/2015,03/27/2015
* Christian Millichap,PA,Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Shuguang Wang
* 04/30/2016
* USD 26,260.00

This award supports participation in the Temple University Graduate Student
Conference in Algebra, Geometry, and Topology, taking place in Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania, on May 16-17, 2015. This conference will involve more than 90
graduate students from the East Coast and beyond, with a variety of backgrounds
and research levels. The conference provides an opportunity for graduate
students to develop their academic careers at an early stage by presenting
mathematics in front of their peers. With thirty graduate student talks on a
wide range of topics and a diversity of research interests among the plenary
speakers, the conference also provides opportunities for graduate students to
learn about areas of mathematical research that are not prevalent at their home
universities. The conference provides unique opportunities for young
mathematicians to initiate collaborative research projects and to make
connections between their fields of study.

The main topics of this conference are algebra, geometry, and topology broadly
construed, with emphasis on interactions between these areas, including: knot
theory, geometric group theory, geometric structures on 3-manifolds, algebraic
homotopy theory, rational homotopy theory, representation theory, differential
geometry, homological algebra, algebraic topology, quantum invariants of
manifolds, and hyperbolic geometry. The conference will feature thirty talks by
graduate students, both original research talks and expository presentations. It
will also include four plenary speakers renowned for both their presentation
skills and research work: Daniel Wise (McGill University) in geometric group
theory, Chelsea Walton (MIT) in noncommutative algebra, Jessica Purcell (Brigham
Young University) in low-dimensional topology and knot theory, and Julie Bergner
(University of California Riverside) in algebraic topology.

Web site: math.temple.edu/events/gscagt
