
* 1532741
* International Travel Grant to Support U.S. Researchers to Attend the International Statistical Institute Satellite Meeting on Small Area Estimation
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 06/01/2015,06/02/2015
* Parthasarathi Lahiri,MD,University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 05/31/2016
* USD 14,999.00

A three-day international meeting titled First Latin American International
Statistical Institute Satellite Meeting on Small Area Estimation will take place
in Santiago, Chile, during August 3-5, 2015. The meeting will serve as an
official meeting of the International Statistical Institute (ISI) and
International Association of Survey Statisticians (IASS) and will provide its
members and a large international group of statisticians and social scientists a
unique opportunity to meet and exchange ideas on small area estimation, a
growing interdisciplinary field with a wide range of real life applications. The
meeting will include a strong mentoring component for students and young
researchers working on small area estimation and related areas. The meeting aims
to provide a forum for leading experts and young researchers to discuss recent
progress in small area estimation, thereby providing new directions for small
area estimation in various fields. This award provides partial travel support
and registration for graduate students from U.S. institutions to attend and
participate in this meeting in order to disseminate their research and develop
collaborations.

The main objective of this meeting is to bring together both well-established
and emerging young researchers from around the world who are actively pursuing
theoretical and methodological research in small area estimation and their
applications. The meeting will have an excellent slate of invited, special
topic, contributed, and poster sessions covering a wide variety of topics in
small area estimation. These include resampling methods, hierarchical modeling,
time series, higher-order asymptotics, and different real life applications. In
addition, a poster session will be held, which will provide an opportunity for
junior faculty and students to showcase their research work. This should lead to
acceleration and enhancement of research for participants. The meeting will also
be a fitting promotion of the role of small area estimation methodology in
science. Conference web page: http://www.encuestas.uc.cl/sae2015/
