
* 1540135
* 28th Annual Pacific Northwest Numerical Analysis Seminar 2015 at Western Washington University
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/15/2015,09/16/2015
* Jianying Zhang,WA,Western Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2016
* USD 8,000.00

This award supports participation in the 28th Pacific Northwest Numerical
Analysis Seminar (PNWNAS), held at Western Washington University, October 17,
2015. As an annual event for the past twenty-seven years, PNWNAS has become one
of the primary means for local research groups in numerical computation to
engage in scientific exchanges. With invited speakers from industry, government,
and academia, PNWNAS 2015 will help keep its participants abreast of recent
developments in the field of computational mathematics and numerical analysis,
hence fostering research interactions and further promoting mathematical
innovation regionally as well as globally. One of the invited lectures will be a
designated public presentation accessible to a broader audience on a subject of
public interest, such as modeling in the social sciences. This will benefit both
the scientific community and the general public in Bellingham. This award will
encourage and support the involvement of traditionally underrepresented groups
by providing some exclusive financial support for them. A broad range of
interdisciplinary research topics will be covered, including mathematical
modeling and numerical simulation of large-scale complex systems in applied
fields, such as biology, chemical engineering, fluid mechanics, medical science,
and materials science. Topics will also include numerical linear algebra, multi-
scale modeling and simulation, stochastic processes, inverse problems, and image
processing. Poster sessions presented mainly by graduate students and
postdoctoral fellows will provide early-stage researchers with an opportunity to
showcase their academic achievements. The goals of PNWNAS 2015 include: to
foster the scientific interaction of computational mathematics groups from
academia, industry, and government agencies working in a broad range of science
and technology; to promote mathematical innovation regionally as well as
globally; to facilitate interactions that potentially lead to regional
employment and internship opportunities for postdoctoral fellows, graduate
students, and undergraduates; and to attract prospective students into the
Pacific Northwest's higher education programs in computational and applied
mathematics.
