
* 1541585
* Nonlinear PDE's, Numerical Analysis, and Applications; October 2-3, 2015; Pittsburgh, PA
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2015,07/29/2015
* Michael Neilan,PA,University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Rosemary Renaut
* 08/31/2016
* USD 10,000.00

Conference: Nonlinear PDEs, Numerical Analysis, and Applications, October 2-3,
2015, University of Pittsburgh. Partial differential equations (PDEs) play a key
role in the understanding, simulation and prediction of various phenomena
occurring in the sciences and engineering. Yet even for simple problems, exact
mathematical solutions are unattainable, and computational methods are necessary
to construct approximate solutions. Therefore there is a critical need to
develop numerical methods and to theoretically justify the quality and
reliability of the resulting approximations. In addition to providing
justification of the numerical methods, the theoretical analysis often gives
insight for the development of new methods with improved efficiency, accuracy
and capabilities. This two-day conference will create a forum for junior and
senior researchers to discuss cutting-edge results and applications of numerical
methods for nonlinear PDEs. The aim of the conference is to provide an informal
setting in which young researchers and leading experts in numerical analysis can
meet, collaborate, and develop new ideas. In addition, the conference will
expose graduate students and postdocs on this active field of numerical PDEs.

The construction, implementation, and analysis of computational methods for
fully nonlinear second order partial differential equations are relatively new,
yet critical research areas in numerical analysis and scientific computing. Such
problems arise in many application areas including meteorology, cosmology,
geometric optics, differential geometry, optimal transport, economics, imagine
processing and mesh generation. These problems constitute one of the most
difficult classes of PDEs to approximate numerically, and breakthroughs in their
discretization have only appeared within the last 15 years. While there have
been several advances in numerical fully nonlinear second order PDEs, there
still remain fundamental challenges that need to be properly addressed. Examples
include the construction of nonlinear Galerkin methods with monotonicity
properties under realistic mesh conditions, robust numerical methods for general
families of nonlinear problems, imposition of non-standard boundary conditions,
and fast solvers of the resulting non-linear algebraic systems. This conference
will gather leaders in the field to discuss state-of-the-art research trends and
directions of future research.
