
* 1542183
* Polytopal Element Methods in Mathematics and Engineering; October 26 - 28, 2015; Atlanta, GA
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2015,07/30/2015
* Chunmei Wang,GA,Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2016
* USD 25,000.00

This award supports participation in the conference "Polytopal Element Methods
in Mathematics and Engineering," held October 26-28, 2015, at the Georgia
Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA. This conference will promote communication
among the many mathematical and engineering communities currently researching
polytopal discretization methods for the numerical approximation of solutions of
partial differential equations. A variety of distinct polytopal element methods
have been designed to approximate solutions of the same types of modern
engineering problems, but a workshop-type environment is required to foster a
community-wide understanding of the comparative advantages of each technique and
to develop a set of best practices regarding implementation. The grant funds
will be used to support the attendance of Ph.D. researchers and graduate
students, with emphasis on supporting recent Ph.D. recipients and researchers
who are members of under-represented groups in this rapidly developing research
area. More information on the conference is available at
http://www.poems15.gatech.edu.

Robust and efficient methodologies for the numerical approximation of the
solutions of partial differential equations are essential for the
characterization and quantification of many physical phenomena. Discretization
of solutions with respect to simplicial and cubical meshes has been studied for
decades, resulting in a clear understanding of both the relevant mathematics and
computational engineering challenges. Recently, there has been both a desire and
need for an equivalent body of research regarding discretization with respect to
generic polytopal meshes, typically a mesh of convex polygons in 2D or a mesh of
convex polyhedra in 3D. Methodologies accommodating polytopal meshes include
virtual element, weak Galerkin, mimetic finite difference, generalized
barycentric coordinate, and compatible discrete operator methods. These methods
have been applied to diffusion modeling, Stokes flow, elasticity, Maxwell's
equations, eigenvalue problems, and other modeling problems. Many of the
approaches and implementations have only been developed in the past few years,
generating a number of open questions in the field. This conference will help
the research community identify the most important results and most pressing
needs in this area from both theoretical and practical standpoints.
