
* 1550117
* Young Mathematicians Conference
* DMS,INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
* 01/01/2016,12/23/2015
* Rodica Costin,OH,Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 12/31/2019
* USD 143,158.00

This award supports the Young Mathematicians Conference (YMC) to be held at Ohio
State University annually over a three year period. YMC provides a venue for
undergraduate students to present and disseminate the results of their research,
discuss mathematics with their peers and with senior researchers, and receive
serious recognition of their achievements. Besides dissemination of
undergraduate research activity in mathematics and facilitating exchange of
ideas, another primary mission of YMC is to inspire and encourage students,
particularly women and traditionally underrepresented groups, to pursue
mathematics as a career.

Each July, student researchers submit abstracts of their research projects,
which are then judged and ranked by a panel of 40-70 faculty reviewers; the top
ranked students, and their mentors, are invited to participate to YMC. The
conference takes place during a weekend in August, from Friday noon until Sunday
at noon. Besides the student talks (about 45, running in three parallel
sessions) and a poster session, there are three plenary lectures delivered by
world class mathematicians, aimed to introduce students to topics related to
high impact, innovative research of current interest; videos of their talks are
posted online. Representatives from about seven graduate schools introduce
themselves and present their departments on Friday evening. A Graduate School
Orientation event is held on Sunday morning where the Graduate Representatives
answer the students' questions. Also on Sunday morning there is a Mentors'
Breakfast where the mentors exchange ideas and information on undergraduate
research. At all stages of preparation of the conference, the organizers seek
advice, and then report back to the YMC Advisory Board.
