
* 1565738
* Workshop on Functional Analytic Methods in Error Prediction with Applications
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 05/01/2016,04/26/2016
* Victor Ginting,WY,University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Rosemary Renaut
* 04/30/2017
* USD 29,810.00

This project provides travel and subsistence support for participants in the
workshop "Functional Analytic Methods in Error Prediction with Applications"
held at the University of Wyoming on June 13-17, 2016. The workshop is part of
an annual activity spearheaded by the Rocky Mountain Mathematics Consortium
(RMMC). The workshop is aimed at exposing graduate students and junior
researchers to recent progress in computational sciences, particularly in error
estimation techniques utilized in a class of multi-physics and multi-scale
problems inheriting various levels of uncertainty. The workshop is designed to
be strongly interdisciplinary. Workshop presentations and lectures are a blend
of colloquium type and more in-depth style, with the intention of allowing
junior participants to gain knowledge that are potentially useful in their
future endeavors, and at the same time giving more experienced participants
ample opportunity to initiate research collaboration.

Any numerical approximation/simulation for solving mathematical problems
contains some errors. These errors are often functionally dependent on some
parameters associated with the method. Formally, a robust numerical method
should exhibit a behavior in which the errors vanish in the limiting process
associated with the parameters. A standard practice is to estimate the errors in
terms of the parameters and some regularity assumptions of the original
problems. Unfortunately, many applications prevent imposing those theoretical
assumptions, thereby creating a need to monitor the errors in real time
simulation. Having this availability will enhance the robustness of the
approximation in the predictive simulation. Furthermore, a closely related
aspect to error estimation is quantifying the uncertainty that can be present
both in the original problem and in the techniques employed to approximate it.
The appropriate strategy to tackle this is multifaceted, involving reliance on
sophisticated mathematical and statistical tools. This workshop provides a forum
for researchers to address all these issues. More information can be found at
the workshop website: www.uwyo.edu/math/additional-learning-opportunities/rmmc-
summer-school/
