
* 1600061
* Analysis of Partial Differential Equations Using Dynamical Systems Techniques
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 06/15/2016,06/07/2016
* Margaret Beck,MA,Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 05/31/2017
* USD 9,000.00

This award provides support for participants, especially graduate students,
junior researchers, women, and mathematicians from groups under-represented in
the sciences, to attend the conference "Analysis of Partial Differential
Equations using Dynamical Systems Techniques" hosted by Boston University during
June 1-3, 2016. Partial differential equations (PDE) arise as mathematical
descriptions of many natural and societal phenomena, for example, processes that
change in both space and time, such as fluid mechanics, particle interaction, or
financial markets. On the other hand, dynamical systems theory originated in
classical Newtonian mechanics and developed into a universal tool for studying
time evolution of a very broad range of phenomena. Techniques from the theory of
dynamical systems have been used to analyze certain classes of PDE. The purpose
of this conference is to bring together researchers who have pioneered the use
of such techniques in the context of PDE, in order to share ideas, promote
collaboration, and advance our understanding of these PDE models and how
dynamical systems techniques can be used to analyze them. In addition, the
conference will further our ability to predict dynamics of the physical
phenomena that these PDEs describe. Many of the conference participants will be
junior researchers, such as PhD students, who will benefit greatly from
interacting with more senior researchers and also from presenting their own
work.

In the last several decades techniques from the theory of finite-dimensional
dynamical systems have proven to be extremely useful for analyzing certain
classes of PDE that can be viewed as infinite-dimensional dynamical systems.
These PDE are viewed as evolution equations whose phase space is an appropriate
infinite-dimensional Banach or Hilbert space. Methods such as semigroup theory,
invariant manifolds, stability analysis, and KAM theory have all been utilized
to great effect for a variety of these PDE, including the Navier-Stokes
equation, Korteweg-deVries equation, Boussinesq equation, nonlinear Schr√∂dinger
equation, and the Fermi-Pasta-Ulam model. The conference will focus on two main
types of PDE where this dynamical systems approach has been particularly
successful: Hamiltonian systems and models from fluid dynamics. This focus on
the two classes of PDE mentioned above will allow for a more complete coverage
of recent related developments. Broader impacts will result from the
participation of early-career researchers and those from underrepresented
groups, who will be able to network and interact with senior participants and to
learn about emerging directions in their field. Furthermore, both Hamiltonian
systems and fluids models arise from practical applications, and thus the
advancement in our understanding of the behavior of solutions to those models
will in turn forward our ability to predict the types of behaviors observed in
the physical systems themselves. More information can be found at the conference
website: http://math.bu.edu/people/mabeck/APDE-DS.html
