
* 1600503
* Taking the measure of one-dimensional dynamics - Conference
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 02/01/2016,02/14/2019
* Marco Martens,NY,SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 11/30/2019
* USD 26,432.00

This award supports the participation of US-based researchers in the conference
"Taking the measure of one-dimensional dynamics" held at the Lorenz Center,
University of Leiden in the Netherlands, from April 11 to 15, 2016. The
conference focuses on one-dimensional dynamical systems, which describe the
simplest chaotic processes but nevertheless exhibit a very rich set of
behaviors. Although the theory explaining one-dimensional dynamical systems is
the most complete and refined among dynamics in general, these systems are not
yet fully understood. Open questions include many shared by higher dimensional
systems. The purpose of this workshop is to bring together some of the main
players responsible for the development of one-dimensional dynamics with new
researchers in this field, to discuss old problems, new methods, and future
directions. The award funds will support eight US participants, including three
graduate students and a postdoctoral researcher. The conference will address
many crucial themes in one-dimensional dynamics. Topics include statistical
behavior, parameter dependence, renormalization, and rigidity. One-dimensional
dynamics is a source of highly sophisticated techniques that can be applied to
the study of higher dimensional systems, such as those used in studying Henon
maps and related dynamical systems. The conference will bring together senior
researchers and those newer to the field to catalyze future research progress in
the subject.

More information can be found on the conference webpage:
http://www.lorentzcenter.nl/lc/web/2016/765/info.php3?wsid=765&venue=Oort
