
* 1600767
* Graduate Student Combinatorics Conference 2016
* DMS,Combinatorics
* 02/01/2016,01/28/2016
* Svetlana Poznanovikj,SC,Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* jacques verstraete
* 01/31/2017
* USD 16,000.00

The 2016 Graduate Student Combinatorics Conference will be held April 1-3, 2016
at Clemson University, Clemson, SC. The main purpose of this conference is to
bring together graduate students in combinatorics in order to educate
participants about the many areas of combinatorics, provide a venue for sharing
current research topics and open questions, have participants meet fellow
graduate students from across the country, and provide an opportunity for
students to collaborate on current research problems. The conference will
feature two plenary one-hour speakers and a number of twenty-minutes contributed
talks by graduate students. This will be the 12th annual conference in this
series which was started in 2005 at the University of Minnesota. The conference
will be publicized via email and information will be posted on a conference
website.

The conference provides an opportunity for graduate students to learn about the
current research in all areas of combinatorics, including algebraic and
enumerative combinatorics, graph theory, design theory, and coding theory. The
conference is designed specifically for graduate students and it is organized
essentially by the graduate students themselves. Combinatorics faculty from
Clemson and the invited speakers will act as mentors for the graduate students
throughout the process. The conference promotes recent advances in research and
exposition of students' research in a supportive environment.
