
* 1619759
* Workshop for Women in Shape Analysis
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 06/15/2016,06/13/2016
* Erin Chambers,MO,Saint Louis University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 05/31/2017
* USD 9,000.00

This grant supports travel for US women to the Workshop for Women in Shape
Analysis (WiShT), to be held at the Nesin Mathematics Village in Istanbul,
Turkey, in the week June 5-12, 2016. The workshop is designed to strengthen the
shape modeling community by bringing together women researchers at various
stages in their careers (from graduate student to senior researcher) and from
across the world, to foster research collaboration and mentorship. Because shape
modeling is interdisciplinary in nature, drawing from mathematics, computer
science, and biotechnology, collaborations are especially crucial. Furthermore,
since no single country has many women working in shape modeling, international
collaborations are essential to forming robust networks of women researchers.
Hosting the workshop in Turkey reflects a conscious effort to make the workshop
more accessible for women from the Middle East and Africa. Participants will
spend one week working together in small groups to solve one of a selection of
open questions in shape modeling. Instead of the more typical workshop structure
where participants watch presentations of established results, WiShT
participants will begin generating new results in collaboration with other
participants. Following the workshop, the research network will be maintained
and strengthened by publishing a proceedings volume, establishing a website and
listserv, and organizing follow-up conferences and reunions for participants.
Mentoring and professional development will happen both formally and informally.
For more information about the workshop see
http://nesinkoyleri.org/eng/events/2016-wis2/index.php

Shape analysis is a critical component in many applications areas, including
image recognition, medical imaging, biomedical engineering, graphics, and
computer animation. The workshop will tackle three very different challenging
problems in shape modeling and analysis in groups led by experienced
researchers, and the broad range of participants will allow an interdisciplinary
team of scholars to make substantial progress in each area. Group 1 will explore
the many possible definitions of shape complexity and will study the
relationships between them in the hope of deriving an overarching mathematical
theory of shape complexity and an understanding of when each notion of
complexity is most appropriate. The second group will focus on combinatorial
optimization for shape-based segmentation models, both discrete and continuous.
Each model presents challenges: continuous models may not converge to optimal
solutions or may be much slower, while in the discrete setting, integrating
shape information or targeting structures with a particular predefined prior is
quite challenging. Group 2 will combine these approaches by exploring the
mapping of variational formulations to the discrete domain and tackle the
challenges associated with optimizing the resultant discrete models. Group 3
will focus on convolution skeletons in both two and three-dimensions. The goal
is to develop a method to transform an input shape and associated convolution
skeleton into a new skeleton that is robust, compact, and reproducible that
gives a smooth parameterization of the original shape. Results from each group
will be published in an AWM-Springer volume, as well as disseminated via
conference and journal publications.
