
* 1619748
* GROW: Strengthening the Mathematical Workforce
* DMS,INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM, IUSE
* 09/01/2016,06/08/2016
* Bryna Kra,IL,Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 08/31/2018
* USD 84,320.00

This grant will fund two related conferences aimed at addressing gender
imbalances within the mathematical sciences. The first conference is a weekend
long conference for women undergraduates in the mathematical science, designed
to encourage women studying mathematics in the USA to continue their
mathematical education at the graduate level. The second activity is a summit of
mathematicians, with the goal of addressing the broader issues that affect the
gender imbalances in the mathematical sciences.

The undergraduate conference, titled Graduate Research Opportunities for Women
(GROW) is modeled on the first such conference organized at Northwestern in
October 2015, which attracted 50 undergraduates from across the mathematical
sciences and a wide variety of institutions, and will bring together 80 women
undergraduates interested in pure and applied mathematics. As in the first
iteration, GROW II will combine research talks, panel discussions, mentoring in
groups and individually, a banquet with speech by a keynote speaker, and
networking opportunities. We will also create a framework for this activity to
continue into the future, not only at Northwestern but also at other
institutions. The second activity is a meeting of mathematicians in the two days
before the next incarnation of GROW. This summit will discuss ways in which the
US mathematics major can be recrafted to make it more attractive to
undergraduate women; reasons behind the substantial differences in gender ratio
among mathematics majors at different colleges and universities in the USA; and
the creation of a network of ambassadors who will be able to assist people at
other locations around the country to implement similar programs. This work is
co-funded by the NSF's Division of Mathematical Sciences and the Division of
Undergraduate Education.
