
* 1620860
* NSF-SIAM Optics and Photonics Workshop
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 03/01/2016,02/24/2016
* Shari Moskow,PA,Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 02/28/2017
* USD 31,200.00

The Principal Investigator will organize the "NSF-SIAM Optics and Photonics
Workshop" which will be held as part of the Annual Meeting of the Society for
Industrial and Applied Mathematics (SIAM) in Boston, MA, July 11-15, 2016.
Advances in our understanding of the behavior of light are necessary both for
improvements on current technologies and for the realization of new and
envisioned technologies. These technologies influence directly a variety of
sectors in our society, including communications, defense and national security,
energy, and medicine. Due to recent advances in computational tools, materials
science, and nanostructure fabrication, mathematicians have a larger role than
ever to play in this field. This workshop will allow leading applied
mathematicians to bring their vision of the future of mathematics in optics and
photonics to a large mathematical audience. The meeting will encourage
collaborations among researchers in this field from a diverse set of scientific
backgrounds, and the majority of the funding will be devoted to supporting the
participation of early career researchers and applied mathematicians from
underrepresented groups.

The workshop will take place completely on the first day of the SIAM Annual
Meeting, Monday, July 11, 2016, and will feature several accomplished applied
mathematicians in the field of optics and photonics. The talks will survey the
field and its open problems for the broader applied mathematics community.
Topics that will be covered include (1) research on light-matter interaction,
including low-loss metamaterials, plasmonics, and quantum phenomena; (2)
multiphysics coupling between classical electromagnetic and quantum mechanical
phenomena; (3) the science of light propagation and imaging through scattering,
dispersive, and turbulent media, which encompasses advances in radiative
transport theory, statistical inverse theory, numerical inversion methods,
simulation models, and hybrid imaging models; (4) nonlinear photonics and the
interplay between nonlinearity and randomness. Representatives from the NSF
Division of Mathematical Sciences will be present to discuss and answer
questions about the new NSF program in Optics and Photonics. The conference will
be advertised through the SIAM annual meeting website at
http://www.siam.org/meetings/an16/workshops.php
