
* 1623782
* Conferences: Southern California Geometric Analysis Seminar; Winter-2017; 2018; 2019; University of California-San Diego and University of California, Irvine
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 08/15/2016,08/21/2018
* Lei Ni,CA,University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2019
* USD 78,000.00

Differential geometry studies the spatial properties of spaces, which includes
the physical space-time in which the human beings live, by Einstein's theory of
general relativity. These spatial properties have fundamental impact on all
physical events happening. Many problems in science can also be formulated in
terms of geometry. Geometric analysis uses the analysis and the partial
differential equation as a tool to study analytic, geometric and topological
properties of the spaces. It is an important part of modern mathematics and is
related to many other branches of mathematics. It has solved a large number of
problems in global geometry, topology, several complex variables and
mathematical physics. The Southern California Geometric Analysis Seminar (SCGAS)
is an annual two-day conference that rotates between the University of
California - Irvine and the University of California - San Diego.

The conference features talks given by world leaders. The Seminar promotes
interaction among mathematicians in Southern California who are interested in
geometric analysis and related areas and to introduce graduate students and
post-docs to some of the best works in geometric analysis. This funding award is
geared towards supporting and encouraging the participation of graduate students
and recent PhDs, especially women and under-represented minorities, by providing
them the necessary travel support to attend the conference. Geometric analysis
is an important area of modern mathematics and is related to many other branches
of mathematics. Using the analysis and the partial differential equations as its
main tools with differential geometry, topology, and algebraic geometry as
foundations, geometric analysis has solved a large number of problems in global
geometry, topology, several complex variables and mathematical physics. One
example is the resolution of the celebrated Poincare conjecture via the study of
the Ricci flow. As the success of the first twenty three meetings have
demonstrated, the SCGAS conference has now become an important and anticipated
event for the southern California region and has also attracted a substantial
number of participants from the rest of the country each year. Indeed, it is the
unique annual meeting of its kind in the southern California area, and continues
to foster interests in geometric analysis at all levels. In the years past,
interactions among the participants during the conference have led to a number
of new collaborations and research projects. Web sites for the Southern
California Geometric Analysis Seminar may be found at
https://math.ucsd.edu/~scgas/ and http://www.math.uci.edu/~scgas/.
