
* 1632493
* Geometries, surfaces and representations of fundamental groups
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 06/01/2016,04/21/2016
* Scott Wolpert,MD,University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 05/31/2018
* USD 45,809.00

This NSF award provides partial support for a conference entitled "Geometries,
surfaces and representations of fundamental groups," which will take place at
the University of Maryland, College Park, on June 22-24, 2016. This meeting will
bring together experts at the frontier of current work in this area from the
United States and internationally, with a view towards open problems and future
directions. The list of distinguished speakers will attract broad participation
of students and postdoctoral researchers. Beginning mathematicians will be
especially encouraged to attend. It is expected that the conference will itself
generate research projects and provide a fertile ground for collaboration and
the exchange of ideas. A major goal of this conference is to support, train and
encourage the next generation of mathematicians in the fields of geometric
structures and representations. The conference organizers are committed to
ensuring a diverse and broad spectrum of participation. This conference will
focus on recent developments in the rapidly developing field of geometric
structures and representation varieties. The areas of focus for this meeting
include Anosov structures, Higgs bundles and higher Teichmueller spaces,
dynamics on moduli spaces, and pseudo-Riemannian structures. The list of fifteen
internationally renowned principal speakers for this conference reflects the
breadth of these topics and indicates the diversity of techniques in this
subject. Additional 50-75 conference participants will include graduate
students, postdoctoral scholars and faculty members. By bringing together all
these speakers in one conference, the links between different approaches and
techniques in this rich subject will be further strengthened. Videos and notes
of the talks will be available on the conference website. The speakers will also
be invited to submit papers to a volume of conference proceedings. The
conference website is at: www-math.umd.edu/geometries/.
