
* 1632111
* International Workshop on Numerical Analysis of Singularly Perturbed Differential Equations
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 06/15/2016,06/13/2016
* James Adler,MA,Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Rosemary Renaut
* 05/31/2017
* USD 10,000.00

Computational Mathematics, in general, and Numerical Analysis and Scientific
Computing (NASC), in particular, are now well-recognized as providing a "third
mode" of scientific investigation, complementing traditional theoretical and
experimental approaches. While the successes of NASC in both basic science and
industry are many, one class of problems that remains challenging are those with
rapid changes in the simulated quantities, such as arise with boundary and
interior layers in fluid dynamics and other disciplines. This grant supports US
participation in an international workshop and short course on "Numerical
Analysis for Singularly Perturbed Differential Equations", to be held on the
campus of St. Mary's University in Halifax (Canada), from July 25-29, 2016. NSF
funds will allow US-based participants to benefit from learning both the basic
tools in this area and the state-of-the-art, developing new collaborations with
researchers from Canada and abroad. The PI will prioritize support for
participants from underrepresented groups.

Problems with boundary and interior layers arise in many areas of scientific and
industrial simulation, including mathematical biology, fluid dynamics, and
electromagnetics. Efficient parameter-robust simulation tools are needed in
these fields to support the ever-increasing complexity of applied problems of
interest to scientists and engineers. Broadly, these problems can be categorized
as ``singular perturbation problems", where a small parameter is identified that
controls the width of these critical layers. In the limit as these parameters
approach zero, nearly all standard discretization and mesh-refinement strategies
fail to yield robust error control; thus, a specialized subfield of NASC has
arisen to address efficient and robust simulation of singularly perturbed
differential equations. This two-day short course will focus on finite-
difference and finite-element discretizations on fitted-layer meshes, as well as
adaptive mesh refinement strategies for these problems. The remainder of the
workshop is aimed at collaborative research sessions among workshop participants
to apply these tools to real-world problems. There are many opportunities for
broader impacts of the proposed short course and workshop, including the
development of new interdisciplinary research connections.
