
* 1637087
* Conference on Quantum Integrable Systems, Conformal Field Theories and Stochastic Processes
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 07/01/2016,07/08/2016
* Ivan Corwin,NY,Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2017
* USD 29,990.00

This award will fund the conference "Quantum Integrable Systems, Conformal Field
Theories and Stochastic Processes," which will be held from September 12-23,
2016, at the Institut d'Etudes Scientifique de Carges in Corsica, France. The
conference website is https://indico.in2p3.fr/event/12461/. The topics of the
conference are at the interface of mathematics and physics and are concerned
with uncovering through exact calculation the universal behaviors of large,
complex random systems. There are two main types of random systems -- those
which are growing and those which have stabilized to a sort of equilibrium. The
universal behaviors of each of these types of systems are rather different in
characteristic. However, recent advances have indicated surprising connections
between the behaviors of non-equilibrium and equilibrium systems. This
conference will bring together experts in both areas with the aim of stimulating
new advances and spark new connections. There is a strong emphasis on educating
a new generation of researchers to appreciate and understand the broad cycle of
ideas and motivations from both mathematics and physics in this area. Half of
the lecturers will be mini-courses and the other half, research talks. This will
benefit the many early-career researchers who will participate in the
conference. The US participants funded by this award, most of whom are early-
career researchers and graduate students, will benefit additionally by the
opportunity to forge relations with their European colleagues. The organizers
will actively encourage the participation of individuals from underrepresented
groups in STEM, including women and minorities.

Universality within and between complex random systems is a striking concept
which has played a central role in the direction of research within probability,
mathematical physics and statistical mechanics. Complementary to universality,
is the exact description of the behaviors that are expected to be universal as
well as the determination of which systems are meant to display them. In recent
years there has been an immense amount of progress in the rigorous mathematical
understanding of certain universal scaling limits in both equilibrium and non-
equilibrium statistical physical systems. On the equilibrium side, critical
scaling limits are often described in terms of conformal field theories, among
which Liouville quantum gravity plays an important role. On the non-equilibrium
side, systems like growth processes are described through the Kardar-Parisi-
Zhang (KPZ) universality class. There is reason to believe that these two
directions share many (as of yet) unexploited relationships. For instance, the
field of quantum integrable systems was developed to study equilibrium systems,
but has now found itself center stage in the KPZ universality class. Conversely,
methods developed in stochastic partial differential equations for non-
equilibrium systems have begun to make their way into constructive field theory.
The purpose of this two-week conference is to bring together experts in these
two areas and enable a lively exchange of ideas and methods through mini-courses
and research talks.
