
* 1642659
* CBMS Conference: Tensors and Their Uses in Approximation Theory, Quantum Information Theory, and Geometry
* DMS,INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
* 04/01/2017,11/04/2016
* Luke Oeding,AL,Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 03/31/2018
* USD 35,253.00

This award supports a 5-day CBMS conference on "Tensors and their uses in
approximation theory, quantum information theory, and geometry," at Auburn
University, Auburn, AL, July 24-28, 2017. The theme is centered on uses of
tensors in approximation theory, quantum information theory and other areas from
a geometric perspective. The conference features Dr. J.M. Landsberg of Texas A&M
University, a leading expert in the algebraic and geometric study of tensors and
their applications, who will deliver 10 lectures and produce a monograph to be
published in the CBMS series and will provide a much-needed resource, enabling
researchers who use tensors to develop the new thinking and perspectives that
underlie the theory of tensors. The award will support a diverse group of 7
discussion leaders and 25 junior researchers from the southeastern region of the
US. Women, underrepresented minorities, graduate students, post-doctoral
associates, junior faculty, and faculty at primarily undergraduate institutions
will be specifically recruited to participate. Being in the Southeast, Auburn
University is a great location to recruit from a diverse population. The
conference and subsequent monograph will make connections between different
areas of science and mathematics. The discussion leaders come from diverse
scientific backgrounds (Algebraic Geometry, Numerical Analysis, Applied
Mathematics, and Physics), so their participation will help establish cross-
disciplinary communication and research. The activity will impact human resource
development by enhancing the research backgrounds of participants and
introducing them to open problems related to tensors. The dates (July 24-28,
2017) are set to precede the SIAM meeting on Applied Algebraic Geometry to be
held in Atlanta, GA, July 31-August 4, 2017, increasing synergetic activities.
This activity will lift the level of research in the southeastern region of the
US.

Tensors are growing in importance in all areas of science. In coordinates, a
tensor is just a higher dimensional matrix. Just as in linear algebra, where we
view matrices as representing linear maps in coordinates, in multi-linear
algebra, i.e., the study of tensors, we view a higher dimensional matrix as
representing a multi-linear map. The perspective of linear maps facilitates the
study of eigenvalues and other properties independent of coordinates in linear
algebra, and the perspective of multi-linear maps similarly enables the study of
coordinate-independent properties of tensors. Unlike the case of linear algebra,
multi-linear algebra is still in its infancy and basic questions (e.g., how to
detect the rank of a multi-linear map) are open and subtle. The main goal of the
proposed conference is to introduce a large group of individuals to the state of
the art in theory and recent important applications. More specifically, the
lectures' aims are: To give an elementary introduction to tensors, their
geometry and uses accessible to beginning graduate students. To describe
applications that have either not been treated in expository form previously, or
had been treated from a completely different perspective (e.g., of physics or
numerical analysis rather than a geometric perspective). To describe recent
breakthroughs in the study of tensor rank and border rank. To bring attention to
open questions--both old and recent--regarding tensors. Graduate students and
young researchers will become equipped to start on open problems, allowing them
to begin contributing to scientific discovery right away.

Conference website: http://www.auburn.edu/~lao0004/cbms.html
