
* 1642595
* CBMS Conference: Dyson-Schwinger Equations, Topological Expansions, and Random Matrices
* DMS,INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM, PROBABILITY
* 07/01/2017,11/07/2016
* Ivan Corwin,NY,Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2018
* USD 37,800.00

This award provides support for the CBMS conference "Dyson-Schwinger Equations,
Topological Expansions, and Random Matrices," which will run from August 28 to
September 1, 2017 at Columbia University in New York City. The conference
features a series of ten lectures by mathematician Alice Guionnet. Probability,
as a field, seeks to understand how large, complex random systems manifest
deterministic behaviors, and universal fluctuations around them. Matrices are
fundamental objects in mathematics and all of science -- they encode
transformations of space, descriptions of atoms in physics, chains of chemical
reactions and probabilities in chemistry, and series of observations in
experimental sciences, and they are vital in signal processing. In many
applications, there is noise present in the system under study, and the
associated matrices end up having structured but random entries. The fundamental
challenge becomes to understand the effect of noise on these structures. How
does it change the key properties of these objects, and how can statistical
methods be developed to separate the signal from the noise? The principal
lecture series will report on some of the most exciting new advances in tackling
these types of questions. The meeting also will include presentations by other
experts in the subject area. There will also be daily tutorials and problem
sessions, with lecture notes provided in advance to help students prepare
adequately.

Understanding the large-dimension asymptotics of random matrices or related
models such as random tilings has been of great interest for the last twenty
years within probability, mathematical physics, and statistical mechanics.
Because such models are highly correlated, classical methods based on
independent variables fail. Special cases have been studied in detail thanks to
specific forms of the laws, such as determinantal laws. These lectures will
discuss a general class of models using the so-called Dyson-Schwinger equations
and generalizations. The ten lectures cover the following subjects: law of large
numbers in random matrices and concentration of measure; central limit theorem
in the one-cut case; generalization to the discrete setting of tiling models;
topological expansions for large-N asymptotics of partition functions; and
generalization to several-cut models. Additional talks will be presented by
Charles Bordenave (University of Toulouse), Gaetan Borot (Max Planck Institute
for Mathematics, Bonn), Paul Bourgade (New York University), Vadim Gorin
(Massachusetts Institute of Technology), and Antti Knowles (ETH Zurich).

The website for this conference is:
http://www.math.columbia.edu/department/probability/seminar/Guionnet.html
