
* 1642586
* CBMS Conference: Sparse Approximation and Signal Recovery Algorithms
* DMS,INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
* 01/01/2017,11/14/2016
* Joseph Lakey,NM,New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 12/31/2017
* USD 38,399.00

This grant provides support for the CBMS Conference on Sparse Approximation and
Signal Recovery Algorithms, which will take place at New Mexico State
University, Las Cruces on May 22-26, 2017. Professor Anna C. Gilbert of the
University of Michigan will provide a lecture series on Sparse Approximation and
Signal Recovery Algorithms. The subject matter lies at the interface of applied
mathematics, electrical and computer engineering, and information science. The
subject is chosen to build and strengthen existing research ties between the
host institution and other institutions and technical industries in the
Southwest region. A primary goal is to bring a large group of researchers in
mathematics and applications to the cutting edge of sparse approximation
techniques and applications.

Sparse approximation problems arise in a variety of applications concerning
digital communications and analysis of large datasets. The lecture series will
begin with basic mathematical formulations of sparse approximation and signal
recovery problems. It will proceed with a discussion of greedy algorithms and
convex methods, such as basis pursuit, sublinear algorithms for streaming and
sketching, and Fourier sampling methods. The lectures will conclude outlining
specific applications such as GPS synchronization, spectrum sensing, and
correlation spectroscopy. The principal lecturer Anna C. Gilbert is the Herman
H. Goldstine Collegiate Professor of Mathematics at the University of Michigan.
She is the recipient of numerous prestigious awards, including the SIAM Ralph E.
Kleinman Prize for outstanding contributions that bridge mathematics and
applications.

Further details, including plans to fund participant travel and registration
information, can be found at:
https://www.math.nmsu.edu/activities/cbms2017/cbms2017.html
