
* 1642598
* Workshop on Hypergeometric Motives and Calabi-Yau Differential Equations
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 09/15/2016,07/21/2016
* Ling Long,LA,Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 08/31/2017
* USD 20,000.00

The award is to support the attendance of researchers from the United States in
a 3-weeks-long program `Hypergeometric motives and Calabi--Yau differential
equations' at the conference center MATRIX at Melbourne, Australia, January 8-28
2017. This activity will bring together both senior and junior researchers in
two overlapping fields of mathematics, namely hypergeometric motives and Calabi-
Yau differential equations, to discuss recent developments and future directions
in both areas. The topic of this program is related to the phenomenon of mirror
symmetry and belongs to the cutting edge of number theory and mathematical
physics at the same time. Families of Calabi--Yau varieties naturally arise in
the context of mirror symmetry and often appear to be hypergeometric. On the
other hand, hypergeometric motives are handy objects on which important standard
conjectures could be tested and perhaps even some new features could be
discovered. Expected participants of the program represent a wide variety of
geographical locations and academic levels, including quite a few junior
participants from the United States. In addition to theoretic developments, the
workshop will foster the role of software Magma, SageMath, and Pari/GP in
research. In return, the program will enhance the implementation of
hypergeometric motives.

More particularly, the goals of the program are: to study general L-functions,
which are central objects in number theory, using the L-functions of so-called
hypergeometric motives as an important but more approachable class; and to
investigate the arithmetic and geometry of families of Calabi--Yau manifolds, in
particular the integrality and modularity phenomena arising in mirror symmetry.
By the influential Langlands program, motivic L-functions are expected to
coincide with L-functions arising from automorphic forms and consequently
satisfy functional equations and can be continued analytically; in other words,
they behave similarly to the classical Riemann zeta function. Already for many
years much effort was spent on creation of a useful library of L-functions and
automorphic forms, the most recent example being the LMFDB project
(http://www.lmfdb.org/) sponsored by NSF. Since 2009 a group of reserachers led
by Fernando Rodriguez Villegas (http://users.ictp.it/~villegas/hgm/index.html)
was investigating and computing explicitly the L-functions of hypergeometric
motives, which are expected to cover a wide range of known L-functions. They
developed efficient computational techniques, most of which are already
implemented in computer algebra software. Another step towards understanding the
local factors of these L-functions was brought to the scene by investigating
finite hypergeometric functions, understanding them as periods over finite
fields and drawing analogies between them and classical hypergeometric
functions. An overall expectation is that periods over finite fields form a new
direction in understanding the integrality phenomenon arising in mirror
symmetry. Originally discovered by physicists the mid-1980s, mirror symmetry
remains one of the central research themes binding string theory and algebraic
geometry. Numerous examples show that the expression of the mirror map in so-
called canonical coordinates possesses rich arithmetic properties, such as
modularity. This expression involves particular solutions to Picard--Fuchs
differential equations attached to families of Calabi--Yau manifolds near a
singular point. Explaining modularity is an ultimate goal on the arithmetic side
of mirror symmetry. Quite remarkably, Calabi--Yau differential equations show up
in several other contexts as diverse as rational approximations to pi, Mahler
measures and generating functions of random walks in models of statistical
mechanics.

More information can be found on the conference website:
http://www.matrixatmelbourne.org.au/events/hypergeometric-motives-and-calabi-
yau-differential-equations
