
* 1642617
* CBMS Conference: Bayesian Modeling for Spatial and Spatio-Temporal Data
* DMS,INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
* 01/01/2017,11/04/2016
* Athanasios Kottas,CA,University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 12/31/2017
* USD 34,968.00

This award supports the CMBS regional conference "Bayesian Modeling for Spatial
and Spatio-Temporal Data" to be held at the University of California, Santa
Cruz, August 14-18, 2017. The principal speaker is Alan Gelfand from Duke
University. Hierarchical Bayesian methods for modeling spatial and spatio-
temporal data constitute an extremely important area of research in the
statistical sciences, with a wide range of applications. However, the explosive
growth in all areas of spatial and spatio-temporal modeling has produced a
massive body of literature that can be daunting for newcomers, imposing a steep
entry barrier into the field. The conference lectures will facilitate
introduction to the subject by providing a comprehensive review of Bayesian
methods for spatial statistics. Established researchers, newcomers, and students
will have the opportunity to learn and discuss the major ideas, modern modeling
and computing methods, and recent results in the field. The conference will
strengthen links and collaborations between multiple groups of researchers in
the western United States. This award will support about 30 participants, with
priority given to junior researchers.

Additional lectures will be presented by Sudipto Banerjee (University of
California, Los Angeles), Michele Guindani (University of California, Irvine),
and Christopher Paciorek (University of California, Berkeley). All three
speakers have research expertise in theory, methods, and applications of
Bayesian modeling for spatial data, and their lectures will be constructed to be
complementary to the main lectures.

More information can be found at the conference webpage:
https://cbms.soe.ucsc.edu
