
* 1644410
* Mathematical Congress of the Americas, Montreal, Canada, July 24-28, 2017: Administration of Travel Grants for US Participants
* DMS,INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
* 12/01/2016,12/01/2016
* Thomas Barr,RI,American Mathematical Society
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 07/31/2018
* USD 67,500.00

To support US participation in the international Mathematical Congress of the
Americas, which runs July 24-28, 2017 in Montreal, Canada, the American
Mathematical Society is administering a travel grant program for US-based
mathematical scientists. Initiated in 2013, the MCA is a quadrennial gathering
administered by the Mathematical Council of the Americas, a network of over
twenty societies (including the AMS), institutes, and agencies throughout North,
South, and Latin America as well as the Caribbean nations. Like the first, this
second congress draws mathematicians from around the Western Hemisphere and the
rest of the world and presents an excellent opportunity for exchange of ideas on
an international stage in a broad array of mathematical areas. Early career
mathematicians, i.e., those having completed a PhD within the last six years,
are especially encouraged to apply and will receive priority consideration from
the committee reviewing applications. Individuals from groups that are
underrepresented in mathematics are strongly encouraged to apply. Full
information and the application form are at http://www.ams.org/programs/travel-
grants/mca.

The general goal of the 2017 MCA travel grant program is to promote the nation's
leadership in mathematical research on the world stage by encouraging and
supporting the interactions of mathematicians based in the US with their
counterparts throughout the Americas and the rest of the world. By
participating, mathematicians will learn of the latest developments and current
work around the Western Hemisphere and also contribute to the increasingly-
global endeavor of mathematical research. With a focus on supporting early-
career mathematicians, this travel grant program is an investment in the future
of the US's continuing leadership in this arena. Anticipating approximately
1,500 attendees from around the Western Hemisphere and the rest of the world,
the organizers have included five plenary and twenty semi-plenary speakers,
mostly from the Americas, on the program. The program also includes seventy-two
special sessions devoted to such topics as algebraic structures, complex
variables, group theory, model theory, combinatorics, symbolic dynamics,
cryptography, finite fields, operator theory, applications to condensed matter,
probability theory, computational science, optimization and control, arithmetic
geometry, harmonic analysis, celestial mechanics, gauge theory, nonlinear
partial differential equations, fractal geometry, cohomology, fluid dynamics,
inverse problems, and number theory. The MCA is also the occasion for presenting
the MCA Prize, the Americas Prize, and the Solomon Lefschetz Medals, all awards
that recognize the distinctive achievement and broad impact of the recipients'
research or professional activities. A complete list of all special sessions is
on the MCA web site, https://mca2017.org/.
