
* 1649061
* Conference Proposal: Symposium on Biomathematics and ecology education and research
* DMS,MATHEMATICAL BIOLOGY
* 08/01/2016,08/01/2016
* Olcay Akman,IL,Board of Trustees of Illinois State University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2017
* USD 15,000.00

This project supports the attendance of students, postdoctoral researchers and
early career faculty at the Symposium on Biomathematics and Ecology: Education
and Research to be held in Charleston, South Carolina on October 14-16, 2016.
The symposium will highlight recent scientific and educational developments in
mathematical biology, biology, ecology, and biostatistics. This meeting will
bring together researchers and educators from both the biological and the
mathematical sciences to disseminate their current work and to network with
others, whose combined expertise covers many areas in mathematical biology.
Moreover, a panel discussion session focusing on projects aiming to benefit the
mathematical biology community as a whole will provide an awareness of creating
new collaboration venues for junior and senior researchers and educators.

This conference is hosted by the College of Charleston. The technical program is
organized by researchers in biology and mathematics, from several universities
across the country and has the goal of sharing progress over a diverse field
biomathematics research while sharing opportunities for student involvement on
related projects. The research focus of the conference allows opportunities for
collaborations that may have impact in advances in biomathematics research,
while the educational focus of the conference supports innovations in
biomathematics education, with the hope that its long-term impact will be the
addition of new and better-prepared students to the future STEM workforce. The
conference programming also directly addresses student participation and
development. Results from the conference will address environmental and public
health problems and questions. In addition, results from this conference will
help in the establishment of a biomathematics curriculum that is current and
relevant to society. Details for this conference can be found at the conference
website https://about.illinoisstate.edu/biomath/beer/Pages/default.aspx.
