
* 1650520
* 2017 Quality and Productivity Research Conference - Quality and Statistics: Path to a Better Life
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 09/01/2016,08/09/2016
* Nalini Ravishanker,CT,University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 08/31/2017
* USD 21,000.00

The 2017 Quality and Productivity Research Conference Quality (QPRC) and
Statistics: Path to a Better Life is held during June 13-15, 2017, preceded on
June 12 by a short course titled Computational Bayesian Methods for Big Data
Problems. QPRC 2017 is an international conference which serve as the annual
conference of the Quality and Productivity Section of the American Statistical
Association (ASA) in bringing together academics and professionals to
disseminate and discuss latest advances in statistical approaches relevant to
quality and productivity. The conference and the short course will be especially
valuable for research oriented graduate and undergraduate students, as well as
junior researchers and professionals. In the long tradition of successful annual
QPRCs, the goal of QPRC 2017 is to provide its participants - statisticians and
inter-disciplinary professionals ? an opportunity to meet and exchange ideas
related to a broad set of topics in the area of quality and productivity,
especially on topics relevant to big data in various areas. The NSF supports the
participation (registration, travel and accommodation) for about 30 research
oriented students with special consideration to women and minority students -
graduate students, or senior or junior undergraduate students - from US academic
institutions. Participants receiving support are strongly encouraged to actively
take part in the conference by presenting a poster, in addition to attending the
short course and attending software demos to be provided by vendors. These
students are expected to greatly benefit from participating in this conference
and attending the short course, and additionally have an opportunity to
disseminate their research and to develop strong collaborations.

The main objective of the conference is to bring together both well established
and emerging young researchers from academia, industry and government, who are
actively pursuing theoretical, methodological, and computational research in the
areas of quality and productivity, in order to discuss their research and in
particular, their applications in various related fields. The focus topics
include, but are not limited to, Bayesian Methods and Computing, Data Mining,
Dynamic Modeling, Experimental Design, Health Analytics, Nonparametric methods,
Reliability, Stochastic Modeling, Time Series, Variable Selection, etc. There
are three plenary sessions and several interesting invited and contributed talk
sessions on these topics. The conference provides an opportunity for all
attendees, and especially for junior faculty, graduate students, and
undergraduate students to showcase their research, and to also benefit from
interactions with senior researchers, leading to acceleration and enhancement of
their research. A rapid round precedes the poster session, and each presenter
has an opportunity to showcase his/her work in 3 minutes. The short course
especially illustrates the importance of techniques that address modeling,
methods, and computing for big data (both big n and big p problems). More
details about the conference and the short course can be found at the conference
website www.qprc2017.org.
