
* 1658793
* The Kansas-Missouri-Nebraska (KUMUNU) Conference in PDE, Dynamical Systems and Applications
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 04/01/2017,01/04/2017
* George Avalos,NE,University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 12/31/2017
* USD 19,350.00

This award will provide support for participants, especially graduate students,
junior researchers, women and mathematicians from under-represented groups in
the sciences, to attend the third regional conference "KUMUNU Conference in
Partial Differential Equations, Dynamical Systems and Applications" (KUMUNU
Lincoln 2017) to be held from April 22-23, 2017, at the University of Nebraska-
Lincoln. The abbreviation KUMUNU signifies the collaboration of faculty from the
Universities of Kansas, Missouri, and Nebraska. The Conference webpage is
http://www.math.unl.edu/events/special/kumunu2017. Similarly to the two previous
KUMUNU Conferences, the KUMUNU Lincoln 2017 Meeting is being organized with a
view toward featuring eminent mathematicians who will deliver lectures on their
respective research programs to a diverse audience of mathematicians. KUMUNU
Lincoln 2017 will serve as a forum for interaction of established scientist with
graduate students and early career faculty, as well as with members of smaller
regional academic institutions. One of the objectives of the conference is the
initiation of collaborations among Partial Differential Equations (PDE)
specialists who, but for their respective participation in KUMUNU Lincoln 2017,
might not otherwise have occasion to collectively meet in a scientific setting.
It is anticipated that these nascent collaborations will involve recent PhDs and
facilitate development of their academic careers.

The invited talks will be devoted to the following areas of research: (i) long
time behavior of solutions to nonlinear PDE; and (ii) analysis of those PDE
systems that describe certain fluid-structure interactions. In particular, the
Conference Speakers will address qualitative issues concerning the existence of
global attracting sets for corresponding "trajectories" (solutions) of given
nonlinear evolutionary PDE. Some speakers will address the rigorous and
numerical analysis of certain fluid-structure PDE dynamics, and present their
latest findings in these research directions. In addition, it is expected that
the collaboration between researchers in long time behavior of nonlinear
evolutionary PDE and fluid-structure PDE specialists will serve as a departure
point from which new inroads will be made towards understanding the asymptotic
behavior of solutions to nonlinear fluid-structure PDE dynamics. The projected
collaborations arising from KUMUNU Lincoln 2017 could provide new mathematical
insights into experimentally and numerically observed fluid-structure phenomena.
