
* 1660568
* Young Geometric Group Theory Meeting VI
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 03/01/2017,12/01/2016
* Timothy Riley,NY,Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 02/28/2018
* USD 24,405.00

This award is to fund US-based junior researchers to attend a conference, Young
Geometric Group Theory Meeting VI, to be held at Oxford University's
Mathematical Institute in England, 20-24 March 2017. Geometric group theory is
an active mathematical field that concerns the interplay between groups
(algebraic structures capturing symmetries) and geometry and topology (the
quantitative and qualitative studies of spaces). Most of the conference
participants will be graduate students and early-career mathematicians. The
conference will allow them to learn about new developments in the field, to
communicate their research results, and to spark new research collaborations.
Geometric group theory enjoys a growing diversity, which this conference aims to
promote further through the selection of the speakers and other participants.

Funds will cover travel and local housing expenses of 15 US-based conference
participants, including some speakers. The conference is the sixth iteration of
the "Young Geometric Group Theory" meetings, which have been held every year
since 2012. It will have three main types of events: mini-courses given by five
established experts in the field, informal discussion sessions, and research
talks given by junior researchers in geometric group theory. The mini-courses
will allow graduate students and postdocs to learn cutting-edge methods in
geometric group theory both from their peers and from experts. The talks
publicize the work of junior researchers and provide feedback. The selection of
mini-courses and speakers will reflect various current key directions of
research in geometric group theory, including group homology and stability, non
C^*-exact groups, and geometric structures, compactifications of representation
varieties and non-archimedean geometry. More information can be found at
http://www.personal.rhul.ac.uk/udah/001/YGGTVI.htm
