
* 1701290
* Number Theory Meetings in the Southeast
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 08/01/2017,05/24/2018
* Hui Xue,SC,Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 07/31/2019
* USD 22,233.00

The University of Tennessee at Knoxville will host the fall meeting of the
Palmetto Number Theory Series (PANTS) in September of 2017. The local organizers
will be Luis Finotti and Marie Jameson. The second meeting will be hosted at
Clemson University at the beginning of December; local organizers will be Jim
Brown, Kevin James, and Hui Xue. The third meeting of the year, the Southeastern
Regional Meeting on Numbers (SERMON), is tentatively scheduled to be held in
April 2018 at East Tennessee State University in Johnson City, Tennessee with
local organizer Rodney Keaton. While ETSU has expressed enthusiasm for hosting
the meeting, the meeting location of SERMON is traditionally decided at the
previous year's SERMON meeting. Further information on these meetings including
the locations, dates, lists of speakers, lists of participants, and registration
information will be linked to the conference home pages as it becomes available.
The conferences slated for 2017 will be the 28th and 29th meetings of the
Palmetto Number Theory Series
(http://www.math.sc.edu/~boylan/seminars/pantshome.html). PANTS is a series of
number theory conferences that was founded in 2006 and is managed jointly by
Clemson University and the University of South Carolina, the two flagship
research institutions in South Carolina, the Palmetto State. The 31st meeting of
the Southeast Regional Meeting on Numbers
(http://www.math.clemson.edu/~kevja/SERMON/) will be held in spring 2018. SERMON
is a larger regional meeting founded in 1988; SERMON rotates to schools in a
larger geographical region than PANTS. Recent meetings of SERMON have averaged
40 - 60 participants. PANTS and SERMON consist of participant talks on current
research in all areas of number theory, including analytic number theory,
arithmetic geometry, and automorphic and modular forms. These topics reflect the
research interests of number theorists working in the Southeast. Each PANTS
meeting features plenary talks by nationally and internationally recognized
leaders in the field, invited talks by graduate students and postdoctoral
researchers, and a larger number of contributed talks by mathematicians at all
levels including undergraduate and graduate students, and junior and senior
faculty. Number theorists from outside the Southeast will give the invited and
plenary talks, while regional researchers will give most of the contributed
talks. SERMON in spring 2018 will feature exclusively contributed talks.

The Palmetto Number Theory Series and the Southeastern Regional Meeting on
Numbers provide the Southeastern number theory community with a forum to
disseminate their own research as well as to learn about new and significant
results in number theory. Students and junior faculty play a prominent role in
the meetings both through delivering talks as well as by forming research
collaborations to others in the region as well as plenary speakers. Funding from
the NSF allows the organizers to achieve their goals at a low cost to individual
participants. These meetings integrate regional mathematicians into the
community who may have little or no funds for professional travel such as
graduate students and faculty at institutions that do not award Ph.Ds. The
organizers will continue efforts to attract a demographically diverse
participant base including women and racial and ethnic minorities.
