
* 1702114
* A view towards algebraic geometry
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 02/01/2017,02/07/2017
* Mircea Mustata,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Janet Striuli
* 09/30/2018
* USD 40,000.00

This award supports participation in a conference entitled "A View Toward
Algebraic Geometry" which will be held May 1-5, 2017, at the Harbor View Hotel,
on Martha's Vineyard. This meeting brings together leading experts in
commutative algebra and algebraic geometry to inform the audience of the major
developments from the past few years, to advance new research problems and
directions, and to establish innovative connections between different subfields.
While all of the speakers were chosen for their role in the recent developments,
many were also chosen for their communication skills, and their dedication to
developing young researchers in mathematics. The organizers expect that all
talks will have an important didactic component, aimed at the junior researchers
in the audience. The award will be used to support the participation of 40
junior mathematicians (defined as graduate students, postdocs, and researchers
within 5 years of their PhD).

The expertise of the speakers covers a broad, but interrelated, range of topics.
Nevertheless, explicit algebraic methods and applications of algebraic geometry
form a coherent underlying theme. Major themes of the conference include the
recent progress on syzygies in algebraic geometry and commutative algebra;
rationality and stable rationality of algebraic varieties; and asymptotic
stability. These three distinct topics are not disjoint, with many of the
speakers and participants working in more than one area. In general, an effort
has been made to bring together participants from related, but different,
fields, in order to encourage the cross-fertilization of ideas and techniques.
Further information is available at the conference's website:
https://sites.google.com/site/aviewtowardag/home.
