
* 1707672
* Workshop: Height zeta functions
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 03/01/2017,01/18/2017
* Ramin Takloo-Bighash,IL,University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 02/28/2019
* USD 25,000.00

A workshop "Height Zeta Functions" will take place April 28-30, 2017 at the
University of Illinois at Chicago. The organizers of this workshop are Ramin
Takloo-Bighash (University of Illinois at Chicago) and Yuri Tschinkel (NYU and
Simons Foundation). The confirmed speakers are Margaret Bilu (Orsay), Tim
Browning (Bristol), Alex Eskin (University of Chicago), Alex Gorodnik (Bristol),
Brian Lehmann (Boston College), Daniel Loughran (Manchester), Lilian Matthiesen
(KTH, Stockholm), Sho Tanimoto (Copenhagen), Yuri Tschinkel (NYU and Simons
Foundation), Tony Varilly-Alvarado (Rice), and Takehiko Yasuda (Osaka). The
website of the workshop is https://sites.google.com/site/rtakloo/2017-atkin-
workshop

The theme of the workshop is exploring the connections between the arithmetic
and geometry of algebraic varieties in the context of Manin's conjectures on the
distribution of rational points. We hope that bringing together experts working
in the area would create an environment in which to exchange ideas and to start
new projects.Funding from the National Science Foundation makes it possible for
junior researchers, graduate students, and other mathematicians without travel
funds to attend this exciting workshop. This is an excellent opportunity for
them to interact with expert and be inspired for further work. The lectures by
invited speakers will happen on April 29 and 30. Select lectures will be
videotaped, and will be made available on a website to make the lectures
available to the mathematical community. The slides of talks will be made
available on the same website.
