
* 1719189
* Southeastern Probability Conference 2017: Special Edition Interacting Particle Systems with Applications in Biology, Ecology, and Statistical Physics
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 05/01/2017,01/26/2017
* Jonathan Mattingly,NC,Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 04/30/2018
* USD 30,000.00

The 2017 Southeastern Probability Conference will take place at Duke University,
from May 15-17, 2017. (See https://sites.duke.edu/sepc/.) The 2017 meeting will
bring together a diverse set of researchers working in the areas of interacting
particle systems, random graphs, percolation theory, stochastic growth models,
statistical physics, mathematical models of cancer evolution and population
genetics. The conference will focus on some of the most important current
questions in these fields. Spread over three days, the conference will feature
eighteen talks delivered by exceptional scholars along with a number of short
presentations delivered by graduate students, postdocs, and other young
researchers. The conference seeks to facilitate the interaction between the
young researchers and the key figures of the field. Priority for financial
support will be given to graduate students, postdocs, women, and minorities, as
well as to junior faculty who may not otherwise be able to attend.

The 2017 Southeastern Probability Conference will be held at Duke University,
from May 15-17, 2017. This conference will develop important ideas and
techniques shared across many sub-fields of probability, including interacting
particle systems, random graphs, percolation theory, random growth models, and
statistical physics. In addition to emphasizing recent theoretical developments,
the conference also will highlight applications of these probabilistic
techniques to areas such as cancer modeling and population genetics. Its breadth
in scope will make the conference a very exciting opportunity for both junior
and senior researchers to be exposed to state-of-the-art ideas in probability
theory and applications.
