
* 1720825
* Workshop: Recent Advances and Challenges in Discontinuous Galerkin Methods and Related Approaches
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 06/01/2017,01/05/2017
* Yanlai Chen,MA,University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 05/31/2018
* USD 15,000.00

The international conference entitled "Recent Advances and Challenges in
Discontinuous Galerkin Methods and Related Approaches" will be held at the
Institute for Mathematics and its Applications at the University of Minnesota
from June 29 to July 1, 2017. This award supports junior participants' travel.
The event brings together a variety of researchers from at least 14
countries/regions. They range from internationally renowned experts to early
career mathematicians and PhD students. The event will summarize recent advances
made both in the theory and implementation of the Discontinuous Galerkin and
related numerical approaches, and to identify new challenges and opportunities
in these areas. The conference will also have a significant educational
component, with each talk required to feature introductory parts at a level
accessible to graduate students, and ample discussion sessions throughout the
conference. To further promote cross-pollination and mentoring, there will be
moderated panel sessions where participants explore the frontiers of different
research areas, possibilities of new connections between areas and new
applications, and exciting opportunities of new collaborations. It will help
junior researchers broaden their perspective and create research ties with more
senior members in these fields.

Discontinuous Galerkin and related approaches have been adopted in areas ranging
from mechanical engineering to the simulation of muscles. In recent decades,
deep theoretical advances have been made and wide-ranging applications
discovered for these approaches. They often lead to design of novel methods
(e.g. Hybridizable discontinuous Galerkin methods, Virtual Element Methods,
etc.) with superior properties in terms of accuracy, versatility, robustness and
computational efficiency. They also leave open many exciting problems. This
conference presents a rare but timely opportunity to summarize recent advances
both in the theory and implementation of these methods, identify new challenges,
and map out future research directions in related areas. The bringing together
of people from different fields such as engineers, applied mathematicians,
national lab researchers, will lead to cross-fertilization of ideas that
normally does not happen in a conference of this size.
