
* 1723851
* Equivariant Combinatorics: A Summer School and Workshop
* DMS,Combinatorics
* 03/01/2017,02/27/2017
* Jennifer Morse,PA,Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 02/28/2018
* USD 20,000.00

This award supports the participation of a diverse group of junior researchers
in a summer school and workshop entitled "Equivariant Combinatorics," to be held
from June 12-23, 2017 at the Centre de Recherche Mathematiques in Montreal,
Quebec. Algebraic combinatorics is the underlying theme of the workshop and
school; it is a vast area of mathematics concerned with the development of tools
for analyzing, organizing, and arranging discrete data. The workshop and school
will enhance the development of combinatorial methods essential in areas such as
genomics, computer science, statistics, and physics. Emphasis is on the creation
of combinatorial techniques for attacking problems in algebraic and geometric
areas such as symmetric function theory, a subject with applications to
probability and statistical mechanics. The program will promote the use of and
training in an open-source computational symbolic algebra system, SAGE.

The workshop is a forum for the communication of recent developments on a body
of problems in representation theory, algebraic geometry and topology, and
theoretical physics with common combinatorial underpinnings. The focus is on
rectangular Catalan combinatorics, relating varied areas such as representation
theory of diagonal harmonic polynomials and coinvariant spaces, flag bundles
over the Hilbert scheme of points in the plane, affine Springer fibres, and
Khovanov-Rozansky homology of torus knots. Three lecture series will run during
the summer school preceding the workshop. The speakers, known for both their
communication and academic excellence, were choosen for differing viewpoints on
similar problems in equivariant combinatorics. The school will broaden
participants' perspective and will enable them to more fully benefit from the
subsequent workshop talks. There will also be ample opportunity to share code
and gain experience with the open-source SAGE-Combinat computer algebra system.
Participants will leave equipped to help colleagues at their home institutions
begin mathematical experimentation in SAGE.

Details of the program can be found at
http://www.crm.umontreal.ca/2017/Equivariant17/index_e.php.
