
* 1723842
* Texas Algebraic Geometry Symposium - 2017
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 05/01/2017,04/18/2017
* John Calabrese,TX,William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Manes
* 04/30/2018
* USD 15,000.00

The Texas Algebraic Geometry Symposium (TAGS) will take place on April 21-23
2017 at Rice University in Houston, Texas. TAGS is an annual conference that is
hosted on a rotating basis by Rice University, Texas A&M University, and the
University of Texas at Austin. Many phenomena in nature can be modeled using
systems of polynomial equations. The study of such systems is an important area
of mathematics known as algebraic geometry. This grant supports participation in
a conference in this subject, providing investigators from Texas and neighboring
states an opportunity to learn the newest developments in this field from
distinguished invited speakers. This conference is also an important opportunity
for local researchers, especially graduate students and postdocs, to meet and
interact, gaining exposure for their work and potentially establishing new
collaborations.

The Texas Algebraic Geometry Symposium provides an opportunity for local
researchers to meet and interact, as well as learn the latest advances in
algebraic geometry, interpreted in its broadest sense. This year, specific areas
of focus include Hodge theory, moduli theory of curves, derived categories, Chow
groups, and algebraic K-theory. Young mathematicians (graduate students and
postdoctoral researchers) will have the opportunity to present their work in a
poster session. More information can be found at conference web site:
http://math.rice.edu/NewsEvents/Conferences/TAGS2017/index.html
