
* 1724137
* Workshops in Geometry and Mathematical Physics, Dynamical Systems, and Number Theory
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS, ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/2017,07/31/2019
* Steven Rosenberg,MA,Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 05/31/2020
* USD 28,825.00

This project funds participant support for the 7th through 9th annual Boston
University/Keio University Workshops, with the 7th Workshop, to be held June
26-30, 2017 at Boston University, focusing on Geometry and Mathematical Physics.
The 2018 workshop will focus on Dynamical Systems, and the 2019 workshop will
focus on Number Theory. The funding is dedicated to partial support for advanced
graduate students and recent PhDs based at US institutions outside the Boston
area. The workshops will provide participants with the opportunity to hear
advanced talks in their research fields, to present their own work in a
professional setting, and to network with each other and with senior experts.
Through funding from the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science, Keio
University faculty bring similar participants to these workshops from Japan. As
a result, these workshops strengthen research ties between the US and Japanese
mathematics and statistics communities.

The workshops follow a format in which senior faculty lecture on recent research
directions in the morning, and recent PhD recipients and graduate students
present their own work in the afternoon. Poster sessions accommodate additional
presentations, and each workshop includes a discussion section on open problems
in the field and other issues of particular interest for early-career
participants, such as career placement. The workshops provide websites with
lecture notes and slides from the research presentations, which serve to
disseminate these cutting edge research results to the broad communities. More
information can be found at the workshop website
http://math.bu.edu/keio2016/index.html.
