
* 1742283
* Special Year Workshops on Combinatorics and Complexity
* DMS,Algorithmic Foundations, Combinatorics
* 09/01/2017,05/24/2017
* Madhu Sudan,MA,Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 08/31/2018
* USD 96,000.00

The Special Year Workshops on Combinatorics and Complexity award supports four
workshops at the interface of the two fields during the periods of 2-6 October
2017, 13-17 November 2017, 5-9 February 2018, and 9-13 April 2018 at the Harvard
Center of Mathematical Sciences and Applications (CMSA) in Cambridge,
Massachusetts. Combinatorics and Computational Complexity have enjoyed a rich
history of interaction leading to many significant developments in the two
fields, such as the theories of NP-completeness, expander graphs,
pseudorandomness, and property testing. Lately these fields have seen many new
points of intersection such as in the development of the polynomial method
(used, for example, in recent advances on the cap-set problem as well as in
development of optimal list-decodable codes), the method of interlacing families
of polynomials (yielding Ramanujan graphs and the resolution of the Kadison-
Singer problem), and the theory of randomness extractors (yielding explicit
constructions of Ramsey graphs. The base funding for the workshops will be
provided by the Harvard CMSA and will enable the participation of senior
visitors and a core group of leaders in the fields. Additional funding provided
by this award will support the travel and local arrangements of graduate
students, postdocs, junior researchers, members of underrepresented groups, and
those without other forms of support.

Topics to be covered by the workshops include: (1) Additive Combinatorics
(organized by Ben Green, Swastik Kopparty, Ryan O'Donnell and Tamar Zeigler).
(2) Algebraic Methods in Combinatorics (organized by Zeev Dvir, Larry Guth and
Shubhangi Saraf). (3) Probabilistic and Extremal Combinatorics (organized by
David Conlon and Benjamin Sudakov) and (4) Coding and Information Theory
(organized by Alexander Barg, Venkatesan Guruswami, and Mary Wootters). Further
information on the workshops and other special year activities may be found at
http://cmsa.fas.harvard.edu/combinatorics/.
