
* 1743331
* Enhancing the Mathematical Sciences Component of the 2017 SACNAS National Conference
* DMS,INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
* 07/15/2017,07/17/2017
* Pamela Harris,CA,Society for Advancement of Chicanos & Native Americans in Sci
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 06/30/2018
* USD 49,991.00

This award supports the participation of mathematical sciences graduate students
and postdoctoral researchers in the National Conference of the Society for the
Advancement of Chicanos and Native Americans in Science (SACNAS) held October
19-21, 2017 in Salt Lake City, Utah. SACNAS is a society of scientists dedicated
to fostering the success of Hispanic/Chicano and Native American scientists from
college students to professionals to attain advanced degrees, careers, and
positions of leadership in science. One way SACNAS strives to achieve their
goals is through their annual National Conference, whose programming includes
scientific symposia sessions featuring talks by members of the scientific
research community. The purpose of these sessions is to present research from
diverse disciplines, share advanced research and discoveries, facilitate
interactions with attendees, and mentor science students. In addition to
scientific symposia, the conference also includes professional development
sessions, undergraduate poster presentations, graduate student and postdoctoral
fellow oral presentations, and a mathematical sciences keynote address. All of
these components are useful in promoting the professional advancement of
mathematical sciences researchers from under-represented groups.

Several mathematical sciences symposia will be held at the 2017 SACNAS
conference. Planned topics include commutative algebra, mathematical biology,
and combinatorics. These symposia are geared towards the beginning graduate
student level, providing good accessibility to more junior participants. Each
symposium involves as leaders several mathematical sciences faculty members who
have strong experience mentoring students. The faculty leaders represent a
diverse set of institutions. The conference will also entail professional
development sessions, one of which will focus on the benefits of undergraduate
research programs for students and another which will focus on mathematics
outside of academia. The conference website is http://www.2017sacnas.org
