
* 1744039
* Women in Statistics and Data Science Conference
* DMS,INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM, STATISTICS
* 08/01/2017,08/03/2017
* Donna LaLonde,VA,American Statistical Association
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2019
* USD 30,000.00

The Women in Statistics and Data Science (WSDS) Conference will take place from
October 19 to 21, 2017 at the Hyatt Regency La Jolla in La Jolla, CA. The theme
for the 2017 conference is Share WISDOM (Women In Statistics, Data science, and
-OMics). The conference will create an environment that promotes transformation
and collaboration by encouraging and supporting women statisticians,
biostatisticians, and data scientists. In particular, an ultimate objective of
this conference is to increase the proportion of successful women researchers
who have the technical skills, capacity and inclination to take on the
challenges of complex data oriented research in twenty-first century.

The two and half-a-day conference (starting the afternoon of October 19th) will
have multiple technical sessions providing participants with the opportunity to
learn about novel approaches and innovations addressing the challenges of
working with complex data. The technical sessions will be complemented by
professional development sessions for all stages of participants starting from
graduate students to senior researchers. The synergy derived from the diverse
cohort of presenters and participants will support the intentional integration
of formal and informal learning and mentoring. The conference, through multiple
invited technical sessions will highlight the research of female rising stars,
mid-career and senior researchers and will provide the opportunity to establish
new collaborations. In addition, the mentoring and networking sessions of
academic, government and industry participants will guide early-career women
participants on a successful career trajectory. Conference URL:
http://ww2.amstat.org/meetings/wsds/2017/conferenceinfo.cfm
