
* 1744256
* Heidelberg Laureate Forum Mathematical Sciences Graduate Student Support
* DMS,INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
* 07/01/2017,06/29/2017
* Michelle Goodson,TN,Oak Ridge Associated Universities
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 06/30/2019
* USD 30,847.00

This award provides travel funds for U.S.-based graduate students and
postdoctoral researchers in the mathematical sciences to attend the Heidelberg
Laureate Forum (HLF) during September 24-29, 2017. The HLF brings together
Laureates of the most prestigious awards in computer science and mathematics to
spend a week interacting with approximately two hundred early career
researchers. As these researchers represent over forty different countries, in
addition to the scientific exchanges with the Laureates and with each other,
they gain a valuable global perspective on current research in computer science
and mathematics. Modeled on the Lindau Nobel Laureate Meetings, the HLF provides
graduate students and postdoctoral researchers with extraordinary access to a
group of scientific role models through lectures, small group discussions, and
casual conversations. Such experiences can have a profound impact on the
development of an early career researcher.

Oak Ridge Associated Universities (ORAU) recruits a highly qualified and diverse
applicant pool for the Forum using social media, on-line forums, and listservs.
Applicants undergo peer review for final selection. There are many exceptionally
promising early career researchers who have little or no opportunity to interact
with the Laureates of the major prizes in the computer and mathematical
sciences. The HLF is a unique opportunity for these individuals, one that can
energize and steer future research. The recruitment and selection of
participants emphasizes the potential benefits of the opportunity for the
researchers, as well as the overall goal of ensuring a broadly inclusive group
of participants. ORAU provides logistical support both prior to and during the
forum, arranges additional on-site enrichment activities, and performs an
assessment of participant experiences to document the impact of the Forum. The
program web page is at http://www.orau.org/hlf/.
