
* 1745772
* Conference in Commutative Algebra
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 10/15/2017,10/20/2017
* Hailong Dao,KS,University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Janet Striuli
* 09/30/2018
* USD 13,000.00

This award supports participation in a conference on commutative algebra, KUMUNU
2017, which will be held at the University of Kansas, Lawrence, October 21-22,
2017. KUMUNU (which is named for its original participating institutions (the
University of Kansas, the University of Missouri, Columbia, and the University
of Nebraska, Lincoln) is an annual conference (held since 1999) for commutative
algebraists in the Great Plains region and attracts participants from a
significantly larger geographical region. Invited speakers are Melvin Hochster
(University of Michigan), Sam Payne (Yale University), Greg Blekherman (Georgia
Institute of Technology), Linquan Ma (University of Utah), Dana Weston
(University of Missouri), Mark Walker (University of Nebraska), and Alessandro
Di Stefani (University of Nebraska). The conference will also include a poster
session for junior researchers. Talks will be held from noon on Saturday to noon
on Sunday, thereby minimizing expenses for participants. The funds will be used
to pay one night's accommodation and travel expenses, with an emphasis on
graduate students and early career researchers.

The general goal of KUMUNU is to provide a setting to share cutting-edge
mathematical research and promote collaborations among algebraists in or within
driving distance of the Great Plains region. Major goals specific to KUMUNU 2017
are to broaden the geographic reach of the conference, promote a connection
between commutative algebra and related areas, and showcase the research of
early career mathematicians. In an effort to promote connections between
commutative algebra and other areas, talks from some experts on tropical
geometry, convex geometry, and optimization are included. KUMUNU 2017 aims to
advance mathematics through the dissemination of new and innovated results and
techniques via research talks. These talks may inspire participating
mathematicians with new ideas, and promote collaboration among them. Informal
discussions between talks should also help spread new results and ideas. Since
some of the talks will not be focused purely in commutative algebra, new
connections may be made. Additionally, both senior researchers from regional
institutions and junior researchers will be invited to speak, giving them the
chance to exhibit their work. More details are available at the conference
website: http://dept.ku.edu/~math/conferences/KUMUNU/2017/.
