
* 1745396
* International Congress of Mathematicians 2018: Administration of Travel Grants for US Participants
* DMS,INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
* 11/01/2017,10/24/2017
* Thomas Barr,RI,American Mathematical Society
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 06/30/2019
* USD 297,000.00

The quadrennial International Congress of Mathematicians (ICM) will be held in
Rio de Janeiro, Brazil on August 1-9, 2018. Between 5,000 and 6,000 mathematical
scientists, teachers, students, and others from around the world will share new
results of research, directions of future investigation, applications, ideas for
pedagogy, and methodologies for disseminating and archiving mathematical
knowledge. Participants from the United States, who will contribute to the
activities through presentation of their research to the worldwide mathematical
community, and they will also enrich the nation's STEM infrastructure through
activities at the Congress with their counterparts from abroad. As a world
leader in mathematical research, the US sustains this position by supporting
basic research, fostering activities that disseminate the results of this work,
and enabling researchers to benefit from ideas and collaborations with
researchers in other countries. In the mathematical sciences, research is
reliant on in-person interactions, the work is increasingly collaborative, and
the efforts are often international in scope. Activities of US participants at
ICM 2018 contribute directly to the vitality of the US's knowledge-based
economy, and from a technical and diplomatic point of view they support national
security. This National Science Foundation award would enable the American
mathematical Society to provide substantial support for approximately ninety US-
based mathematicians to participate in the Congress. Recommendations for awards
will be made by a panel of mathematicians drawn from among the members of
several US-based professional organizations focused in the mathematical
sciences. Mathematicians of all career stages are welcome to apply, women and
members of underrepresented groups are especially encouraged to apply, and
early-career applicants will receive priority for funding. Since the 1950s, the
ICM has been held under the auspices of the International Mathematical Union
(IMU), a consortium of mathematics societies from more than eighty member
nations, including the US. For the 2018 Congress the IMU's Program Committee has
set nineteen sections on topics of current research: Logic and Foundations,
Algebra, Number Theory, Algebraic and Complex Geometry, Geometry, Topology, Lie
Theory and Generalizations, Analysis and Operator Algebras, Dynamical Systems
and Ordinary Differential Equations, Partial Differential Equations,
Mathematical Physics, Probability and Statistics, Combinatorics, Mathematical
Aspects of Computer Science, Numerical Analysis and Scientific Computing,
Control Theory and Optimization, Mathematics in Science and Technology,
Mathematics Education and Popularization of Mathematics, and History of
Mathematics. Participants in the Congress will have opportunities in these
sections to hear many invited lectures, visit poster sessions, and interact with
mathematicians engaged in similar research. A number of the invited speakers
will have support from the ICM travel grant program. In addition to section
lectures, the ICM incorporates the Emmy Noether and Abel Lectures and twenty
stand-alone plenary lectures on recent major developments. The Congress is also
the occasion for conferring some of the most prestigious awards in the
mathematical sciences: the Fields Medal, Nevanlinna Prize, Gauss Prize, Chern
Medal Award, and Leelavati Prize. All of these recognize singular achievements
of individuals involved in in the forefront of mathematical research. Since its
inception in 1897 in Zurich, the ICM has been a significant impetus to
international cooperation in mathematical research, and it is often a historic
occasion for the mathematical community and the wider world. Information about
ICM 2018 can be found at http://www.icm2018.org/portal/en/home/.
