
* 1747867
* MANNA 2017: Modeling, Analysis, and Numerics for Nonlocal Applications
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, Dynamics, Control and System D
* 12/01/2017,07/31/2017
* George Karniadakis,RI,Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 11/30/2018
* USD 15,000.00

The workshop, "Modeling, Analysis, and Numerics for Nonlocal Applications", will
take 11-15 December 2017 in Sante Fe, New Mexico; information is at the website:
sites.google.com/site/manna2017abq. The focus of this workshop is on non-local
mathematical models, a topic of increasing interest in several diverse
scientific and engineering applications related to, as an example, material
science, biology, and environmental studies. Non-local calculus and the
corresponding models have emerged as a powerful tool for modeling multi-scale
phenomena, including overlapping microscopic and macroscopic scales. In the
computational mathematics community, two relatively separate groups of
researchers (i.e., the "fractional derivatives" and the "non-local operators"
communities) are concurrently working on the analysis and simulation of these
relevant problems. One of the main goals of this workshop is to unite these
separate communities providing significant benefit from their interaction and
opportunity to exchange their recent progress and results on the topic. Central
to the workshop is also the involvement of students or young researches, not
necessarily already engaged in non-local research, who will have the opportunity
to interact and learn from worldwide experts. The main topics that will be
addressed are the analysis and improvement of such non-local models and their
efficient simulation by means of cutting-edge algorithms on the newest computer
architectures.

Non-local operators provide a new framework to overcome limitations that are
present in classical PDE-based models. This workshop is designed to facilitate
the exchange of information between the (tempered) fractional calculus and non-
local vector calculus and the establishment of connections between them; this
will lead to the design of new improved non-local models and will facilitate
their analysis and simulation. As a result, the workshop will lead to new
research in applications of national interest such as subsurface flow
simulations, energy storage systems, contaminant transport, polymer and complex
fluid flow, material failure and damage, or any applications in complex systems
and disordered media that exhibit anomalous transport and diffusion. The goals
and objectives of the workshop include establishing synergies between
participants working on fractional PDEs with those working on general non-local
integral models; maximizing both the breadth and depth of the information
imparted to and exchanged among participants; providing researchers at all
career stages with the opportunity to present their state-of-the-art results or
to learn from experts in the field; and identifying the most important needs and
most potentially fruitful avenues for future non-local related research and
related applications. This will be facilitated by the discussion session at the
end of each day that will focus on a review of the recent past and near-future
directions of research in each area.
