
* 1758574
* Texas Algebraic Geometry Symposium 2018-2020
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 03/01/2018,02/12/2020
* Gregory Pearlstein,TX,Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 02/28/2023
* USD 45,000.00

The Texas Algebraic Geometry Symposium (TAGS) is an annual conference that is
hosted on a rotating basis by Rice University, Texas A&M University, and the
University of Texas at Austin. TAGS 2018 will take place on April 6-8 at Texas
A&M University in College Station, Texas. TAGS 2019 will take place during the
Spring of 2019 at the University of Texas at Austin. TAGS 2020 will take place
during the Spring of 2020 at Rice University in Houston, Texas. The symposia
provide opportunities for local researchers to meet and interact, as well as to
learn the latest advances in algebraic geometry, interpreted in its broadest
sense. Each symposia includes lectures aimed specifically at graduate students.
In addition, early-career researchers have the opportunity to present their work
in poster sessions. In addition there will be a one day weekend workshop for
graduate students and postdocs during the fall semester.

Algebraic geometry is the study of solutions to systems of polynomial equations
in many variables. Such systems are of central importance to mathematics and its
applications, such as coding theory, cryptography, and the study of various
natural phenomena. This grant will fund a conference series in this area in
which investigators from Texas and the neighboring states will discuss the
newest developments in the field with each other and with experts from outside
the region. The conference series is also an important opportunity for
regionally-based researchers, especially graduate students and postdocs, to
meet, interact, gain exposure for their research, and establish new
collaborations. More information is available at:
http://www.math.tamu.edu/~gpearl/TAGS.html.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
