
* 1758187
* Triangle Lectures in Combinatorics
* DMS,Combinatorics
* 01/01/2018,02/22/2022
* Ricky Liu,NC,North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 12/31/2022
* USD 30,000.00

This award supports participation in the Triangle Lectures in Combinatorics
(TLC), a series of once-a-semester, one-day conferences held in and around the
Research Triangle region of North Carolina, the next of which will take place at
North Carolina State University on March 24, 2018. Since the Spring of 2010,
each meeting of the TLC has brought four outstanding mathematicians from around
the country to give talks about some of the most exciting and significant recent
developments in combinatorics. A great number of graduate students, postdocs,
and tenure-track/tenured researchers in combinatorics and related fields work
within a five-hour drive of the Research Triangle, but the large distances
between colleges and universities can be isolating. The TLC conference format
gives a practical reason for these researchers to come together and interact
with each other. Past meetings of the TLC have attracted groups of attendees
from North Carolina, Virginia, Tennessee, Kentucky, South Carolina, Georgia, and
beyond.

Combinatorics is an important and growing area of mathematics that focuses on
the structure of discrete (as opposed to continuous) sets of objects. It is
critical to many areas of mathematics and plays a key role in computational,
scientific, and engineering applications. The Triangle Lectures in Combinatorics
serve to: enhance the national infrastructure for research and education by
creating and strengthening a regional network of interacting researchers;
facilitate the dissemination of cutting-edge research ideas, methods, and
results among researchers in the Southeastern United States; promote the
teaching and training of graduate students by exposing them to the perspectives
of leading researchers; increase awareness and understanding of combinatorics
among faculty and students in the Southeast; support the development of young
faculty at various institutions to help them build local support and research
networks; broaden participation of underrepresented groups, particularly women;
and foster research interactions among participants, leading to new research
results. More information can be found at: https://web.math.ncsu.edu/tlc/
