
* 1764236
* Permutation Patterns 2018
* DMS,Combinatorics
* 01/01/2018,12/21/2017
* Lara Pudwell,IN,Valparaiso University
* Standard Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 12/31/2018
* USD 15,000.00

The 16th International Conference on Permutation Patterns will be held at
Dartmouth College in Hanover, New Hampshire, from July 9 to July 13, 2018. The
conference will provide a high quality program of speakers in the area of
permutation patterns with opportunities for collaboration between junior and
senior researchers, as well as between participants from around the world. The
conference will feature two plenary one-hour speakers and a number of
contributed talks, each thirty minutes long. Researchers will present their new
results and there will be time for open discussions to explore unsolved problems
in the field. This award supports travel to the conference by students and early
career mathematicians from the United States. This conference is part of a
series of annual conferences devoted to the area of permutation patterns. Ever
since the first conference in 2003, which was hosted by the University of Otago
in New Zealand, it has been held every year at different institutions around the
world: in North America, Europe, and Australasia.

The conference will feature current research in the area of permutation patterns
and its applications. Major themes in the conference include the structural
theory of pattern classes, asymptotic behavior of pattern classes, generalized
pattern avoidance, packing densities, and algorithmic and decidability problems.
Research in the area is influenced by theoretical computer science, and traces
its historical origins to the study of sorting machines. Combinatorial interest
in permutation patterns focuses on centrally important enumeration and packing
problems, for instance the extremal problem to determine how one pattern can be
embedded as often as possible in a permutation. The statistics of permutations
also enters into the picture, garnering attention from probabilists. The
conference is expected to have a wide impact on a variety of different research
areas in mathematics and computer science. The conference website is at
http://permutationpatterns.com.
