
* 1764311
* Workshops in Geometric Topology
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 05/01/2018,01/30/2023
* Craig Guilbault,WI,University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 04/30/2024
* USD 50,000.00

This award will fund three meetings of a well-established series of summer
Workshops in Geometric Topology, with the first to be held at Calvin College in
Grand Rapids, MI, June 14-16, 2018. The award will also fund workshops at the
University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee in 2019 and at Texas Christian University in
Fort Worth, TX, in 2020. These workshops provide an annual opportunity for
active researchers and graduate students in the mathematical field of geometric
topology to interact in a setting that provides multiple tangible benefits,
including: 1) attending the lectures of a principal speaker to receive an in-
depth introduction to important current streams of research being performed by
nationally-recognized experts, 2) learning about a breadth of other research
activities by attending shorter talks given by the other workshop participants,
3) the opportunity to share their own work by giving talks in a congenial
environment, and 4) important time for informal discussion and interaction among
participants and with the principal speaker. These workshops regularly feature
participation and talks by members of underrepresented groups in mathematics,
and, to further broaden the impact of the workshops, the talks of the principal
speaker will be recorded and posted to the internet. The workshops also provide
significant benefits to graduate students by providing a serious but informal
research atmosphere in which they can meet and learn from others in the field.
NSF funding will be used to cover the attendance costs of workshop participants.

More specifically, the workshops provide opportunities for geometric topologists
to interact and share ideas, leading to research collaborations. Furthermore,
the proposed workshops will continue the tradition of inviting each year a
renowned principal speaker to provide a series of three lectures on a topic of
his or her choice for the purpose of expanding the interests of the participants
by having a nationally-recognized expert discuss an important area of current
interest. The 2018 workshop will feature Andras Stipsicz of the Renyi Institute
of Mathematics. The web site for this workshop will be
http://www.calvin.edu/~venema/workshop18/ .

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
