
* 1801103
* Quantum Computing Workshop for Advancing Aerospace Sciences
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 11/01/2017,10/19/2017
* William Oates,FL,Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 10/31/2019
* USD 10,000.00

A workshop entitled "Quantum Computing Workshop for Advancing Aerospace
Sciences" is scheduled to be held in Suffolk, VA at the Lockheed Martin Center
for Innovation on November 7-8, 2017. More details on the workshop can be found
at http://www.nianet.org/quantumcomputing/. The goals of the workshop are to
understand the challenges and opportunities to develop a new type of computing
methodology that significantly increases computer speed and can be applied to
science and engineering problems. This has implications on a variety of
applications including machine learning, materials design, personalized
medicine, advanced weather prediction, energy distribution and optimization,
among others. Quantum computers use an entirely different computing paradigm in
comparison to conventional computers. Conventional computer hardware uses
silicon to process information in terms of "bits" that can be encoded in either
zeros or ones. Quantum computers use what is known as "qubits" which allow
information to be encoded by both zeros and ones at the same time using the
unusual behavior of quantum mechanics. This quantum behavior has been measured
in different experimental systems by controlling and measuring light and
electricity, for example. However, transitioning these prototype machines into a
quantum computer with a large number of qubits that can reliably processes
information is still in its infancy. This workshop will bring together industry
leaders, government laboratory researchers, and university researchers to define
new goals and objectives to transition how small scale quantum computing
testbeds can be scaled up using advanced hardware and quantum algorithms. This
is expected to provide a roadmap for solving practical problems of interests to
the general public and national security. The invited speakers will discuss
challenges and opportunities centered around the following four topic areas: 1)
Quantum algorithms, 2) Quantum computing hardware, 3) Control and error
correction of quantum systems, and 4) Aeroscience applications. Fourteen global
experts, including two female speakers, will discuss current research related to
these four quantum computing areas.

The objective of this workshop is to bring together experts on quantum computing
and quantum information to discuss the challenges, opportunities, and latest
developments in quantum algorithms, hardware, and its impact on supporting
aeroscience computations. The goal is to develop a roadmap for success that
connects mathematicians, physicists, computer scientists, and engineers to
collectively explore capabilities where quantum speed-up may impact domain
specific problems in science and engineering applications. These specific areas
may include computational materials science, fluid dynamics, uncertainty
quantification, machine learning, among others. This will include discussions on
the latest advances in algorithm development, scalability, universal logic, and
error correction with the aim to understand the next set of mathematical
challenges required to control quantum systems, measure their outputs, and
preserve their properties from outside disturbances. Quantum speed-up is well
known in specific algorithms that lead to exponential increases in factoring
prime numbers (Shor's algorithm) and quadratic speed increases in unstructured
searches (Grover's algorithm). More recently, it has been suggested that
exponential speed-up can be achieved in linear algebra problems. Similar
research has focused on new Monte Carlo quantum algorithms. This research is
focused on identifying efficient means to solve partial differential equations
on a quantum computer. Based upon the chosen topics, we will focus discussions
on these topics where quantum algorithms and hardware may converge onto methods
that allow for efficient solutions to partial differential equations relevant to
a broad area of mathematics, physics, materials science, and engineering
problems. Through discussions among quantum computing stakeholders in industry,
government laboratories, and academia, we expect to facilitate building
partnerships across disciplines and provide opportunities for young faculty and
graduate students to learn about quantum computing. We envision developing a
roadmap that defines the next set of realistic challenges that can be met over
the next 10-15 years.
