
* 1802058
* Workshop on Automorphic Forms and Related Topics
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 03/15/2018,03/01/2018
* Robert Lemke Oliver,MA,Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 02/28/2019
* USD 21,000.00

The 32nd Automorphic Forms Workshop (AFW) will be held March 19-22, 2018 at
Tufts University. Automorphic forms play a central role in number theory and
related areas, including the proof of Fermat's Last Theorem. The AFW provides a
setting for researchers to discuss new developments, learn from other
researchers, and begin new collaborations. Many researchers in automorphic forms
give their first research talks at the AFW, and many senior researchers attend
as well. The workshop has historically also sparked research collaborations
leading to new developments in the field. To increase accessibility to a wider
audience, the organizers have introduced a "bootcamp" to be held March 18th.

Due in part to the location of the conference just outside Boston, the 32nd
Automorphic Forms Workshop will attract active researchers for whom attendance
at other recent AFWs was impractical because of geographical constraints, time
constraints, or lack of sufficient funding. This will ensure that a mix of
attendees will contribute new perspectives to the workshop, which also attracts
attendees who have participated annually for many years. Typically, about half
of the attendees at the AFW are at early stages of their careers, and about one-
quarter to one-third of the participants are women. The AFW will continue to
provide a supportive and encouraging environment for giving talks, exchanging
ideas, and beginning new collaborations. In addition to research talks, the AFW
will have two professional development panels on topics such as proper
mathematical writing, starting a tenure track job, forming collaborations, and
transitioning from one career stage to the next. The organizers are committed to
continuing to facilitate an inclusive, vertically integrated environment; to
this end they are introducing a bootcamp to enhance the experience of early-
career researchers attending the workshop. The workshop website is
http://automorphicformsworkshop.org/.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
