
* 1802259
* The Southeastern Number Theory Meetings
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 08/01/2018,03/20/2018
* Matthew Boylan,SC,University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* michelle manes
* 07/31/2020
* USD 14,980.00

In mid-September of 2018, the first of three Southeastern Number Theory Meetings
planned for the 2018-2019 academic year will take place at either Davidson
College in Davidson, NC, or at Wake Forest University in Winston-Salem, NC. The
local host at Davidson will be Mike Mossinghoff; if the meeting is at Wake
Forest University, the local hosts will be Jeremy Rouse and Abbey Bourdon. The
University of South Carolina in Columbia, SC will host the second meeting on the
first weekend of December 2018. The third meeting is tentatively planned for
April 2019 at Armstrong State University in Savannah, GA. The local hosts will
be Sungkon Chang and Duc Huynh. While Armstrong State has expressed enthusiasm
for hosting the meeting, the location of the Southeastern Number Theory Meetings
is traditionally decided at the previous year's meeting. Further information on
these meetings including the locations, dates, lists of speakers, lists of
participants, and registration information will be linked to the conference home
pages as it becomes available:
http://www.math.sc.edu/~boylan/seminars/pantshome.html and
http://www.math.clemson.edu/~kevja/SERMON. The meetings consist of participant
talks on current research in all areas of number theory, including analytic
number theory, arithmetic geometry, and automorphic and modular forms. These
topics reflect the research interests of number theorists working in the
Southeast. Each meeting features plenary talks by nationally and internationally
recognized leaders in the field, invited talks by graduate students and
postdoctoral researchers, and a larger number of contributed talks by
mathematicians at all levels including undergraduate and graduate students, and
junior and senior faculty. Number theorists from outside the Southeast will give
the invited and plenary talks, while regional researchers will give most of the
contributed talks.

A primary goal of the Southeastern Number Theory Meetings is to provide members
of the number theory community in the Southeast with an opportunity to learn
about new and significant research in number theory and to disseminate their own
research. Students and junior researchers in the community particularly benefit
from the meetings. The meetings strengthen their knowledge base, expose their
work to a wider audience, and give them insightful input and feedback from other
participants. Funding from the NSF allows the organizers to achieve their goals
at a low cost to individual participants. These meetings integrate regional
mathematicians into the community who may have little or no funds for
professional travel such as graduate students and faculty at institutions that
do not award Ph.Ds. The organizers will continue efforts to attract a
demographically diverse participant base including women and racial and ethnic
minorities.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
