
* 1802828
* Frontier Probability Days Conference
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 03/01/2018,02/22/2018
* Yevgeniy Kovchegov,OR,Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 02/28/2019
* USD 25,000.00

This award supports participation in the research conference "Frontier
Probability Days" to be held at Oregon State University, March 29 - 31, 2018.
The meeting brings together leading regional and national researchers, graduate
students, and other scientists interested in probability theory and its
applications, to stimulate research activities in this area and foster new
interdisciplinary collaborations. A special feature of the conference is its
attention to "applications of probability". Part of the intent of the meeting is
to help broaden interaction with other fields, a source of inspiration for both
more applied and theoretical aspects of probability research. Much of the
support in this award is allocated to travel support for students and early-
career researchers, for whom the conference represents an excellent opportunity
to stay informed of recent research progress and to initiate research
collaborations.

This meeting is the sixth in a series that meets approximately every two years
in the Inter-mountain West of the United States. The format consists of ten
plenary talks and several shorter presentations. The plenary speakers represent
a spectrum of leading work in both theoretical and applied probability.
Approximately fifty non-local participants are expected to participate in the
conference. Topics of interest include random graphs, stochastic partial
differential equations, stochastic networks, and probabilistic applications to
biology and dynamical systems. More details can be found at the conference web
site:

http://math.oregonstate.edu/~kovchegy/FPD2018/

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
