
* 1804586
* Workshop on Complex Differential Geometry
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 02/01/2018,01/11/2021
* Ioana Suvaina,TN,Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 01/31/2022
* USD 12,570.00

The Shanks Workshop on Complex Differential Geometry will take place on March
2-3, 2018, at Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN. The workshop brings together
leading researchers with different backgrounds, but common research interests in
the area of complex differential geometry. This research area uses techniques
from complex analysis, differential geometry and algebraic geometry, and the
real insight of these theories is highlighted when all these facets merge
together and relations between them are established. The main goal of the
workshop is to promote these interactions and initiate new projects and
collaborations. This meeting is expected to be highly beneficial to graduate
students and junior mathematicians as they will have the opportunity to interact
with experts in the field in a friendly, open to discussions environment.

Complex differential geometry is an area with deep roots and very rapid and
diverse advances. The proposed workshop brings together researchers using a
variety of techniques which focus on one main problem: understanding canonical
metrics in complex geometry. The workshop is intended to present recent progress
in the study of complete Calabi-Yau manifolds and Ricci solitons with prescribed
asymptotic behavior, Sasaki-Einstein geometry, extremal Kahler metrics, moduli
space of Kahler metrics and the relations with stability, and generalizations to
Hermitian geometry. For more details, see the workshop webpage at
https://my.vanderbilt.edu/shankscdg/.
