
* 1806896
* 2018 Redbud Geometry/Topology Conference
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 03/15/2018,02/23/2018
* Neil Hoffman,OK,Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 02/28/2019
* USD 27,349.00

This award supports the "2018 Spring Redbud Topology Conference", to be held on
April 28-29, 2018 on the campus of Oklahoma State University in Stillwater,
Oklahoma. The confernece will be preceded by a one-day graduate workshop to be
held on April 27. The conference will bring together experts in the fields of
3-manifold and 4-manifold topology -- i.e., features (like 'holes') that remain
unchanged when these spaces are bent or stretched -- to discuss natural ways of
breaking these objects into more well understood pieces. The list of committed
speakers includes researchers based in Australia, Asia and the US. This award
will provide funding for their travel as well as US based graduate students and
other early career mathematicians wishing to attend the meetings.

Two main areas of research will be presented at the Spring 2018 conference,
namely triangulations of 3- and 4-manifolds and trisections, a recently
introduced combinatorial decomposition of 4-manifolds. In the triangulations
thread, the focus will be on current algorithmic questions related to 3-manifold
topology. We will also focus on recent developments in trisections, including
basic constructions of trisections arising from gluing, invariants which can be
calculated from trisections, and applications of trisections in mathematical
physics. By bringing these groups of experts together, participants will explore
and extend very recently discovered connections between 4-dimensional
trisections and triangulations. Ten speakers will be featured during the
conference as well as introductory talks during the graduate workshop. The
conference webpage can be found at:

http://math.okstate.edu/conferences/redbud/

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
