
* 1806830
* Frontiers of Mathematical Biology: Modeling, Computation and Analysis
* DMS,MATHEMATICAL BIOLOGY
* 04/15/2018,04/06/2021
* Yuanwei Qi,FL,The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 03/31/2022
* USD 38,980.00

The international conference "Frontiers of Mathematical Biology: Modeling,
Analysis and Computation" will take place at the University of Central Florida
in Orlando, Florida, on May 2-4, 2018. The meeting, supported by the NSF
Mathematical Biology Program, will bring together researchers in mathematical
and biological sciences to disseminate their most recent progress on using
mathematics to study subjects ranging from cancer and neural sciences to ecology
and chemical reactions. This project encourages the participation of graduate
students and early career researchers. Participants will include leading
international researchers as well as postdocs and graduate students. The
schedule includes six plenary talks given by senior researchers, seventy invited
and contributed talks (including twenty by early career participants), and
mentoring activities for younger researchers. Special effort will be made to
attract recent PhD recipients and graduate students to participate in conference
activities, particularly underrepresented minorities and female scientists. The
conference will help to establish new collaborations as well as to refresh
existing collaborations.

The broad theme of the conference is the analysis of mathematical models using
differential equations to study temporal and spatiotemporal dynamics in biology.
Special topics include: cancer stem cells in primary breast cancer tissues and
cell lines and the role of non-linear growth kinetics; pattern formation in
coupled cell networks; spread of spatial disturbances in chemical reactions and
Turing pattern formation leading to structure and coloration during development;
and systematic approaches to large-scale coupled systems of differential
equations which describe the chemical signaling and control upon which life
systems are constructed. The conference will foster development of new ideas and
innovative tools through collaboration between researchers from different
mathematical disciplines and biologists. This conference will facilitate
scientific interactions between a new generation of US mathematicians and
leading senior researchers in mathematics and biology, enhanced by mentoring
activities before the meeting. Plenary speakers will be encouraged to reach a
broader audience, give non-technical surveys of current research in their field,
and suggest new research directions. More information is available on the
conference website: http://sciences.ucf.edu/math/mathbio

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
