
* 1808177
* Underrepresented Students in Topology and Algebra Research Symposium (USTARS)
* DMS,INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM, ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, TOPOLOGY
* 04/15/2018,04/05/2018
* Erik Insko,FL,Florida Gulf Coast University
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 03/31/2023
* USD 45,000.00

This award will support participant travel for two-hundred and thirty
participants to attend three Underrepresented Students in Topology and Algebra
Research Symposia (USTARS) to be held April 6-8, 2018 at Reed College, in April
2019 at Iowa State University, and in April 2020 at the University of Iowa. The
goal of the symposia is to highlight research being conducted by
underrepresented students in the areas of algebra and topology. Speakers will
give 30-minute parallel research talks and graduate students will give at least
three-quarters of these presentations. The topics of the presentations will span
algebra and topology. Two distinguished graduate students and one invited
faculty member will be asked to give one-hour presentations, and a poster
session featuring invited undergraduates is also planned. At this unique
meeting, participants are exposed to a variety of current research, ideas, and
results in their areas of study and beyond. Participants are also given the
opportunity to meet and network with students and faculty members from
underrepresented groups. USTARS promotes diversity in the mathematical sciences
by encouraging women and minorities to attend and give talks, and USTARS exposes
all participants to the research and activities of mathematicians from
underrepresented groups, encouraging a more collaborative mathematics community.
Further details and an application are available at the conference website:
www.ustars.org.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
