
* 1812462
* Macaulay2 Programming Workshop
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 02/15/2018,02/14/2018
* Daniel Erman,WI,University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Janet Striuli
* 01/31/2019
* USD 15,000.00

This award supports participation in a workshop on the mathematical programming
system Macaulay2 to be held April 14-17, 2018 at the University of Wisconsin,
Madison. Macaulay2 is a free, open-source technical programming language for
computation in research mathematics. Macaulay2 is developed through an "app"
model: individual researchers write packages with specialized capabilities that
are then made available (for free) through Macaulay2's website, for use by other
researchers. These workshops provide a setting where groups of less-experienced
programmers learn to develop high quality packages with the support of
Macaulay2's core developers. In addition, the workshop includes professional
development activities for early career mathematicians, including opportunities
to speak on their own research, and panel discussions on jobs and developing a
research program. More details are available at the conference website:
https://juliettebruce.github.io/M2-Wisconsin-2018/

At last count, Macaulay2 had 119 built-in packages, many of which have been
developed at workshops such as this. The capabilities of Macaulay2 grow in
response to research interests of the community, and this allows Macaulay2 to
quickly create and distribute resources for new and emerging fields. At this
workshop, the packages to be developed will include: FI-modules, Schur functors
of complexes, the simplex method, random monomial ideals, and more. In addition,
this meeting will be unique among Macaulay2 workshops because it will engage
researchers from number theory and applied algebra, which have not been
traditional foci of Macaulay2's development. This presents a unique opportunity
for Macaulay2 to develop capabilities that will be useful to those communities.
