
* 1821870
* Recent Developments on Mathematical/Statistical Approaches in Data Science
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 03/01/2019,06/28/2018
* Yifei Lou,TX,University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 10/31/2019
* USD 16,457.00

A workshop on Recent Developments on Mathematical/Statistical Approaches in Data
Science will be held at the University of Texas, Dallas, in the Spring of 2019.
The workshop will bring together researchers from different disciplines
including computational and applied mathematics, statistics, computer science,
and engineering to report on cutting-edge methodologies and state-of-the-art
computational algorithms in data science. The workshop will provide an
opportunity to all the participants to submit their related works to a special
issue in the journal of Inverse Problem and Imaging (IPI). The funding provided
will be primarily allocated in support of junior researchers such as graduate
students, post-docs, and entry-level faculty members, specifically to under-
represented minorities and women in the STEM. The organizers will coordinate
invited speakers to serve as mentors to junior researchers during the poster
session and the career luncheon. The organizers also invite speakers from
different countries to promote international collaborations. Due to the blooming
of 'big data' and an emerging field of data science, there is a need to bring
together researchers from different disciplines to keep up with recent
developments. The objectives of this workshop are (1) to facilitate discussions
and foster collaborations among the participants with different backgrounds and
expertise; (2) to attract new researchers to the field of data science and to
offer mentoring service to junior participants in this field; and (3) to bridge
the gap between the theoretical development in academia and practical
applications in industry. The proposed workshop will be multidisciplinary with
topics ranging from scientific computing and statistics to various applications
in data science. As a result, this workshop will strengthen the relationship
between mathematicians and other scientists/engineers who are interested in data
science. In addition, the workshop will advance the development of computational
methods, statistical theories, and tools for big data analysis. Furthermore, the
workshop will build close connections between academia and industry to establish
and facilitate research collaborations in a variety of data-driven applications.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
