
* 1821955
* Increasing the Visibility of Women's Research in Mathematics through Graduate Student Participation in National Workshops
* DMS,INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
* 06/01/2018,07/09/2020
* Darla Kremer,RI,Association for Women in Mathematics, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 05/31/2022
* USD 49,966.00

This award supports the participation of graduate students in workshops
presented by the Association for Women in Mathematics at four major U.S.
mathematics meetings in 2018-2020: SIAM 2018 (July, Portland), JMM 2019
(January, Baltimore), SIAM CSE 2019 (February, Spokane), and JMM 2020 (January,
Denver). These workshops will bring rising women stars and current mathematical
leaders together with graduate students and recent graduates from a variety of
fields in pure and applied mathematics. By creating a rich intellectual
community centered on shared research interests, the events are structured to
generate new mentoring relations, new research collaborations, and increased
activity in the associated research areas. Moreover, these events at highly
visible national meetings benefit the entire mathematical community by
showcasing the excellent mathematical work done by women. Each workshop has a
particular research focus. Leaders in each research field will introduce younger
mathematicians to a deeper understanding of the field and its connections with
their own work. Graduate students will, in turn, share their research during
poster sessions and small group interactions. The research topics to be
highlighted in these workshops include modeling boundaries of objects in two and
three dimensions, computational topology, and other topics that span a broad
spectrum of current mathematical problems. The workshops aim to promote the
research of young women mathematicians and to increase the visibility of
research done by women mathematicians on questions of current interest. For more
information on the workshops, see https://sites.google.com/site/awmmath/awm-at-
siam and https://sites.google.com/site/awmmath/awm-at-jmm

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
