
* 1823060
* Research Workshops, UCONN Special Semester in Probability
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 05/01/2018,12/09/2022
* Iddo Ben Ari,CT,University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 10/31/2023
* USD 49,998.00

As part of a special thematic semester in probability in 2018, the mathematics
department at the University of Connecticut will be holding research workshops
of national scope in three prominent areas of probability theory: 1) Recent
Progress on Dimer Model and Integrable Probability, Aug 15-16 2018, Avery Point
campus; 2) Mathematical Finance, Oct 12-13 2018, Storrs campus; 3) Functional
Inequalities, Nov 2-3 2018, Storrs campus.

The research workshops are supported by this grant and complement the other
activities in the special semester (including a public lecture and colloquia
series), funded by the department. Each workshop will feature a group of invited
distinguished leaders in the respective area. The goals of the workshops are to
bring together researchers from all parts of the country and at all stages of
their career to disseminate ideas, collaborate and network, having direct access
to the invited speakers. Particular focus, attention and funding opportunities
will be given to early-career researchers and researchers from underrepresented
groups. Specifically, this grant will be used to support about ten early-career
participants per workshop. Participants will have the opportunity to contribute
to the proceedings from the special semester, to appear in a volume of the
Birkhauser series Progress in Probability. The workshops will be widely
advertised online (e.g. IMS meetings website and mathprograms.org), through
email lists and networks, specifically the Women in Probability network
(womeninprobability.org) and the mailing list of women probabilists in North
America, as well as through announcements in meetings, emails to colleagues, and
posters. More details on the special semester and the research workshops can be
found on probsem18.math.uconn.edu (temporary URL draft.probsem18.math.uconn.edu)

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
