
* 1830889
* Characters in Low-Dimensional Topology
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 06/01/2018,06/01/2018
* Cameron Gordon,TX,University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 05/31/2019
* USD 25,000.00

This award supports participation by U.S.-based junior researchers in the
conference "Characters in Low-Dimensional Topology" held June 2-6, 2018 in
Montreal, Canada at the University of Quebec at Montreal, hosted by the Centre
de Recherches Mathematiques. The conference provides an international forum for
the dissemination and discussion of recent important advances in low-dimensional
topology and geometry. This is a large and active area of research in pure
mathematics, whose basic goal is to understand the structure of mathematical
objects known as manifolds, which arise naturally in modeling many scientific
phenomena. Manifolds are "spaces" whose small-scale structure depends only on
the number of degrees of freedom, called the dimension: for example, on a small
scale a 1-dimensional manifold looks just like a line, a 2-dimensional manifold
looks just like a flat plane, a 3-dimensional manifold looks like a region of
the space in which we live, and so on. Although all manifolds of a given
dimension are the same on a small scale, their large-scale structures can be
very different and quite complicated; many mathematical techniques have been
developed to investigate this. "Low-dimensional" means dimensions 3 and 4, which
are of special interest: we live in a manifold that has three dimensions if we
consider only the spatial universe, but four dimensions if time is included as
well. The conference brings together experts and emerging researchers to report
on recent results and explore future directions. This award enables young
mathematicians from the U.S., graduate students and postdoctoral researchers, to
participate. A particular effort will be made to support diversity by
encouraging the attendance of women and other groups that are traditionally
underrepresented in mathematics.

The conference focuses on the many different geometric and topological
techniques that have recently been developed to study 3-dimensional manifolds.
It is now known that 3-manifolds possess rigid geometric structures, and recent
related developments have brought new insights not only to low-dimensional
topology but also to neighboring fields. Meanwhile, new homology theories,
having their origins both in quantum physics and in gauge theory, have led to
dramatic progress on old questions in knot theory and 3-and 4-dimensional
topology. Despite these advances on several fronts, relatively little is known
about the interplay between analysis, geometry, and algebraic invariants in
dimension 3. The conference highlights ongoing research focused on finding
direct connections between these several aspects of 3-dimensional topology. The
meeting brings together experts and early-career mathematicians working on the
new invariants of 3-manifolds, on geometric group theory applied to 3-manifolds,
and on more classical geometric and topological techniques.

The website for the conference is cirget.uqam.ca/boyerfest//en

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
