
* 1833416
* Emerging Statistical and Quantitative Issues in Genomic Research in Health Sciences
* DMS,STATISTICS, MSPA-INTERDISCIPLINARY
* 09/01/2018,08/03/2018
* Xihong Lin,MA,Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 08/31/2023
* USD 90,000.00

The 2018 Conference of the Program in Quantitative Genomics (PQG), entitled
"Biobanks: Study Design and Data Analysis" will take place at the Joseph B.
Martin Conference Center at the Harvard Medical School from November 1-2, 2018.
This is the first of three years of the Program in Quantitative Genomics (PQG)
Conference series to be supported by this award. This long-standing conference
series, open to the whole research community, focuses on timely
interdisciplinary discussions on emerging statistical and computational
challenges in genetic and genomic science. The focus of each conference changes
to reflect the evolution of scientific frontiers. Key to the success of the
series is its interdisciplinary nature, bringing quantitative and subject-matter
scientists together to discuss statistical and quantitative issues that arise in
cutting-edge genetic and genomic research in human disease. The impetus for the
2018 conference theme comes from the proliferation of large-scale biobanks
worldwide, composed of massive genetic and genomic data, epidemiological data,
Electronic Medical Records, wearable devices and imaging data. The use of
biobanks is becoming an essential and potentially revolutionizing approach to
biomedical research, with the capacity to improve the prevention, diagnosis, and
treatment of a wide range of illnesses, and to advance personalized health. This
conference aims at discussing key statistical and quantitative challenges in
biobank studies, including biobank design to meet a wide array of needs,
strategies for improving phenotyping accuracy, data harmonization across
biobanks, and novel statistical and data science methods for analysis of biobank
data. The conference is open to the whole research community and particularly
encourages participation of junior faculty and researchers, postdoctoral
fellows, students, women and members of underrepresented groups. The
participants will discuss and critique existing quantitative methods, discuss
in-depth emerging statistical and quantitative issues, and identify priorities
for future research in the design and analysis of biobank data. The research
presented will be broadly disseminated in publications in scientific journals
and websites.

For the 2018 PQG conference we have assembled an interdisciplinary team of
speakers experienced in biobank development and study design, including
statisticians, medical informaticians, geneticists, epidemiologists, and
clinical scientists. Three emerging topics of substantial current interest
include the design of population Biobanks; phenotyping and harmonization across
biobanks; and biobank data analysis. The conference discussion will revolve
around 1) examples of different types of biobanks including different examples
of recruitment strategies, selection of genotype / technologies, genotype
resources and future directions, design strategies: cross-section, longitudinal,
representative probability sampling, and increasing diversity and expanding to
the Americas, Africa and Asia; 2) issues of phenotyping and harmonization across
biobanks including new methods for improving phenotyping, harmonization within
and across biobanks, enriching phenotyping using registry data (time to event),
combining different biobank/registry data across the world, bias and missing
data, misclassification in electronic health records (EHR) and other design
heterogeneity issues in EHR databases; and finally 3) issues related to data
analysis methods, including how to make analysis computationally scalable,
analysis of related samples and admixture samples, multiple phenotypes and
PheWAS analysis, missing data, misclassification of phenotypes, handling small
number of cases for some diseases, risk prediction, selection of appropriate
controls, integrative analysis across biobanks, and integrative analysis of
different data types (genotype and phenotype, or transcriptomic and metabolomic
data) or replicating phenotypes across biobanks. For more information, see
https://www.hsph.harvard.edu/2018-pqg-conference/

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
