
* 1833126
* 38th Southeastern-Atlantic Regional Conference on Differential Equations (SEARCDE)
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/2018,08/07/2018
* Ramjee Sharma,GA,University of North Georgia
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 07/31/2019
* USD 24,000.00

This project supports participation in the thirty-eighth annual Southeastern-
Atlantic Regional Conference on Differential Equations (SEARCDE) at the
University of North Georgia in Oakwood, Georgia, on October 6-7, 2018. Since its
origin in 1981 at Virginia Tech, the conference has rotated among institutions
in the southeast region of the United States. The main purpose of the conference
is to promote research and education in the theory and applications of
differential equations and the related numerical computations in many areas of
science. Experts, beginning researchers, and graduate students will be brought
together to share their research and develop a research network. Graduate
students, university professors, and mathematicians who work in different
industries from the southeastern region will particularly benefit from the
conference; and women, minority, and underrepresented groups are strongly
encouraged to participate in SEARCDE. Further information about the conference
can be found at https://ung.edu/mathematics/searcde. The goal of SEARCDE is to
foster an environment for the exchange of ideas and the discussion of recent
developments in the field. The thirty-eighth SEARCDE will focus on the
application of differential equations in fluid dynamics, environmental change,
and the related computational methods guiding high performance and parallel
computing. Graduate students and beginning researchers will have opportunities
to learn about progress in their field from experts, present their research,
receive feedback, explore future directions, and develop collaborative projects.
Three plenary speakers will deliver a one-hour lecture each at the conference,
and all other participants will have an opportunity to present a twenty-minute
talk on their research. There will also be an open forum led by experts that
will foster discussion and collaboration among participants

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
