
* 1833447
* Symposium on Mathematical Statistics and Applications: From Time Series and Stochastics, to Semi- and Non-Parametrics, to High-Dimensional Models
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2018,05/17/2018
* Frederi Viens,MI,Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2019
* USD 25,000.00

This award supports participation in the conference "Symposium on Mathematical
Statistics and Applications: From Time Series and Stochastics, to Semi- and Non-
Parametrics, to High-Dimensional Models" held September 14 - 16, 2018 at
Michigan State University. This conference is designed to benefit graduate
students and early-career researchers in mathematical statistics. As the data
revolution of the 21st century takes the US to new frontiers in data-based
decision-making and predictive analytics in business and government, the role of
the mathematically-trained and analytically-critical statistician remains more
important than ever, to develop and analyze sound, innovative ways of
understanding data science algorithms, methodologies, and procedures. The
conference will bring together established and aspiring researchers from around
the country and abroad to explore frontiers of mathematical statistics and a
host of emerging applications. The exposure and networking opportunities
provided by the conference to the dozens of graduate students and early-career
researchers will be of great value, and potentially career-changing for some.

Foundational work to further develop the analysis and use of data in all its
forms is underway in several areas, particularly in semi- and non-parametric
statistics. Such mathematical development is needed across a wide spectrum of
the statistical sciences, including high-dimensional statistical inference, non-
parametric time series, functional data analysis, empirical processes, and
machine learning. The conference will expose the participants to these topics as
well as other directions, including asymptotic theory of adaptive and efficient
estimation, time series in econometrics, and survival analysis. With ample time
built into the schedule for discussions, the conference will give participants
opportunities to engage in fruitful cross-group collaborations. A particularly
impactful aspect of the conference is the inclusion of several presentations by
local non-statisticians who work in areas typically underserved by statisticians
but with very significant data analysis needs, all interested in interacting
with statisticians from across the country with whom there would ordinarily be
no chance to meet. Application areas covered will include quantitative finance,
insurance mathematics and risk analytics, nuclear physics, agricultural
economics, neuro-imaging, soil science, hospital management, hydrology, and
others. The conference website is https://stt.msu.edu/MSUStatSymposium2018/.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
