
* 1833614
* NSF-SIAM Minisymposium on the NSF DMREF Program
* DMS,DMREF
* 06/01/2018,04/18/2018
* James Crowley,PA,Society For Industrial and Applied Math (SIAM)
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 05/31/2019
* USD 13,040.00

The multi-agency Materials Genome Initiative for Global Competitiveness (MGI)
evolved from priorities set by the White House Office of Science and Technology
Policy and was based on a recognition of the importance of materials in
technology and to society at large. The NSF program "Designing Materials to
Revolutionize and Engineer our Future" (DMREF) is the primary program by which
NSF participates in the national MGI. This project supports travel expenses for
participants of a one day symposium: NSF-Society for Industrial and Applied
Mathematics (SIAM) Minisymposium on the NSF DMREF Program; see
http://www.siam.org/meetings/ms18/ for the detail. This Symposium will be held
on July 10, 2018 at the SIAM Conference on Mathematical Aspects of Materials
Science (SIAM-MS18) in Portland, Oregon, July 9-13, 2018. The goal of the
symposium is to highlight the recent and current successful projects supported
by the DMREF Program in the area of interdisciplinary materials science.

The symposium will serve to raise awareness in the applied mathematics community
of the features and opportunities of the DMREF program. In particular, SIAM
researchers will see two avenues of DMREF participation: as Principal
Investigators on mathematics-led proposals or as participants on proposals led
by materials scientists and engineers from non-mathematical departments. It is
expected that the symposium will tap the potential for the mathematics community
to contribute to MGI that has not yet been realized. This includes several
diverse mathematical domains outside of those that are typically regarded as
"mathematical materials science," for example, optimization, image analysis, and
data science and statistics.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
