
* 1836318
* CBMS Conference: Mathematical Molecular Bioscience and Biophysics
* DMS,INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
* 09/01/2018,08/06/2018
* Shan Zhao,AL,University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 02/29/2020
* USD 35,000.00

This award supports the 2019 NSF-CBMS conference "Mathematical Molecular
Bioscience and Biophysics," hosted by University of Alabama, Tuscaloosa, during
May 13-17, 2019. The conference will feature Professor Guowei Wei of Michigan
State University as the Principal Lecturer. Mathematical molecular bioscience
and biophysics has been emerging as a promising interdisciplinary research area
at the interface of mathematics and biology, driven by the trends of
contemporary life sciences that transform biosciences from macroscopic to
microscopic or molecular, and from qualitative and phenomenological to
quantitative and predictive. The conference will promote biological studies for
solving cutting edge problems at molecular level, so that mathematics can play a
more important role in addressing fundamental challenges in molecular
biosciences and biophysics. This conference consists of ten principal lectures,
together with supplemental presentations by other experts and round table
discussions. The conference aims to attract many junior mathematicians,
including undergraduate and graduate students, postdoctoral fellows, and young
faculty, to enter this new interdisciplinary field. In addition, the meeting
will benefit the hosting university by enhancing its research program and
raising its visibility to peer institutes in the southeastern region.

Mathematical Molecular Bioscience and Biophysics (MMBB) concerns the development
of mathematical theories, models, methods, schemes, and algorithms for
elucidating molecular mechanisms and for solving open problems at the forefront
of molecular biosciences and biophysics. The lecture series will provide a
thorough overview of the MMBB literature to mathematical and biological
societies. Numerous areas of mathematics, including differential equations,
functional analysis, harmonic analysis, Lie groups, Lie algebras, geometry,
graph theory, topology, combinatorics, multiscale modeling, inverse problems,
optimization, machine learning, stochastic analysis, uncertainty quantification,
fuzzy logic, statistical inference, and nonparametric regression, have found
important applications in MMBB and many successful applications will be
illustrated in this conference. Biological open problems at the forefront of the
MMBB, such as those associated with drug design and discovery, which will
stimulate new research directions in modeling and computation of biomolecular
structure, function, dynamics and transport, will be identified. For more
information, please refer to the conference webpage: http://cbms.ua.edu

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
