
* 1836636
* Integers Conference 2018
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, Combinatorics
* 09/01/2018,08/09/2018
* Bruce Landman,GA,AUGUSTA UNIVERSITY RESEARCH INSTITUTE, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 08/31/2019
* USD 23,376.00

This award will provide funding for the "Integers Conference 2018," which will
be held in Augusta, Georgia, October 3-6, 2018. The conference is being hosted
by the Department of Mathematics at Augusta University. The Integers
conferences, of which this will be the eighth, serve to bring together
mathematicians and students interested in the fields of combinatorics and number
theory. It will promote interaction among research mathematicians at all career
stages from the talented undergraduate to the internationally distinguished
researcher. A large portion of the funding will support students, early-career
faculty, and mathematicians belonging to underrepresented groups. The conference
will serve as a catalyst for major collaborative projects among mathematicians
representing the areas of additive number theory, multiplicative number theory,
combinatorial game theory, probabilistic number theory, enumerative
combinatorics, combinatorial optimization, Ramsey theory, the theory of
partitions, and other areas of combinatorics and number theory. It will feature
three plenary speakers and around sixty additional speakers. The conference
organizers plan to support twenty student research talks, including talks
presented by students who have recently participated in an NSF "Research
Experiences for Undergraduates" program. The proceedings of the conference will
be published as a special volume of the journal Integers. The following website
has been created for the conference:
https://sites.google.com/a/westga.edu/integersconference2018/

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
