
* 1839112
* RoL: FELS - Workshop on Multiscale Modeling in Biology
* DMS,MATHEMATICAL BIOLOGY
* 09/01/2018,08/06/2018
* Jasmine Foo,MN,University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2019
* USD 33,790.00

The project supports a workshop on 'Multiscale Modeling in Biology', to be held
on May 20-22, 2019 at the University of Minnesota. Biological systems often
involve complex processes that span spatial and temporal scales, ranging from
the molecular and cell levels to the tissue and organism levels. The development
of multiscale mathematical models, capable of resolving the interaction between
phenomena at each scale, is instrumental in understanding these processes. The
conference aims to foster an exchange of ideas between researchers working in
diverse biological applications using common multiscale modeling frameworks.

The focus of the conference will be on mathematical models spanning the
molecular, cellular and tissue scales, with an emphasis on problems that involve
signal transduction, shape changes, movement, and growth. A variety of
biological application areas will be represented, including tissue organization,
development, and cancer. A key theme will be the interplay of mechanics and
biochemistry, which is central to many of these problems. To this end, 18
confirmed speakers will present work spanning the development of new multiscale
techniques and their application in reaction dynamics, signaling networks, cell
motility, development and tumor dynamics. In addition, the workshop will bring
together a new generation of researchers with established topical experts to
cultivate new collaborations and networks.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
