
* 1839608
* Collaborative Research: RoL: FELS: Workshop - Rules of Life in the Context of Future Mathematical Sciences
* DMS,Cross-BIO Activities, MSPA-INTERDISCIPLINARY
* 09/01/2018,11/03/2020
* Padmanabhan Seshaiyer,VA,George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 08/31/2021
* USD 80,201.00

The RoL: FELS: Collaborative Proposal Workshop - Rules of Life in the Context of
Future Mathematical Sciences will be hosted jointly by George Mason University,
Ohio State University, and University of Michigan. The conference will be held
in Alexandria, Virginia on October 4-6, 2018 and will bring together 50 faculty
experts and 30 graduate and post-doctoral students from a variety of fields
spanning mathematics and biology. One of the main goals of the conference is to
help refine emerging research areas in mathematical biology under the Rules of
Life, one of the NSF's ten Big Ideas. The conference will help to promote the
exchange of new ideas in mathematical biology, specifically to understand the
organizational principles and rules of living systems. This exchange will be
accomplished through a variety of activities including keynote presentations,
brainstorming affinity mapping activities, faculty lightning talks, student
poster presentations and expert panel presentations from agencies and leading
mathematical biology institutes. Outcomes of the discussions will be aggregated
and refined, ultimately resulting in the publication of a white paper. This
white paper will be freely available online, and the conference organizers (PIs
Dawes, Eisenberg and Seshaiyer) will further disseminate the ideas in the white
paper at other workshops and symposia. The conference will also provide graduate
students as well as post-doctoral fellows and new doctoral degree holders with
an opportunity to present their research in a setting similar to professional
disciplinary conferences.

Specific conference activities will focus on topics (not limited to): (a) new
and predictive understanding of outcomes of biological processes; (b)
understanding the basic rules for the emergence of multicellular structures; (c)
understanding regulation of circadian and seasonal rhythms; (d) re-engineering
sustainable and resilient biological systems at any scale and; (e) understanding
role of social interactions and experiences in reshaping the genome through
genetic and epigenetic changes. It is expected that the conference will help to
frame comprehensive genome/environment-to-phenome theories with predictive
capability that can help design phenotypes to respond to environmental
challenges or lead to next generation state-of-the-art technologies. The
conference format and broad community participation will develop priority areas
in mathematical biology addressing one of the NSF Big Ideas, Understanding the
Rules of Life, that will (a) enable discoveries that will allow better
understanding of complex biological interactions and identify causal, predictive
relationships across scales and (b) help to identify connections between genomic
and phenotypic diversity to encompass biological and environmental processes
across multiple scales of space and time.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
