
* 1839534
* Workshop on Representation Theory, Combinatorics, and Geometry
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 09/01/2018,08/14/2018
* Leonid Petrov,VA,University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 08/31/2019
* USD 15,000.00

The award will support participation of primarily early-career researchers in
the Workshop on Representation Theory, Combinatorics, and Geometry, and the
Distinguished Lecture Series "Virginia Mathematics Lectures" which will take
place on October 19-21 and 22-24, 2019, respectively, at the University of
Virginia. The workshop will consist of talks by leading experts on connections
between quantum groups, quiver varieties, and canonical bases, as well as short
talks by early-career participants. Participants will be exposed to exciting new
directions in representation theory, geometry, and combinatorics, and will gain
fodder for future projects. The diversity of mathematical researchers and areas
represented at the workshop will foster new collaborations and new research
projects.

In more detail, Springer resolutions of nilpotent cones of semisimple Lie
algebras provide a fertile ground for geometric representation theory. Maulik
and Okounkov introduced a notion of stable envelope in the framework of
symplectic resolutions (with Springer resolutions and quiver varieties as most
important examples), and used it to provide a first geometric construction of
R-matrices and a different construction of Yangians using the equivariant
cohomology in a wide context. Their construction is intimately related to
quantum cohomology of the symplectic resolutions. These subjects have played an
important role in several areas of modern mathematics. Some of the most recent
research directions (such as i-quiver varieties) have emerged only in the last
year or so, and are currently aligning with Maulik-Okounkov's theory. The events
at University of Virginia will provide a timely platform for exchange of
emerging new ideas that will facilitate their further development. The website
of the workshop is http://math.virginia.edu/ims/workshop-fall-2018/.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
