
* 1839457
* International Conference on Mathematics of Data Science
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 11/01/2018,10/29/2018
* Yuesheng Xu,VA,Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Stacey Levine
* 10/31/2019
* USD 15,000.00

Data science is an emerging interdisciplinary field of science and technology.
It aims at developing theory, methods and techniques for extraction of useful
knowledge or insights from raw data in various structured or unstructured forms
such as signal, radar, sounds, images, videos and texts to make smart decisions.
Data science employs theories and methods drawn from many fields within the
broad areas of mathematics, statistics, information science, and computer
science. Mathematics plays an indispensable role in data science. To bring
together active researchers in various fields related to data science and
practitioners in industry to identify mathematical and statistical challenges in
data science, the International Conference on Mathematics of Data Science is
being held on the campus of Old Dominion University on November 3-4, 2018. The
conference website is http://icmds2018.org. The conference invited speakers are
internationally known researchers in the field of data science and will address
critical mathematical issues of the field. The conference will promote research
collaboration among different areas, cultivate research partnership between
academia and industry and, in particular, encourage young talents to work in the
field of data science. The funds will solely be used to support junior
researchers and graduate students in related fields at US universities and
research institutions to attend the conference. This supports the recruitment of
young talent to the field of data science and preparation of the next generation
researchers to meet the scientific challenges in the big data era. Special
efforts are made to recruit graduate students from underrepresented groups such
as African American students and female students for the conference
participants.

The conference will cover mathematical topics crucial to data science. In the
field of data science, mathematics has provided functional spaces to represent
data sets, approximation approaches to characterize similarity and difference of
data sets, optimization methods to extract information from raw data, and
analytical, geometrical tools to describe insightful relationships among various
concepts in data and their statistical analysis. Further development of data
science demands that mathematics play a leading role. For example, it is not yet
fully understood that why deep learning is very efficient for certain
applications while less efficient in other scenarios. This requires mathematical
understanding of the fundamental issues in deep learning. All these issues will
be the focus of the conference. Specifically, its scope covers sparse
representation of big data sets, functional spaces suitable for big data
analysis, mathematical foundation of machine learning, signal image processing,
statistical analysis for big data, convex or non-convex sparse optimization for
data analysis, scalable algorithms for big data and applications of data
science. Scientific and societal broader impacts of this project lie in the
aspects that the conference will promote interaction of mathematics, statistics,
computer science, engineering and industrial applications, which support the
interdisciplinary field of data science, and it will provide a platform for
young scholars to learn about and discuss challenging mathematical issues in the
field.

Website: https://sites.wp.odu.edu/icmds2018/

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
