
* 1840884
* International Collaborative Workshop on Modeling Dynamics, Statistical Inference, and Prediction of Tropical Infectious diseases in India
* DMS,MATHEMATICAL BIOLOGY
* 08/01/2018,08/06/2018
* Anuj Mubayi,AZ,Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2019
* USD 15,000.00

The goal of the project is to support the participation of US faculty, graduate
and undergraduate students in the first international workshop "Indo - U.S.
Workshop on Modeling Dynamics, Statistical Inference and Prediction of
Infectious diseases (MoDSIP-ID)". The workshop will be held at the Sri Sathya
Sai Institute of Higher Learning (SSSIHL), Vidya Giri, Prashanti, Nilayam,
Puttaparthi, Anantapur District, Andhra Pradesh, India from August 12-14, 2018.
This workshop, supported in part by the NSF Mathematical Biology program,
focuses on mathematical modeling and analysis of public health problems from the
developing world and is jointly organized by US and Inidan researchers. The
award provides support for US faculty, graduate and undergraduate students to
travel to India, participate and present at this workshop and as well as to
train and mentor participants. The focus of 2018 MoDSIP workshop is on training
undergraduate and graduate students as well as faculty outside mathematical
biology on analytical and computational techniques (including deterministic and
stochastic modeling theory, statistical inference, uncertainty quantification
methods, data mining tools and high performance computing techniques). The
workshop will provide a platform to encourage discussion, identify new linkages
and foster new international collaborations, advancing mathematical modeling of
infectious tropical diseases in India across multiple biological scales.

MoDSIP-ID is the first workshop in an annual series to promote international (US
and India) scientific collaborations and bring together students and researchers
working at the interface of mathematics, statistics, ecology, epidemiology,
public health and computational science. This event will identify linkages among
population dynamics of tropical infectious disease systems at different scales,
from individuals to ecosystems, and provide the opportunity to discuss and share
some of the successful mathematical, computational, and statistical approaches
in modeling these systems and data. MoDSIP will host approximately 80-100
participants from USA, India and other developing countries. This workshop will
invite participation from women and underrepresented minorities and encourage
them to consider pursuing careers that bridge mathematics and biology. MoDSIP
will cover topics in three different scientific dimensions: mathematical
(stochastic processes, dynamical systems, parameter estimation, computational
modeling, and uncertainty analysis), interdisciplinary (ecology, epidemiology,
infectious diseases), and educational (research methodology, mentoring,
professionalism, team building) via theoretical and hands-on experience. The
interdisciplinary workshop program will include educational training and
research methodology for infectious diseases; computational labs focusing on
challenges in gathering empirical information, statistical data analysis and,
modeling, and simulations of infectious diseases. All participants will engage
in interactive lectures from faculty and graduate students along with hands-on
lab sessions using R, Matlab, Python, and Netlogo. More information can be found
at the https://mcmsc.asu.edu/ and http://sssihl.edu.in/ websites. Dissemination
of workshop results and participant research will occur in a Special Issue of
the Letters in Biomathematics.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
