
* 1848599
* Symposium on Mathematical Aspects of Materials Science - Modeling, Analysis, and Computations 2019
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 04/01/2019,03/27/2019
* Dmitry Golovaty,OH,University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 03/31/2020
* USD 18,000.00

Further developments in modeling of materials science phenomena and training of
the next generation of interdisciplinary scientists are of critical importance
to maintaining U.S. leadership in science and technology. This award provides
support for participants in a symposium entitled "Mathematical Aspects of
Materials Science - Modeling, Analysis, and Computations," to be held during the
Materials Research Society 2019 Spring Meeting and Exhibit in Phoenix, Arizona
on April 22-26, 2019. The four-day symposium will feature twenty invited
presentations by leading mathematicians and materials scientists working on
problems at the intersection of their disciplines. The invited presentations
will be complemented by up to fifty contributed presentations from the members
of both communities; it is anticipated that a significant number of these talks
will be given by researchers in early stages of their careers. This will offer a
unique networking and training opportunity for students and junior researchers
to interact with their senior counterparts working at the cutting edge of the
mathematics of materials. The funding from this award will be used to support a
diverse group of early-career participants from all parts of the scientific
community, including women and minorities. The opportunity to expose their
research by presenting a contributed talk at the premier materials science
gathering and a chance to develop new interdisciplinary collaborations would be
an important step in a career development for young mathematicians.

The symposium will cover a wide range of topics of interest to the larger
materials science community. The principal focus will be on problems related to
structural defects and phase transitions in materials, microstructure and
pattern formation, homogenization, and the relationship between descriptions of
materials at different scales. From the mathematical perspective, the issues
discussed at the symposium will come under the umbrella of nonlinear analysis,
modeling, and computations. The combination of cutting edge materials science
and modern mathematics at the symposium offers a strong chance to further
advance research in both disciplines through cross-penetration of ideas. Details
can be found at https://www.mrs.org/spring2019/symposium-sessions/symposium-
sessions-detail?code=CP09

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
