
* 1852674
* Undergraduate Mathematics Research Conference Series 2019-2021
* DMS,INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
* 01/01/2019,12/21/2018
* Kenneth Roblee,AL,Troy University
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 08/31/2022
* USD 18,621.00

This award supports participation in three meetings of the Troy MathFest
conference series, taking place in Troy, AL in April of 2019, 2020, and 2021.
This is an undergraduate mathematics research conference that includes sessions
for undergraduate presentations (although graduate students and faculty are
welcome to present, too), a poster session, graduate school information session,
a calculus competition, and two invited faculty speakers. The goals of the
conference series are (1) to help participating students develop better
scientific literacy and appreciation by learning new mathematical ideas; (2) to
provide the participants experience in preparing and delivering a presentation;
and (3) to help better prepare the next generation of mathematicians for
graduate school and beyond.

The Troy MathFest is an undergraduate research conference that includes
presentations by students working in a wide range of areas of mathematics. The
conference provides an environment where students from various academic
institutions gather to build collaborations and learn new mathematics from one
another. The conference also provides the opportunity for students to attend
keynote lectures from prominent mathematicians who have records of working with
undergraduates on research. The meeting further provides the opportunity for
students to learn about regional mathematics graduate programs and to connect
with their representatives. The conference concludes with a competitive and
compelling calculus competition, in which students can showcase their skills and
possibly win prizes. More information can be found at the conference series web
site: https://www.troy.edu/mathfest/.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
