
* 1852797
* Number Theory Series in Los Angeles
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 05/01/2019,03/07/2019
* James Brown,CA,Occidental College
* Standard Grant
* Adriana Salerno
* 04/30/2022
* USD 15,001.00

The first meeting of the Number Theory Series in Los Angeles will take place at
Occidental College in Fall, 2019; the second meeting will take place at
Occidental College in February 2020. The third and fourth meeting will take
place in late Fall, 2020 and Spring, 2021 respectively at an institution in
Souther California. More detailed information about dates, local information,
speakers, and schedules will be posted at the conference website: http://jim-
brown.oxycreates.org/NTS-LA. The topic of each meeting is number theory, broadly
construed. The intent of keeping the topic broad is to encourage a more diverse
group of participants in terms of speakers and attendees, and to foster
collaboration amongst those in attendance. Each meeting will feature two plenary
speakers and one graduate student plenary speaker. These plenary speakers will
be chosen from outside of Southern California. Unlike other number theory
meetings in the region, the primary focus of these meetings will be on
contributed talks from mathematicians at all levels from all types of
institutions, including undergraduate and graduate students and faculty at
institutions without regular access to seminars and research funds. The
contributed talks will primarily be given by mathematicians located in Southern
California or a reasonable driving distance.

While there are numerous seminars in the Los Angeles region, faculty at local
institutions without such seminars are often unable to find time to attend these
seminars. In addition, these faculty, along with undergraduate and graduate
students, are often not afforded the opportunity to present their results in
these seminars. A primary goal of the Number Theory Series in Los Angeles is to
present these populations of mathematicians in Southern California with an
opportunity to hear about the latest research from prominent mathematicians from
outside the region, as well as others in the region, and to speak about their
own research. These meetings will foster collaborations among the participants
and create a more tight knit and diverse community of number theorists in
Southern California. NSF funding allows this opportunity to be presented without
significant cost to the participants.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
