
* 1855778
* Spring Institute in Noncommutative Geometry and Operator Algebras 2019
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 04/01/2019,02/06/2019
* Dietmar Bisch,TN,Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 03/31/2020
* USD 47,250.00

This award supports participation, particularly by graduate students and early-
career researchers, in the Spring Institute in Noncommutative Geometry and
Operator Algebras (NCGOA) held at Vanderbilt University from May 3, 2019 to May
9, 2019. The award gives early-career researchers, researchers who are members
of underrepresented groups, and researchers without other sources of support an
opportunity to participate in this conference. The organizing committee is
making efforts to recruit speakers and attendees from these groups to promote
diversity. The conference will focus on common themes and recent developments in
topology, quantum algebra, topological condensed matter physics, subfactor
theory, and quantum information theory.

The topic of the Spring 2019 NCGOA meeting will be "Algebra and Geometry
Quantized and Quantified." The conference will emphasize the interaction among
operator algebras, topology, and quantum physics, in particular mathematical
conformal field theory, topological condensed matter physics, and topological
quantum computing. One of the main goals of the meeting is to explore what
interactions between mathematics and physics should be pursued and what paths
may be open to skirt computational barriers to produce a deeper understanding of
manifolds, quantum physics, subfactors and planar algebras, information theory,
and complexity. NCGOA 2019 will be held in conjunction with the 34th Shanks
Lecture, which will be delivered by Fields Medalist Michael Freedman. More
information can be found at https://my.vanderbilt.edu/ncgoa2019/

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
