
* 1855584
* Rocky Mountain Mathematics Consortium Summer School: Inverse Problems in Imaging
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 05/15/2019,05/09/2019
* Long Lee,WY,University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 04/30/2020
* USD 25,000.00

This award provides participant support to the Rocky Mountain Mathematics
Consortium (RMMC) summer school, to be held in June 2019 at the University of
Wyoming. The summer school provides an intellectually stimulating environment
for graduate students and junior faculty from various backgrounds in the Rocky
Mountain area to learn and discuss immensely important subjects in mathematical
sciences. The RMMC summer school held annually at the University of Wyoming
since 1996. It has a long tradition of encouraging the participation of female
graduate students and early-career researchers in mathematical sciences. The
theme for the 2019 RMMC summer school is "Inverse problems in imaging''. The
program of the 2019 summer school will take place over six days. It will include
short courses on selected topics given by six lecturers. There will be working
group sessions. The working groups will help channel scientific discussions and
the exchange of ideas on open problems and challenges in the area of inverse
problems and its applications in medical and geophysical imaging. The program of
2019 RMMC summer school is split into several topics in inverse problems and
imaging. The topics include regularization methods for inverse problems in
imaging, optical imaging with biomedical applications, electrical impedance
tomography (EIT) and the D-bar method, statistical inference for geophysical
imaging, and integral equations, sampling methods and their applications in
inverse scattering. The invited lecturers are leaders in these fields. The
summer school not only provides an opportunity for young scientists, including
graduate students, postdocs, and junior faculty in the Rocky Mountain area to
interact with some of the best mathematical scientists in inverse problems and
imaging sciences but also introduces the state-of-the-art techniques and
research in inverse problems and image sciences to the Rocky Mountain scientific
community. The web link to the RMMC summer school is
https://www.uwyo.edu/mathstats/rmmc/summer19/index.html.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
