
* 1856716
* Fiftieth Southeastern Conference on Combinatorics, Graph Theory, and Computing
* DMS,Combinatorics
* 02/15/2019,02/04/2019
* Frederick Hoffman,FL,Florida Atlantic University
* Standard Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 01/31/2020
* USD 15,000.00

The 50th Southeastern International Conference on Combinatorics, Graph Theory
and Computing will be held March 4-8, 2019 at Florida Atlantic University in
Boca Raton. This conference has been held annually since 1970, in Baton Rouge,
Louisiana and Boca Raton, Florida. The conference has grown to be the major
annual event in its disciplines and plays a major role in disseminating results
and in fostering collaborative work. It is not unusual for people who discuss
mathematics with each other for the first time at this conference to become
long-term collaborators in combinatorial research. Its stress on the interplay
among the covered topics has continued to be one of the distinctions of the
conference.

Hallmarks of the conference include its mixture of friendly informality and
serious mathematical collaboration among participants, who traditionally include
a large number of students, as well as faculty ranging from new PhDs to very
senior researchers, coming from five or six continents. There is a commitment to
diversity, and wide participation by women. All of this contributes to the
strength, breadth and vitality of the international combinatorics community.

The conference website is at http://www.math.fau.edu/combinatorics2019/

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
