
* 1901444
* South-Central Combinatorics Conference (CombinaTexas) 2019
* DMS,Combinatorics
* 02/15/2019,02/07/2019
* Laura Matusevich,TX,Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 01/31/2020
* USD 8,600.00

The CombinaTexas 2019 conference will be held at Texas A&M University, in
College Station, Texas, on March 23-24, 2019. The conference will take place on
Saturday and Sunday to make it easy for researchers to attend, and will feature
six fifty-minute plenary lectures and a number of twenty-minute contributed
talks. The aim of the CombinaTexas conference series is to enhance the
educational and research atmosphere of combinatorialists in Texas and the
surrounding states, increase communication among mathematicians of the region,
and provide a forum for presentation and discussion of the most recent
developments in the field of Combinatorics. The first CombinaTexas conference
was held in 2000; CombinaTexas 2019 is the eighteenth conference in this series.
Over 65 participants are anticipated in 2019, with 20-25 contributed talks in
parallel sessions. The conference will be publicized using distribution lists
and on related conference websites.

The conference will feature a broad selection of combinatorial research.
Researchers will present their new results and there will be time for open
discussions to explore unsolved problems in the field. The confirmed plenary
speakers are Ira Gessel (Brandeis University), Jessica McDonald (Auburn
University), Criel Merino (UNAM, Mexico), Svetlana Poznanovikj (Clemson
University), Brendon Rhoades (University of California, San Diego), and Joel
Spencer (New York University). More details can be found at the conference
website: http://www.math.tamu.edu/conferences/combinatexas/

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
