
* 1902052
* Collaborative Research: Upstate Number Theory Conference
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 04/01/2019,08/29/2022
* Charles Haessig,NY,University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Adriana Salerno
* 09/30/2023
* USD 14,950.00

This award supports participation in three annual conferences in number theory
held in Upstate New York; the first conference will take place at Cornell
University on April 27-28, 2019, the second conference the University of
Rochester in 2020 and the third conference Union College in Schenectady in 2021.
Binghamton University, the University at Buffalo and Daemen College will play
administrative roles and we expect future conferences to be held in Binghamton
and Buffalo. The investigators represent these six different institutions. The
conference series seeks to have a broader impact in a number of ways. It will
help graduate students and post-docs by exposing them to work of leading
experts, by allowing them to communicate their own research and interests, and
by giving them the chance to interact with experts, among themselves and with
young people from nearby places. It will also allow specialists to disseminate
their ideas to a larger audience.

At the level of faculty research, the conference series will continue to
stimulate collaborations among several specialists in the region, while at the
same time strengthening ties between researchers in Upstate New York and those
near Boston, New York City, Montreal, Philadelphia, Princeton, and Toronto. The
meetings will catalyze the region's research in number theory and will enrich
the opportunities for education and professional development available to junior
researchers in the region. The first conference will be centered on the themes
of arithmetic geometry over finite fields and new directions in automorphic
forms. More information about the conference series can be found at
https://math.cornell.edu/ninth-annual-upstate-number-theory-conference

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
