
* 1902170
* Southeastern Number Theory Meetings
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 08/01/2019,06/23/2022
* Hui Xue,SC,Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 07/31/2023
* USD 15,051.00

In September of 2019, the first of three Southeastern Number Theory Meetings
planned for the 2019-2020 academic year will take place at University of North
Carolina at Charlotte, NC. The local host at UNCC will be Arindam Roy. Clemson
University in Clemson, SC will host the second meeting in December 2019. The
local hosts will be Kevin James and Hui Xue. The third meeting is tentatively
planned for April 2020, with the location to be determined during the meeting on
April 2019. The meetings consist of participant talks on current research in all
areas of number theory, including analytic number theory, arithmetic geometry,
and automorphic and modular forms. These topics reflect the research interests
of number theorists working in the Southeast. Each meeting features plenary
talks by nationally and internationally recognized leaders in the field, invited
talks by graduate students and postdoctoral researchers, and a larger number of
contributed talks by mathematicians at all levels including undergraduate and
graduate students, and junior and senior faculty. Number theorists from outside
the Southeast will give the invited and plenary talks, while regional
researchers will give most of the contributed talks.

A primary purpose of the Southeastern Number Theory Meetings is to regularly
convene Southeastern number theorists at all career stages and from all types of
institutions at low cost to the participants. Participants and speakers include
graduate students, junior faculty, and senior faculty. Efforts will be made to
increase participation of undergraduates. Many participants come from
institutions that do not award Ph.D. degrees. Such participants often have
limited access to travel funds or to research seminars. The Southeastern Number
Theory Meetings serve the purpose of integrating them into the larger research
community. The organizers will also continue to try to attract a demographically
diverse participant base, including women and racial and ethnic minorities. As a
means of engaging undergraduates at host institutions, we will include an
accessible Friday colloquium lecture by one of the plenary speakers. The
Southeastern Number Theory Meetings are designed to both strengthen and
invigorate the number theory community in the Southeast. By working together,
its members can achieve more than by working alone. Further information on these
meetings including the locations, dates, lists of speakers, lists of
participants, and registration information will be linked to the conference home
pages as it becomes available:
http://www.math.sc.edu/~boylan/seminars/pantshome.html and
http://www.math.clemson.edu/~kevja/SERMON.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
