
* 1902042
* Arithmetic of Function Fields and Diophantine Geometry
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 03/15/2019,03/14/2019
* Matthew Papanikolas,TX,Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 02/29/2020
* USD 16,000.00

This award supports mathematicians from US institutions to participate at the
conference Arithmetic of Function Fields and Diophantine Geometry, to be held on
May 20-24, 2019, at the National Center for Theoretical Sciences (NCTS) on the
campus of National Taiwan University in Taipei, Taiwan. The purpose of the
conference will be to bring together both established and junior researchers in
Number Theory from across the globe, and especially researchers in Function
Field Arithmetic, Diophantine Geometry, and related fields. Primary goals will
be to discuss recent advances in these areas and to encourage further research
and future collaboration, and one important aspect of the conference will be to
increase participation of junior researchers. In addition to twenty invited
speakers ranging from established mathematicians to recent Ph.D.'s, the schedule
will include 6-8 contributed talks by graduate students and post-doctoral
researchers. The conference website is
http://www.ncts.ntu.edu.tw/events_2_detail.php?nid=216.

Since early work of Artin and Weil in the last century, it has been known that
the study of function fields of algebraic curves over finite fields in positive
characteristic runs in close analogy with the study of number fields. At the
same time Diophantine geometry also applies techniques from algebraic geometry
to problems in number theory, and so the two subjects are closely intertwined in
their efforts to resolve deep problems in number theory using geometric methods.
The conference will focus on aspects of function field arithmetic and
Diophantine geometry that strengthen common points of view and present
opportunities for cross-pollination of ideas, including modular forms and Galois
representations, special values of L-functions, arithmetic dynamics, and
rational points on varieties. These topics are on the forefront of research in
Number Theory, and there have been several major advances in these areas in
recent years. The conference will afford participants the opportunities to
communicate their research with a broader mathematical community and to initiate
new research projects that advance these important areas of Number Theory.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
