
* 1904332
* Diophantine Approximation and Value Distribution Theory at the interface of Arithmetic and Complex Hyperbolic Geometry: A Research Workshop with Minicourse
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 03/01/2019,02/15/2019
* Aaron Levin,MI,Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* michelle manes
* 02/29/2020
* USD 15,000.00

This proposal will facilitate US participation in the international workshop
"Diophantine Approximation and Value Distribution Theory at the interface of
Arithmetic and Complex Hyperbolic Geometry: a research workshop with
minicourse". The event will be held at the University of Quebec at Montreal
(UQAM), Montreal, QC, during the time period 13-17 May 2019. The workshop will
center around spectacular recent progress in directions that are fundamental to
the classification, arithmetic, and moduli of projective varieties, including
topics in Diophantine approximation, value distribution theory, and hyperbolic
geometry. The workshop will bring together researchers of all levels to discuss
and exchange ideas across diverse, but interrelated, fields, and allow for
recent results to be disseminated and studied in detail. A highlight of the
workshop is the presentation of two minicourses to be given by Professors Pietro
Corvaja and Ariyan Javanpeykar. Specific topics of interest for the workshop
include Diophantine approximation, rational points and holomorphic curves,
hyperbolicity of moduli spaces, and direct images of pluricanonical sheaves. A
primary goal is to focus on advances in and around the main conjectures of Vojta
and Lang, with emphasis on results that have consequences for the arithmetic and
hyperbolic geometry of orbifolds, moduli spaces and nearby geometric objects.
Discussing these topics in tandem will facilitate cross-pollination of ideas and
strengthen existing interactions between these areas. More details can be found
on the conference webpage: http://cirget.uqam.ca/Diophantine//en/index.html

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
