
* 1904501
* Summer Programs on Commutative Algebra and Its Interactions with Algebraic Geometry and on p-adic L-functions and Eigenvarieties
* DMS,INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM, ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 06/15/2019,07/09/2020
* Samuel Evens,IN,University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 05/31/2023
* USD 99,360.00

The Center for Mathematics at the University of Notre Dame will run a 2019
program on Commutative Algebra and Its Interactions with Algebraic Geometry and
a 2020 program on p-adic L-functions and Eigenvarieties. In 2019, the program
will consist of an undergraduate summer school from May 28 to June 1, a graduate
level summer school from June 3 to June 14, and an international research
conference from June 16 to June 21. In 2020, the program will consist of a one
week undergraduate summer school, a one week graduate level summer school, and a
one week conference. The purpose of the programs is to introduce students at
various levels to important ideas in commutative algebra and in number theory,
which are both active and central areas of mathematics with many connections to
other areas of mathematics and to science. The goal of the undergraduate week is
to expose undergraduates to fundamental ideas they would not normally see until
graduate school. We will introduce material through a combination of lectures
and active learning sessions, with the aim of inspiring students to take
advanced courses or reading courses when they return to university. The graduate
summer schools are geared towards graduate students in the field, and will be
followed by a conference which will present current research on topics developed
in the earlier weeks. The goal is to inspire graduate students to explore
connections between different areas of mathematics, beyond the level they may
see in their own graduate program. We also hope to bring together graduate
students and postdocs from different institutions so they can develop productive
professional relationships. We note that many students from previous Center for
Mathematics at Notre Dame programs have gone on to get a Ph.D. in mathematics.

The goal of the program Commutative Algebra and Its Interactions with Algebraic
Geometry is to educate undergraduates and to bring together researchers
interested in the area. The first week will introduce useful techniques and
examples amenable to calculation. The graduate summer school will introduce
cutting edge topics and computational tools using the Macaulay2 program, and the
conference will emphasize exciting new research developments. The topics for the
2020 program on p-adic L-functions and Eigenvarieties are not completely set,
but will include an interactive program for students, and advanced topics such
as the Iwasawa main conjecture, the exceptional zero conjecture, and
eigenvarieties.

The program website is available at
www3.nd.edu/~cmnd/programs/https://centerformath.nd.edu/scientific-events-and-
programs/

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
