
* 1907926
* Statistical Analysis of Neural Data (SAND9)
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 03/15/2019,03/08/2019
* Robert Kass,PA,Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 02/29/2020
* USD 20,000.00

The ninth international workshop on Statistical Analysis of Neural Data (SAND9)
will take place May 21-23, 2019, in Pittsburgh, PA. Its purpose is to define
important challenges in the analysis of neural data and useful strategies for
attacking them. SAND9 will bring together neurophysiologists, statisticians,
mathematicians, engineers, physicists, and computer scientists who are
interested in quantitative analysis of neural data. The meeting will include 8
keynote lectures, with 5 invited discussants, 12 lectures by junior
investigators chosen competitively based on abstract submissions, a poster
session, and a panel discussion of emerging challenges across several areas of
brain science. SAND9 is the ninth workshop in a series that began in 2002. The
workshops are held during the spring at the Center for the Neural Basis of
Cognition, run jointly by Carnegie Mellon University and the University of
Pittsburgh. Like past SAND meetings, SAND9 aims to foster communication between
experimental neuroscientists and those trained in statistical and computational
methods; to encourage young researchers to present their work and get feedback
from more senior investigators; and to include as participants women, under-
represented minorities, and persons with disabilities, who might benefit from
the small workshop environment.

Experimental methods for discovering the neural basis of behavior have been
advancing rapidly and, as a result, brain data sets are increasing in size and
complexity. Methods for better understanding such rich data sets, which can
enable design of ever-more informative experiments, are desperately needed. This
workshop series is concerned with identifying, discussing, and disseminating
many of the most promising approaches to analysis of neural data of all kinds,
including data obtained from microscopy, electrophysiology, calcium imaging,
circuit stimulation, and neuroimaging. More details are available at
http://sand.stat.cmu.edu/

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
