
* 1914741
* A National Introductory Colloquium and Undergraduate Research Experience in Mathematical Biology
* DMS,MATHEMATICAL BIOLOGY
* 08/01/2020,10/15/2020
* Janet Best,OH,Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Amina Eladdadi
* 07/31/2023
* USD 74,647.00

This program will provide virtual colloquia for students at Historically Black
Colleges and Universities (HBCUs) that include robust scientific discussions and
interactions between the speaker and the students and between the students at
the different HBCUs. Additionally, this proposal aims to impact both the
students and the faculty members at HBCUs. By engaging the HBCU faculty members
as partners in the project, the goal is to create pipelines for the HBCU
students to graduate schools and to establish and enhance working relationships
and networking between HBCU faculty members and faculty members at large
research institutions. If these two innovative ideas are successful, they will
have a broad impact. This research project emphasizes mathematical biology, but
the same ideas should work in other branches of pure and applied mathematics,
and in other scientific disciplines as well. In making the virtual colloquia as
interactive as a classroom, the project will have created a template for faculty
at other research universities to participate in and enhance the training of
undergraduates at HBCUs, and that, in and of itself, will create pipelines from
the HBCUs to the research institutions, both for students and for faculty. The
methods and the template could then be used by other groups of mathematicians or
scientists to enhance the training of students at the other HBCUs at low cost.

The project has three goals: to encourage undergraduate students at the HBCUs to
go to graduate school in the STEM disciplines; to connect faculty in analysis
and mathematical biology at the HBCUs to faculty and research programs at The
Ohio State University (OSU) and other large research institutions; to experiment
with virtual colloquia and virtual teaching techniques in mathematics. Faculty
members at six HBCUs will each recruit 2-3 students to participate in the year-
long program that includes a meet-and-greet workshop at Howard University, where
they will meet the PIs and some of the speakers and hear mathematical biology
lectures. Through the academic year, the students receive 7 introductory
colloquia in which the speakers sit in their home office and the broadband
facilities of the Mathematical Biosciences Institute (MBI) are used to broadcast
the colloquium simultaneously to the six HBCUs. The MBI facilities permit
questions and answers and discussions in real time during the talk. Materials
prepared by the speakers provide follow-up activities that will be mentored by
the local faculty members. The year concludes with a 10-day workshop at OSU that
will be both a research experience for the students and collaboration events for
the faculty. For the students, there will be panel discussions on academic and
non-academic jobs and graduate school. For faculty research engagement, ten
mathematical biology faculty members at OSU, in addition to some speakers, have
agreed to include an HBCU faculty member in their current research program.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
