
* 1915926
* Model Theory and Mathematical Logic
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS
* 05/01/2019,04/10/2019
* David Kueker,MD,University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 04/30/2022
* USD 27,350.00

The international conference, titled Model Theory and Mathematical Logic, will
take place at the University of Maryland College Park on June 21st to June 23rd,
2019. The main purpose of this conference is to bring together many leading
researchers in the field of model theory from around the world. The conference
is expected to consist of approximately seventeen talks over the span of three
days. Although the talks will generally be aimed for logicians, some of these
talks will be accessible to researchers outside of mathematical logic.
Furthermore, a poster session is planned at the conference where students and
early career researchers can present their work.

The conference aims to focus on areas of model theory which have not been the
emphasis of any major conference in North America for the last several years.
The main topics that may be covered in the conference include: stability theory,
simplicity theory, and neo-stability theory; model theory and computability
theory; model theory and combinatorics; model theory in non-first order
contexts; and model theory and set theory. More information about this
conference can be found on the conference website, http://www.umdlogic2019.com/.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
