
* 1916466
* Conference on Finite Geometry and Extremal Combinatorics
* DMS,Combinatorics
* 05/01/2019,04/03/2019
* Qing Xiang,DE,University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 04/30/2020
* USD 31,376.00

This award will provide support for the conference "Finite Geometry and Extremal
Combinatorics" which will be held at University of Delaware from August 21 to
August 24, 2019. The conference will focus on finite geometry, extremal
combinatorics, and their interactions with other subareas of combinatorics.
Combinatorics is an area of mathematics primarily concerned with properties of
finite structures. It is closely related to many other areas of mathematics and
has many applications ranging from logic to statistical physics, from
evolutionary biology to computer science, etc.

The goal of this conference is to bring together researchers from finite
geometry and extremal combinatorics in one setting to discuss recent
developments. It is expected that there will be considerable cross-fertilization
of ideas leading to people learning new problems and new techniques from each
other. The conference will feature seven invited speakers who are leading
experts in the aforementioned areas of combinatorics. There also will be 18
contributed talks. Particular efforts will be made by the PI and the co-PIs to
encourage junior and/or female researchers to attend and speak at this
conference. Further details about the conference can be found at the conference
website https://www.mathsci.udel.edu/fgec19

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
