
* 1917863
* Undergraduate Knot Theory Conference 2019
* DMS,INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM, TOPOLOGY
* 06/15/2019,06/15/2019
* Jennifer McLoud-Mann,WA,University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Krishnan Shankar
* 05/31/2020
* USD 35,000.00

This award supports participation in the Undergraduate Knot Theory Conference
2019, held at the University of Washington Bothell on July 19-21, 2019. Knot
theory is a field very amenable to research by undergraduates; a variety of REU
(Research Experiences for Undergraduates) programs in mathematics have a knot
theory component. Moreover, many faculty members would like to involve students
in undergraduate research in knot theory. This conference will bring together
experts in knot theory with undergraduates who are either currently
participating in knot theory REUs, undergraduates who have participated in knot
theory research, current graduate students who participated as undergraduates in
knot theory research, and perhaps most importantly, faculty who either have
involved undergraduates in knot theory research or who would like to involve
undergraduates.

This conference provides an opportunity for students to experience a mathematics
research conference specifically designed for and directed toward them. As a
centerpiece, the conference features a collective problem session to give
participants numerous ideas for future research directions. Moreover, the
conference will establish a supportive network of students and faculty with an
interest in knot theory research, thus furthering the involvement of students in
the field of mathematics.

The conference URL is https://sites.google.com/view/unknot-iv/home

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
