
* 1919555
* Fall 2019 Mathematics Conference: Differential Equations and Dynamical Systems and Applications
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2019,07/30/2019
* Anna Ghazaryan,OH,Miami University
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 07/31/2020
* USD 11,552.00

Many natural phenomena and man-made processes are described mathematically by
differential equations. Differential Equations and Dynamical Systems as an area
of mathematics is rooted in the work of Newton and Leibniz in the 17th century.
This very active area of mathematics continues to evolve and grow as a response
to the demands of applications. To promote the progress of this branch of
mathematics, it is important to maintain the influx of diverse groups of young
researchers into the related research: this is the principal goal of the
Conference supported by this award.

On September 20th through 21st of 2019, the Department of Mathematics of Miami
University in Oxford, Ohio, will hold a conference on Differential Equations and
Dynamical Systems and their Applications. In conjunction with the conference
there will be a meeting devoted to research presentations by undergraduate
students celebrating the Ohio Delta Chapter of Pi Mu Epsilon (a national
mathematics student honor society). The main goals of the conference are to
inspire the new generation of mathematicians by exposing students to cutting-
edge research in the area of Differential Equations and Dynamical Systems,
foster collaborations between participants, and encourage diversity of this
research community. A broad range of topics will be presented in invited talks
by Nancy Rodriguez (University of Colorado-Boulder), Bjorn Sandstede (Brown
University), Arnd Scheel (University of Minnesota), and Todd Young (Ohio
University). A series of parallel talks will provide an opportunity for the
participants to present their research results. Participation of minorities and
women is encouraged. Detailed information about the venue and the program is
available at the following website:
https://miamioh.edu/cas/academics/departments/mathematics/about/events/annual-
mathematics-conference/index.html

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
