
* 1930036
* US Participation at the Twenty-sixth Internaltional Domain Decomposition Conference
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2019,07/16/2019
* Jinchao Xu,PA,Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 01/31/2021
* USD 15,000.00

Scientific computing is an important and general interdisciplinary research
field and plays a crucial role in many application areas in science and
engineering. In recent years, there has been tremendous growth in both the need
for large-scale scientific computing and the amount of computing power, thanks
to new high performance computing (HPC) clusters with millions of cores. Domain
decomposition methods represent one of the most powerful and versatile
techniques for the efficient parallel solution of such large-scale scientific
problems. The goal of the current project is to provide financial support for
US-based early career researchers, i.e., graduate students and post-docs, to
attend the 26th International Conference on Domain Decomposition Methods, to be
held in Hong Kong from December 2-6, 2019. The conference is part of a series
that is considered one of the most successful in Applied and Computational
Mathematics. The NSF-funded US participants will benefit from learning about
cutting-edge developments in domain decomposition methods and latest worldwide
trends in high performance computing. They will also have the opportunity to
develop new collaborations with other researchers from Asia and around the
world. The proposal will support up to 10 participants to travel to this
workshop and some of these 10 are expected to be graduate students at US
universities.

Domain decomposition methods (DDM) can be regarded as a divide-and-conquer
strategy for solving mathematical problems posed in a physical domain, reducing
a large problem into many smaller, but easier-to-solve, problems. They are
particularly suited for making efficient use of distributed memory
architectures, which are able to solve many such smaller problems in parallel.
As we approach the dawn of exascale computing, such scalable techniques are
vital tools for solving complex problems in physics and engineering that would
otherwise be intractable. Since 1987, the International Conferences of Domain
Decomposition Methods have been held in 15 countries throughout Asia, Europe and
North America. In this conference, now in its 26th edition, researchers in
domain decomposition and related fields will present and discuss state-of-the-
art methodologies and developments and propose future directions in high
performance computing. Early career researchers will be able to participate in
one of three ways: as speakers at a minisymposium organized by fellow
participants, by giving a contributed talk, or by presenting a poster. The NSF-
funded US participants, consisting of graduate students, postdocs and other
early career researchers who lack their own funding, will benefit from learning
new developments in domain decomposition methods and latest trends in high
performance computing. MOre details are available at the conference website:
https://www.math.cuhk.edu.hk/conference/dd26/?Conference-Home

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
