
* 1931844
* Symposium on Computational Modeling and Image Processing of Biomedical Problems
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2019,07/22/2019
* Zhengfu Xu,MI,Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 07/31/2020
* USD 15,000.00

Title: Symposium on Computational Modeling and Image Processing of Biomedical
Problems Conference location: Michigan Technological University (MTU) Date: June
15-17, 2019 Website: http://pages.mtu.edu/~zhengfux/Overview.htm.

From the discovery of penicillin (1928) to Human Genome Project (1990),
breakthroughs in medicine have greatly impacted billions of people on earth.
Among them, developments of medical imaging techniques such as x-ray imaging,
computed tomography (CT) scans, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), and a variety
of other radiological imaging techniques have allowed the examination of the
internal condition of the body without the use of invasive surgical procedures.
Furthermore, medical imaging technologies are being increasingly used to provide
guidance for surgery, biopsy, and radiation therapy in real-time. We are now on
the cusp of another breakthrough era, given the availability of data,
computational power, and novel computing methodology such as artificial
intelligence, thereby potentially elevating human healthcare to a level never
seen before. Mathematics, particularly, computational and applied mathematics,
plays a foundational role in the projected advancement.

The primary focus of the proposed interdisciplinary symposium is to provide an
update on recent important contributions to computational and numerical methods
in biomedical problems. Applying novel mathematics and modeling techniques to
extract new or additional information from complex bio-medical datasets are
particularly encouraged. Topics of interest include mathematical and computing
methods and their immediate applications in the following areas: a) Novel
mathematical image formation/reconstruction/processing methods and their
applications in biomedical problems; b)Novel mathematical algorithms enabling
multi-scale and multi-physics simulation related to biomedical problems;c)
Scientific visualization and analytics of (BIG) biomedical data; d) Novel
machine learning and statistical analysis methods and their application in (BIG)
biomedical data. One of the main challenges when integrating mathematics into
biomedical sciences is overcoming existing barriers. Unfamiliarity with
biomedical language, distinct disciplinary-bound approaches to research in the
mathematics community, and 'artificial' academic boundaries aimed at 'preserving
subject integrity' can hinder developments in this line of interdisciplinary
research. The secondary objective of this symposium is to provide a platform so
that intelligent exchanges among applied mathematicians, biomedical engineers,
and clinical scientists can take place, fostering interdisciplinary
collaborations. A concerted effort will be made to include underrepresented
students and early and middle-career mathematicians in the symposium. Using
existing resources available at the Michigan Technological University, the
organizers will work together with the Center of Diversity and Inclusion and
other partners to recruit students who are typically from economically-
disadvantageous backgrounds to attend this symposium. In addition, it is planned
to create a future network of support and interaction among participants to
enable further research and collaboration.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
