
* 1933327
* CBMS Conference: K-theory of Operator Algebras and Its Applications to Geometry and Topology
* DMS,INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
* 01/01/2020,10/22/2019
* Guihua Gong,PR,University of Puerto Rico-Rio Piedras
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 12/31/2022
* USD 37,958.00

This award provides support for the NSF/CBMS regional conference: K-theory of
operator algebras and its applications to geometry and topology, to be held
during August 17-21, 2020 at the University of Puerto Rico at Rio Piedras. The
principal speaker is Guoliang Yu, Powell Chair in Mathematics and University
Distinguished professor at Texas A&M University. There will also be lectures on
complementary topics delivered by invited speakers. In the last decade, there
have been exciting developments in this field of research with applications to
several areas of mathematics. The principle speaker and his collaborators have
made significant contributions to introducing and studying new concepts. The
conference lectures will highlight the recent advances, identify promising new
research directions, and help a diverse group of students and early career
mathematicians navigate to the frontier of this exciting yet challenging
research field. K-theory is a unifying theme in several important areas of
mathematics including operator algebras, geometry, topology, and number theory.
K-groups are receptacles for both primary and secondary invariants of elliptic
operators. Guoliang Yu and his coauthors have made several significant
contributions to introducing and studying these invariants and developing new
tools such as quantitative/controlled K-theory and localization algebra. Yu,
Weinberger, and Xie recently solved the long standing open problem regarding
additivity of higher rho invariants. This result has important applications to
non-rigidity of manifolds. Yu-Guentner-Tessera developed a theory of geometric
complexity to prove the stable Borel conjecture on rigidity of manifolds when
the geometric complexity is finite. This CBMS lecture series will be designed to
be a friendly introduction to these recent developments. For more information,
see the conference website- https://math.uprrp.edu/nfs_cbms_uprrp/

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
