
* 1936054
* 2019 Field of Dreams Conference
* DMS,INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
* 08/01/2019,07/18/2019
* David Goldberg,IN,Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 07/31/2020
* USD 50,000.00

This award will partially support the 2019 Field of Dreams Conference, to be
held at the Renaissance St. Louis Airport Hotel, in St. Louis, MO, November
15-17, 2019. The Field of Dreams Conference is organized by the Math Alliance,
an organization whose goal is to increase the number of students from
backgrounds underrepresented in the mathematical sciences who earn doctorates in
those fields. Approximately 200 undergraduate and terminal MS students will
attend the conference, and about 75% of those will be underrepresented
minorities. All funds from this award will be used to pay the cost of attendance
for some of these students. The conference coordinates with the Math Alliance's
Facilitated Graduate Admissions Process (F-GAP), which has helped place an
average of about 80 Math Alliance Scholars per year in graduate programs the
last six years with very good retention to this point. The conference is an
essential part of a program to produce a more diverse professional mathematical
workforce. In addition, there are events at the conference which assist faculty
in mentoring practices and help academic departments transform their cultures to
be more inclusive and supportive of student success.

The Field of Dreams conference has several purposes, including: providing
information about all aspects of the mathematical sciences professions to
students wishing to pursue doctoral studies; providing information about summer
research programs and opportunities at the NSF-funded Mathematical Sciences
Institutes; facilitating appropriate placement of Math Alliance students in
graduate programs; providing professional development in mentoring and cultural
competence for our Math Alliance faculty; and serving as a clearinghouse for
employment opportunities for new (and recent) Math Alliance doctoral recipients.
More information about the Math Alliance is available at www.mathalliance.org.
Material from previous years' conferences, are available at
https://mathalliance.org/field-of-dreams-conference/, and the page for the 2019
conference is https://mathalliance.org/2019-field-of-dreams-conference/.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
