
* 1936051
* Hudson River Undergraduate Mathematics Conference 2020-2022
* DMS,INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
* 10/01/2019,07/17/2019
* Kursad Tosun,NY,Siena College
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 09/30/2022
* USD 11,769.00

This award supports the participants of the Hudson River Undergraduate
Mathematics Conference to be held in the month of April of 2020, 2021, and 2022.
This conference, first held in 1994, will continue to serve students and faculty
from a diverse list of universities, colleges, and community colleges in the
Northeast. The goals of the conference are to motivate undergraduate students,
in particular underrepresented groups and women, at all levels to attend and
participate in a professional conference of the mathematical sciences; to
provide students with an opportunity to learn about the community of
mathematical scientists by interacting and networking with peers and faculty;
and to provide a venue where undergraduates, share their scholarship, and
practice communicating through preparing and presenting talks. This conference
is distinctive because it explicitly aims to involve first-year and sophomore
students as participants and because it is free to attendees. It is thus able to
nourish the mathematical growth and collaborative experience of students and
faculty at institutions that do not have the funds for conference expenses. The
conferences will include two panels: one on how to make the most of one's
college career and the other on career choices both in and out of academia. The
atmosphere of the conference is exciting and encouraging and conference surveys
have shown again and again that the experience of attending and/or presenting at
the conference is key to retaining and encouraging students in the mathematical
sciences. The problem-solving, reasoning, and communication skills developed at
these conferences are transferable and will prepare students to solve larger
societal issues.

These three one-day conferences will each bring together 300-350 students and
faculty from the mathematical sciences. Students, under the mentorship of
faculty members, will give most (approximately 80%) of the 15 minute
presentations which are organized into three 1- hour session times each with
multiple parallel sessions organized by subject. All conference participants
will come together for an hour long keynote speech given by a well-known
mathematical scientist followed by a working lunch and two informative lunchtime
panels. The conference organizers have an assessment plan to modify the
conference's evaluation tool and to centralize storage and access of conference
data and an outreach plan to increase participation by members of
underrepresented groups and to include first and second year students, as well
as high school students and their teachers. Through the preparation and
presentation of talks, students learn to take complex mathematical ideas and
present them in clear, understandable terms. In short, they are gaining first-
hand experience on how mathematical scientists interact and communicate in order
to further their understanding. More information regarding this conference can
be found at www.skidmore.edu/hrumc.htm

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
