
* 1938935
* ISBA 2020: 15th World Meeting of the International Society for Bayesian Analysis -- June 29-July 3, 2020
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 01/01/2020,12/16/2019
* Li Ma,NC,Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 12/31/2021
* USD 30,000.00

This award supports travel for participants in the 2020 World Meeting of the
International Society for Bayesian Analysis (ISBA) held in Kunming, China, June
29 - July 3, 2020. The conference themes include theory, modeling, and
applications in Bayesian statistics. The grant provides support for graduate
students and postdoctoral researchers from U.S.-based institutions to travel to
the conference. Particular emphasis is given to supporting women and members of
underrepresented groups.

Statisticians play a critical role in the analysis of noisy, complex data that
are used to make scientific discoveries as well as practical decisions under
uncertainty. Bayesian statistics provides a coherent framework that facilitates
integrating information from different sources and communicates findings and
conclusions using probabilities. As a result, Bayesian approaches have been
widely adopted in a variety of modern applications in areas such as biology,
physics, psychology, economics, finance, environmental science, and engineering,
along with many others. Bayesian models and methods are also the foundation for
many recent developments in machine learning and artificial intelligence. The
2020 ISBA World Meeting brings together the diverse international community of
researchers and practitioners who develop and use Bayesian statistical methods
for sharing recent findings, exchanging ideas, and discussing new, challenging
problems. The international meeting exposes participants to ideas and colleagues
from other countries, with whom they may not ordinarily interact. Participation
in the conference will help inform junior statisticians about the key problems
and methods that shape research in modern Bayesian statistics and provide them
with opportunities to learn from more established researchers and to build
collaborative relationships.

Additional information is available on the meeting web page
https://bayesian.org/isba2020-home/

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
