
* 1951535
* Seminar on Stochastic Processes (SSP) 2020
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 02/15/2020,11/14/2019
* Yimin Xiao,MI,Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Pawel Hitczenko
* 12/31/2020
* USD 46,072.00

The Seminar on Stochastic Processes 2020 will be held at Michigan State
University in East Lansing, Michigan, on 5-7 March 2020. These seminars have
been held annually since 1981. They have become a crucially important regular
conference series for probabilists in North America, bringing together a diverse
group of accomplished researchers, early-career investigators, and graduate
students in probability and stochastic processes. The primary goal of SSP 2020
is to provide a platform for the dissemination of the most recent significant
progress in research, and to enable participants to discuss their work with
others. The five scholars who will be the main speakers at SSP 2020 were chosen
for their prominence as researchers in stochastic processes, and for the breadth
of their research areas as a group, to maximize the participants' exposure. SSP
2020 will include additional activities intended especially for new researchers
and they will take the form of two 90-minute tutorial lectures delivered by a
speaker selected by the Probability Subcommittee of the IMS New Researchers
Committee and a panel discussion on topics of particular interest to early-
career researchers. This conference will be an extraordinary opportunity for
students and early-career researchers to learn the latest developments in
probability and related topics, and to interact with leading researchers.

Financial support to attend the conference will preferentially be given to
graduate students, postdocs, women, and other under-represented or marginalized
groups, as well as to early-career faculty who may not otherwise be able to
attend the conference. The topics covered in this edition of SSP will include
Brownian motion and Levy processes, stochastic analysis, stochastic partial
differential equations, random matrix theory, fractional Brownian motion and
rough path theory, random media, and application to fluid mechanics, statistical
physics, climate science, and mathematical biology. More information will be
curated and kept at the conference webpage:
https://stt.natsci.msu.edu/events/ssp2020/

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
