
* 1954271
* Support for 6th International Conference on Establishment Statistics; June 15-18, 2020; New Orleans, LA
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 02/01/2020,12/20/2019
* Donna LaLonde,VA,American Statistical Association
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 01/31/2022
* USD 18,000.00

The International Conference on Establishment Statistics-VI (ICES-VI) will take
place June 15-18, 2020 in New Orleans, Louisiana. A nation's official statistics
is directly affected by the quality of the data derived from its business,
economic and agricultural surveys. Unlike the situation for social and
demographic surveys, there are too few commonly accepted and practiced
methodologies for these surveys. The most important reasons for this situation
are that establishment surveys face much more difficult design and execution
problems and that far less is published on strategies to solve these problems.
ICES was created to address this situation by providing a venue for researchers
to share their expertise in new areas of establishment statistics and to reflect
on state-of-the-art methodologies.

The International Conference on Establishment Surveys (ICES) provides a forum to
present current methods being used for surveys of businesses, farms, and
institutions; to offer new or improved technologies for solving the unique
problems associated with such establishment surveys; and to promote
international interchange of ideas by providing an opportunity for researchers
around the world to discuss their work and to exchange ideas for
interdisciplinary and cross-country research. The survey world has continued to
change in the four years since the last conference. There are increased
possibilities for electronic communication, reductions in response rates, and
greater opportunities to harmonize international data. During this conference
leading experts and emerging researchers will have an opportunity to discuss
these timely and important topics. The conference website is:
https://ww2.amstat.org/meetings/ices/2020/index.cfm.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
