
* 2000033
* Richmond Area Mathematical Sciences Conference at Virginia Commonwealth University
* DMS,INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
* 12/15/2019,12/18/2019
* Dewey Taylor,VA,Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 05/31/2023
* USD 6,060.00

Richmond Area Mathematical Sciences Conference at Virginia Commonwealth
University (RAMS Conference at VCU) will be held on Saturday, March 28, 2020.
The conference will be free to all participants and will promote education and
research in the fields of mathematics, applied mathematics, statistics and
operations research. The conference will be specifically tailored for
undergraduate and graduate students to present results of their research and to
allow students at all levels to interact with and learn from each other. Faculty
mentors will have an opportunity to observe and network with peers, find
potential collaborators, and discuss best practices to mentor undergraduate
students in research.

The Richmond Area Mathematical Sciences Conference at Virginia Commonwealth
University will establish a tradition of attracting active undergraduate
researchers and faculty mentors from Virginia and the whole mid-Atlantic region.
The opportunity for personal interaction among students and between students and
faculty will be a hallmark of this conference. Such interactions enhance the
research infrastructure and are essential for the success of research. We
estimate that women and minorities (who are currently underrepresented in
mathematical research) will account for around half of the participants who will
be supported by this grant. The conference website is
https://math.vcu.edu/rams/.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
