
* 2000214
* Annual Spring Institute on Non-Commutative Geometry and Operator Algebra 2020
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 04/01/2020,05/10/2022
* Jesse Peterson,TN,Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 03/31/2023
* USD 45,000.00

This award provides funding to help defray the expenses of participants in the
Annual Spring Institute in Noncommutative Geometry and Operator Algebras (NCGOA)
to be held at Vanderbilt University in Nashville, Tennessee from May 1 to 7,
2020. The topic for this workshop is Connes? embedding problem and quantum
information theory.

Over the last 40 years Connes' embedding problem has emerged as one of the most
important problems in operator algebras. It has found equivalent versions (many
of them quite unexpected) in almost all specializations within operator
algebras. One notable equivalent formulations is Tsirelson?s Problem from
quantum information theory. The conference will feature several mini-courses and
research talks on these topics. This institute is especially timely as a
solution to Connes' embedding problem has recently been announced (with a proof
using techniques from quantum information theory), and the institute will
provide a venue for the mathematical community to learn about, and help form a
consensus as to the validity of, the announced proof. The proposed speakers are
world leaders of their fields, and it is expected that the conference will
germinate new international based interactions between operator algebras and
quantum information theory.

Additional information about the institute can be found on the website
https://my.vanderbilt.edu/ncgoa20/

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
