
* 2002442
* Conference on Artin Groups, CAT(0) Geometry, and Related Topics
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 03/15/2020,03/10/2020
* Michael Davis,OH,Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 02/28/2022
* USD 36,000.00

This award provides partial support for participation by US-based mathematicians
at the international conference "Artin Groups, CAT(0) Geometry, and Related
Topics" to be held at the CIRM (Centre International de Rencontres
Mathematiques) in Luminy, France from June 1-5 of 2020. This international
meeting on geometric group theory is expected to have about 80-85 participants.
The organizers will make a special effort to include a diverse group of graduate
students and postdocs, and the program will incorporate mechanisms for
encouraging their interaction with more established mathematicians. The subject
of the conference can be broadly described as using geometric methods to study
algebraic objects. More specifically, the idea is to study groups by realizing
them as groups of symmetries of some space, then to use geometric features of
the space such as curvature to draw conclusions about the group. This subject,
called geometric group theory, has expanded dramatically in recent years and is
now a major current in mathematics.

This conference will highlight the interaction between two main themes in
geometric group theory: Artin groups on the one hand, and CAT(0) geometry on the
other. Perhaps the most well-known examples of Artin groups are the braid
groups. The study of Artin groups touches on many different fields, including
low-dimensional topology, singularity theory, algebraic topology, and
mathematical physics. CAT(0) spaces were introduced as a synthetic analog of
non-positively curved manifolds. The symmetry groups of CAT(0) spaces turn out
to have strong algebraic properties, making them an ideal tool for geometric
group theory. Although Artin groups and CAT(0) geometry and their strong
relationship will be the unifying theme of the conference, related topics such
as Coxeter groups, three-dimensional manifolds, automorphisms of free groups,
and mapping class groups will also be included in order to enrich exchanges
between participants and inspire ideas for new research projects. Details of the
conference and registration information may be found at
https://conferences.cirm-math.fr/2159.html.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
