
* 2002676
* Student workshop in symplectic and contact geometry
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 04/01/2020,04/22/2022
* Eleny-Nicoleta Ionel,CA,Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 03/31/2026
* USD 62,944.00

This award provides support for the next three editions of the Kylerec Student
Workshop (2020, 2021 and 2022), starting with its 2020 edition to be held from
July 20 to July 24 in Big Bear Lake, CA. The Kylerec workshop aims to introduce
aspiring mathematicians in the fields of symplectic and contact geometry and
from many institutions to vibrant areas of research, fostering collaboration,
forming strong research ties between young researchers, and thus promoting
future collaboration and research. The workshop is specifically designed to
encourage the development of a diverse group of researchers in the fields of
symplectic and contact geometry. It is a week-long intensive workshop, in which
all activities occur under one roof. The lectures are delivered by the graduate
student participants with the help of three to four mentors, who are emerging
expert researchers in the field. This setup enhances communication skills,
encourages active involvement of the participants and forging new
collaborations.

The student organizers for the 2020 Kylerec workshop are Orsola Capovilla-Searle
(Duke University), Dahye Cho (Stony Brook University), Francois-Simon Fauteux-
Chapleau (Stanford University), Tim Large (MIT) and Sarah McConnell (Stanford
University). The topic is Quantitative Symplectic Geometry, with a focus on
symplectic embedding problems. The deceptively simple question of when does one
symplectic manifold embed inside another, and the subtle dependance of this
question on quantitative parameters, has been a focal point of the subject for
the last thirty years. Since Gromov's celebrated non-squeezing result, a variety
of techniques drawing upon ideas in dynamical systems, toric algebraic geometry
and four-dimensional gauge theory have been used to better understand such
problems; yet a systematic understanding has eluded researchers thus far. The
objective of the 2020 Kylerec workshop is to understand the current state of
knowledge on such questions, covering both the methods researchers have
developed to produce surprising symplectic embeddings, as well as the technical
tools of Floer theory and embedded contact homology that have been used to
provide state-of-the-art obstructions to the existence of a symplectic
embedding. The web site for the Kylerec workshops is
https://kylerec.wordpress.com/.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
