
* 2003536
* Geometric Representation Theory: A Double Conference
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 05/01/2020,02/15/2023
* Carl Mautner,CA,University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 04/30/2024
* USD 18,750.00

The conference "Geometric Representation Theory" will take place June 22-26,
2020 and will have a novel format, in that it will be held simultaneously in two
locations: at the Perimeter Institute in Waterloo, Canada and also the Max
Planck Institute for Mathematics in Bonn, Germany. The conference will bring
together a wide range of researchers in the field from across both continents
and highlight a number of exciting directions in representation theory, an
active area of research with deep connections to geometry, number theory and
physics. The organizers have invited fifteen leaders in the field to give
lectures that will be shown at both sites simultaneously, live on one continent
and on the other by video conferencing. Due to the time difference, the morning
in Europe and afternoon in North America are not suitable for shared talks, and
during this time, there will be local talks given by junior researchers and time
for discussion and collaboration. The double location format is designed to
lower the travel costs and carbon footprint of the conference while still
encouraging international collaboration. NSF funds will be used to support ten
to fifteen researchers who are early-career or from groups underrepresented in
the mathematical sciences to attend the conference at the North American site.

The invited speakers represent a wide range of areas falling within the topic of
geometric representation theory and the conference will aim to facilitate
interaction between these groups and between the two locations. Talks will
highlight a number of exciting directions including recent advances from
interactions with physics, connections between the geometric and classical
Langlands program, new homotopical methods, combinatorial representation theory
and topology. A conference website can be found at the address:
https://perimeterinstitute.ca/conferences/geometric-representation-theory

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
