
* 2005243
* Statistics in the Big Data Era
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 01/01/2020,12/16/2019
* Peng Ding,CA,University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 12/31/2022
* USD 19,950.00

This award supports participation by graduate students and junior researchers in
the conference "Statistics in the Big Data Era" held at the Simons Institute for
the Theory of Computing at the University of California, Berkeley during May
27-29, 2020. This conference focuses on the changing role and nature of the
discipline of statistics in the time of a data deluge in many applications, and
on the increasing success of artificial intelligence at performing many data
analysis tasks. The conference will feature approximately twenty invited
speakers who have made fundamental contributions to the theory and practice of
statistics and machine learning. The meeting aims to bring together experts in
statistical methodology and theory for complex and big data with researchers
focused on a range of applications, from genomics to social networks, and to
provide opportunities for early-career researchers to learn about both emerging
methods and applications. This conference will be an especially important
opportunity for graduate students and early-career researchers to see recent
advances and emerging challenges in the theory, methodology, and application of
statistics in the big data era.

Statistics plays a central role in quantitative research in many disciplines,
including social and biological sciences. With the advances in information
technology, statistics has gone through a paradigm shift from conventional
methods to big data analytics and modern machine learning. This conference will
bring together current leading statisticians and the next generation of
statistical leaders to discuss achievements and difficulties in the statistical
analysis of big data. The meeting will focus on methodology for solving
challenges involving big data with complex and heterogeneous structure. The
discussions will promote opportunities for statisticians to identify important
research topics and critical applications in science and industry. Another
important component is a poster session in which students and early-career
researchers present their work. The conference program also includes discussion
of statistics and data science education in the era of big data.

More information about the conference can be found at
https://simons.berkeley.edu/workshops/statistics-big-data-era.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
