
* 2011979
* Southern Regional Algebra Conference 2020
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 07/15/2020,07/13/2020
* Guy Roger Biyogmam,GA,Georgia College
* Standard Grant
* Adriana Salerno
* 06/30/2022
* USD 15,000.00

The Southern Regional Algebra Conference (SRAC) 2020 will be held at Georgia
College & State University in Milledgeville, Georgia on March 20-22, 2020. This
conferences series, established in 1988, plays an important role for the algebra
research community in the Gulf Coast Region, which incorporates many
institutions whose student populations are under-represented in the mathematical
sciences. This funding will allow graduate students, young mathematicians,
faculty from small institutions, undergraduate institutions, and institutions
that serve under-represented groups to present their research as well as network
with faculty from larger comprehensive research institutions. The resulting
increased participation of faculty in the Gulf Coast Region at SRAC 2020 and
future SRAC meetings will foster collaboration between primarily undergraduate
institutions and larger comprehensive universities. In turn this will help to
recruit more students, including members of under-represented groups, to Ph.D.
programs in the mathematical sciences.

This year?s program has three sessions. One of these sessions will specialize in
recent developments in commutative algebra. A second session will concern
computational methods in algebra and representation theory. The third session
will be a contributed session comprising topics in other areas of algebra and
their applications. The meeting will have potential significant impact on
undergraduate research activities at participating institutions, as well as
fostering a network that facilitates colloquia and seminar visits of researchers
at partner institutions, serving as a platform for both recruitment and
employment of mathematicians in the region. More details may be found at the
conference series website: https://www.gcsu.edu/artsandsciences/math/southern-
regional-algebra-conference

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
