
* 2114592
* Northern States Mathematical Biology Workshop: Stochastic Spatial Dynamics in Biology
* DMS,MATHEMATICAL BIOLOGY
* 08/15/2021,08/04/2021
* Luis Gordillo,UT,Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 07/31/2023
* USD 15,257.00

This award will support a conference on October 14-15 2021
(https://math.usu.edu/spatialdynamics) that will provide an opportunity for
graduate and undergraduate students, as well as early-career and experienced
mathematical biologists and theoretical biologists, to learn innovative research
techniques and perspectives on advanced topics that involve the modeling,
analysis, and simulation of problems and questions emerging in modern studies of
spatial dynamics in biological systems. The workshop will strengthen and enrich
science personnel in a geographic region that has fewer workshop and conference
opportunities. Unlike other, more densely populated areas in the United States,
students and junior researchers from the northern states (Montana, North Dakota,
South Dakota, Wyoming, and Utah) have fewer opportunities to attend conferences
and other academic events, often due to geographical limitations. The scientific
focus of this workshop is the discovery of analogies between phenomena for which
new techniques and methods for spatial stochastic modeling, analysis, and
simulation have been elaborated, and the emerging ecological problems that are
explicitly spatial and inherently random. The exploration of similarities
between the dynamical descriptions of biological spatial processes potentially
creates new and interesting research opportunities emerging from specific
insights and perspectives.

It is apparent that modern developments in movement Ecology heavily rely on new
theoretical and innovative computational tools that allow a closer look at
complex biological processes at different space and time scales. Although
current advanced stochastic perspectives have brought progress in mathematical
understandings of molecular, genetic, cellular and physiological mechanisms in
biology, many of these techniques have not been yet applied at ecologically or
environmentally relevant scales. At the same time, there is a tremendous growth
in spatially referenced ecological and environmental data available, driven by
advances in remote sensing technology and the capacity to accurately resolve
individual motion. There is therefore a novel opportunity for new research at
the boundary between quantitative movement/landscape ecology and modern
stochastic mathematical biology. The theme of this workshop is to introduce a
new generation of mathematical biologists to both new stochastic techniques and
also to researchers involved with current questions and data in movement and
landscape ecology.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
