
* 2130872
* Emergent Properties of Cancer Square Table
* DMS,PROJECTS, XC-Crosscutting Activities Pro, PHYSICS OF LIVING SYSTEMS, MSPA-INTERDISCIPLINARY
* 06/01/2021,06/21/2021
* Jennifer Schwarz,NY,Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 11/30/2021
* USD 99,036.00

This proposal seeks support for a Square-Table (SQT) meeting that is one of
three meetings co-organized by the Division of Cancer Biology (DCB) of the
National Cancer Institute (NCI) and the Mathematical and Physical Sciences (MPS)
Directorate of the National Science Foundation (NSF) to explore fundamental
research at the nexus of the physical sciences and mathematics, synthetic and
systems biology, and cancer research. The goal of the meetings is to foster
stimulating discussions between researchers whose work at the frontiers of their
own discipline may not yet intersect in a substantial way yet but whose exchange
of knowledge, thoughts, and ideas could identify research discoveries and
directions that have high potential impact on, and may be transformative for,
cancer research. This meeting, entitled SQT- Emergent Properties of Cancer, will
complement the other two meetings on SQT- Living Materials and SQT- Windows on
the Cell. The goal are discussion of fundamental challenges and opportunities at
and over the horizon (10-15 year time frame) at the interface between
fundamental sciences (typically funded by the Directorate of the Mathematical
and Physical Sciences at the NSF) and cancer research (typically funded by NCI)
and needed methodological developments that could enable transformative
research. The outcome will be a synthesized report of the discussions and
questions raised in the meeting. Along with the reports of the other two SQT
meetings, these reports will provide an intellectual map of future questions and
serve both NCI and NSF to understand the scientific intersections that are most
interesting and important. Recent advances in the physical sciences and
mathematics relevant to biology, in synthetic and systems biology, and in cancer
research have highlighted the need to explore the intersection of these areas at
and over the horizon, 10-15 years out, for new opportunities and identifying the
gaps. This Square-Table (SQT) meeting is intended to bring together distinct and
non-interacting disciplines of the fundamental sciences and math, with synthetic
biology, and cancer researchers. This SQT meeting will focus on Emergent
Properties of Cancer and is the third of three meetings, complementing Living
Materials and Windows on the Cell SQT meetings sponsored jointly between the
Division of Cancer Biology (DCB) of the National Cancer Institute (NCI) and the
Mathematical and Physical Sciences (MPS) Directorate of the National Science
Foundation (NSF). This SQT meeting will also initiate and foster new
partnerships between groups of researchers who generally don?t interact but
whose separate research endeavors can complement and foster synergistic work
with strong potentially transformative impact in biotechnology and medicine.
Interactions and interdisciplinary collaborations between the participants can
provide a solid ground for training the next generation of scientists, engineers
and researchers. The outcome will be a synthesized report of the discussions and
questions raised in the meeting. Along with the reports of the other two SQT
meetings, these reports will provide an intellectual map of future questions and
serve both NCI and NSF to understand the scientific intersections that are most
interesting and important.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
