
* 2132710
* Collaborative proposal: Workshop on Numerical Modeling with Neural Networks, Learning, and Multilevel Finite Element Methods
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 11/01/2021,11/01/2021
* Ludmil Zikatanov,PA,Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 10/31/2022
* USD 30,000.00

The workshop will focus on the development, investigation, and application of
fundamental mathematical theories and advanced modeling techniques using both
Artificial Intelligence (AI) tools, such as deep neural networks, and scientific
computing techniques, such as multilevel finite element methods. Participation
of students, postdocs, junior, and senior researchers in the workshop creates an
effective environment for exchange of ideas between researchers working in areas
related to machine learning and scientific computing. The overarching goal of
this workshop is to bridge these communities with the aim of creating efficient
and more robust methods and techniques for the use of AI in mathematical and
computational modeling of phenomena in physics, biology, and the social
sciences. The workshop will be driven by several factors. The first is the wide
range of numerical and mathematical models for real-time interactions at
different scales. The second is the combination of numerical tools using
classical discretizations with neural network techniques that can handle complex
models in physical, biological, and medical research beyond current scientific
computing capabilities. The workshop will also include topics in robust linear
and nonlinear solvers for different temporal and spatial scales and efficient
and interpretable learning processes that provide physics-aware numerical
models. Finally, topics on advanced software packages tuned to modern high
performance computers will be included. The workshop will be held at
Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA on November 3-5, 2021
(https://jxu60.math.psu.edu).

A primary objective of the workshop is to marshal forces to work on the
development of newly integrated techniques that properly address the fundamental
difficulties of solving multiphysics and multiscale problems. Workshop
participants will have the opportunity to present their research related to
scientific machine learning and traditional numerical methods, communicate and
interact with leading experts from other countries, and initiate potential
collaborations. The workshop focuses on key open questions in neural networks,
machine learning, and multilevel methods, and is expected to lead to new ideas
and collaborations in the development of analytic results and simulation
technologies. On a longer-time scale, the design of the workshop will help to
enable future advances in interdisciplinary studies of machine learning and
traditional scientific computing, which will facilitate progress in many other
areas of science.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
