
* 2132585
* CBMS Conference: Interface of Mathematical Biology and Linear Algebra
* DMS,INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
* 08/01/2021,07/22/2021
* Zhisheng Shuai,FL,The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 07/31/2023
* USD 35,000.00

This award supports the NSF-CBMS conference "Interface of Mathematical Biology
and Linear Algebra" to be held at the University of Central Florida, during May
23-27, 2022. The 5-day conference will feature three principal speakers who will
co-deliver 10 main lectures. Professor Pauline van den Driessche, who has
pioneered many advancements at the interface of mathematical biology and linear
algebra in the past 40 years, will deliver 4 of these main lectures. Expertise
and further insight on linear algebra and mathematical biology will be provided
by two sets of 3 lectures, delivered by Professor Stephen Kirkland and Professor
Mark Lewis, respectively. These 10 lectures will highlight the most cutting-edge
research at the intersection of these two branches of mathematical research, and
promote the development of new tools and techniques in linear algebra and
practical applications in mathematical biology.

The focus of the conference is at the cutting-edge research at the interface of
mathematical biology and linear algebra, two long-time interacting mathematical
fields, which have witnessed significant new advances at a higher level.
Specifically, recent advances of new algebraic theories and novel applications
of classic matrix results have helped resolve many challenges in mathematical
biology, while biologically-driven research problems have attracted an
increasing number of researchers in the field of linear algebra. The conference
will bring together both groups of researchers who have been working on
biologically-driven algebraic problems and/or algebraically-forced biological
applications, provide a unique platform to communicate the recent advances in
their fields, strengthen the existing and initiate new collaborations across the
two branches, and, most importantly, showcase the interface of mathematical
biology and linear algebra for early-career researchers and graduate students.
Further information about the conference will be available at the website:
https://sciences.ucf.edu/math/cbms

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
