
* 2139349
* Graph Theoretical Methods for Blockchain Data Analysis
* DMS,ATD-Algorithms for Threat Dete
* 07/01/2022,06/16/2022
* Christopher Saunders,SD,South Dakota State University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 12/31/2022
* USD 7,562.00

Graph Theoretical Methods for Blockchain Data Analysis Workshop, May 25, 2022
George Mason University

The Workshop on Graph Theoretical Methods for Blockchain Data Analysis will be
focused on the recent developments on the foundational statistical and
mathematical tools associated with the data structures that arise from the use
of distributed secure ledger technologies. Building on the efforts of the first
conference, the second workshop will bring together researchers from a broad
range of mathematical and statistical disciplines, from graph theory to
computational topology to mathematical statistics, to discuss the open problems
in analysis, modeling and inference for this class of data in an open forum.
While the goal of the second workshop is focused on the mathematical sciences
community, we will also include select researchers in e-crime detection,
cryptocurrency risk analysis, integration of private and public blockchains, and
other distributed ledger-based applications to calibrate the mathematical
scientists on the needs of this community.

The Workshop on Graph Theoretical Methods for Blockchain Data Analysis will
address issues related to the new blockchain technology. Blockchain has already
revolutionized many fields, from e-payments to digital ownership management,
enabling organizations to leverage a secure distributed public ledger. The first
popular application of blockchain was the Bitcoin cryptocurrency, and since then
blockchain technology has witnessed rapid evolution and unprecedented interest,
from investors to regulating agencies to the general public. For instance, most
recent versions of public blockchains such as Ethereum are now used to support
fundraising activities for many start-ups by enabling the sales of digital
assets worth billions of dollars, to trace the life cycles of crops and other
agricultural products, from seed to consumers, determining the responsibilities
of each party within the supply chain, and to validate compliance protocols and
transparency of clinical trials. As more blockchain applications and variations
of the original algorithms are developed and deployed, novel interdisciplinary
tools for blockchain data analytics are of critical importance for enhancing our
understanding of the emerging phenomena and a wide range of its societal
impacts, from energy sharing during natural disasters to novel methods for
secure access of electronic health information. This workshop will bring
together researchers in the mathematical sciences to address the needs of this
rapidly evolving community.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
