
* 2139109
* 2022 Texas Women in Math Symposium
* DMS,INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
* 09/15/2021,08/06/2021
* Shelly Harvey,TX,William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 08/31/2023
* USD 10,942.00

This NSF award provides support for Texas Women in Math Symposium (TWIMS) at
Rice University in Houston, Texas on February 5-6, 2022. The TWIMS is a
conference series that takes place at a different institution in Texas each
academic year. The ongoing goals of the TWIMS conference series are to highlight
the research and professional accomplishments of outstanding, established female
mathematicians, to provide a supportive platform for early career women
mathematicians to showcase their research, to facilitate connections among
Texas-based mathematicians that lead to long-lasting professional relationships,
and to create an inclusive environment to discuss issues facing women in
mathematics. The conference is open to participants of any gender and will
feature opportunities for collaboration between mathematicians of all career
levels and across several mathematical subfields. By fostering these
collaborations, TWIMS 2022 will contribute to the advancement of mathematical
research and will encourage early career researchers to continue to work in the
mathematical sciences.

The inclusion of individuals from dissimilar backgrounds leads to the
advancement of research. Increasing the number of people interested in pursuing
math research and diversifying the backgrounds of researchers increases the
number of perspectives from which any math problem is considered. This is key to
the advancement of the field as a whole. At each career stage we see attrition
of women in mathematics at rates disproportionately higher than those of men. In
order to increase retention of women at every career stage, the institutional
barriers preventing women from reaching their full potential need to be removed.
Some of these barriers include the prevalence of negative societal gender
stereotypes, lack of diverse representation and role models, and lack of
encouragement from teachers and mentors. TWIMS aims to address these problems
directly with the explicit goal of contributing to and in retention of women in
math at every career stage. To this end, the symposium will showcase the
research of a diverse array of distinguished invited speakers to provide
examples of successful women in math who can be role-models to younger
mathematicians or women at an earlier stage in their careers. TWIMS will provide
engaging opportunities to build mentor/mentee relationships by featuring small
group breakout sessions and a career advancement panel. Furthermore,
participants will examine gender issues in mathematics with the goal to mitigate
gender-based problems. Positive professional and academic experiences, the
promotion of woman-identifying role models in mathematics, the existence of
encouraging and supportive communities of women mathematicians, and effective
mentorship are necessary to decrease attrition among women in the mathematical
sciences. TWMS will provide these experiences and facilitate the growth of a
supportive inclusive mathematical community for women in math at every stage of
their careers, allowing them to contribute to the advancement of the
mathematical sciences. The conference website is
https://sites.google.com/view/twims-2022/about.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
