
* 2154480
* International Conference on Microlocal Analysis, Harmonic Analysis, and Inverse Problems
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2022,03/24/2022
* Alex Iosevich,NY,University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Tyson
* 12/31/2022
* USD 36,171.00

This award supports a conference on microlocal analysis, harmonic analysis, and
inverse problems, which will take place August 15-17, 2022 at the University of
Rochester. These three research areas have many points of intersection and have
each seen tremendous progress in recent decades. Furthermore, research in these
areas has led to advances in applied subjects such as diffuse and X-ray
tomography, non-invasive imaging, and cloaking technology. The purpose of the
conference is to bring together mathematicians working at the borders between
these three research areas, to spur the cross-fertilization of ideas and
generate new directions for the global research agenda. The conference also
includes specific activities geared towards early-career mathematicians, and
aims to provide such researchers with valuable experiences to help further their
professional careers.

The objective of the workshop is to bring together an international group of
experts in three research areas: microlocal analysis, inverse problems, and
harmonic analysis. A variety of topics are expected to receive prominent
attention during the meeting. These include eigenfunction bounds for Laplace-
Beltrami operators on Riemannian manifolds, regularity of Radon transform
operators, Falconer?s distance set conjecture and some of its more recent
generalizations, and connections between Fourier integral operators, inverse
problems, and integral geometry. The conference program includes specific
activities intended to promote a robust and informative dialogue among
researchers from the three focus research areas, as well as opportunities for
the professional development of junior researchers.

https://people.math.rochester.edu/faculty/iosevich/allanconferencewebsite.html

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
