
* 2154020
* International Conference to celebrate 200 years of Fourier analysis
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 04/01/2022,02/02/2022
* Betsy Stovall,WI,University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Tyson
* 03/31/2023
* USD 13,400.00

This project supports the participation of US-based researchers in an
international conference to be held at the International Centre for Mathematical
Sciences (ICMS) in Edinburgh, June 27-July 1, 2022. The conference, entitled
Fourier Analysis @200, is timed to celebrate the 200th year since the origin of
Fourier analysis, a subject that has had a tremendous impact on the modern
world. Fourier analysis provides tools for the decomposition of natural signals
and operators into simple parts, and efficient reconstruction of such signals
and operators from their constituent parts. The week-long conference will bring
together internationally recognized experts in the field and will provide
opportunities for early career researchers to present their work and form new
collaborations.

The 200th anniversary of the publication of Fourier?s Théorie analytique de la
chaleur coincides with a remarkably active period in the modern development of
Fourier's theory. Developments during the last five years, for instance, have
led to insights into the behavior of the wave and Schrödinger equations, the
resolution of Vinogradov?s mean value conjecture in analytic number theory, and
significant progress on fundamental questions in geometric measure theory. These
fast-moving developments present a signature opportunity to bring experts from
across the globe together to build upon this remarkable recent burst of
activity. The presence of US-based researchers at this event will allow for the
exchange of ideas and research findings, and will enable these researchers to
bring new techniques back to their home institutions. More information on the
conference can be found at: https://www.maths.ed.ac.uk/fourier200/

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
