
* 2201270
* Conference: Geometry and Physics---Deformations, Homotopy Algebras, and Higher Structures
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS, TOPOLOGY
* 05/01/2022,03/08/2022
* Mathieu Stienon,PA,Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 04/30/2024
* USD 40,000.00

This award provides financial support for U.S.-based participants in two
international summer schools in Geometry and Physics (GAP): GAP XVII (2022) to
be held at the Pacific Institute for Mathematical Science in Vancouver, Canada
during the week May 16-20, 2022 and GAP XVIII (2023) to be held at the Institut
Henri Poincar√©, in Paris, France during the week May 22-26, 2023. The twofold
purpose of the proposed activities are to gather leading experts and early-
career researchers working in rapidly developing subjects, and to foster
interaction between groups of mathematicians and physicists working on different
aspects of related problems; this will facilitate cross-fertilization between
different fields and disseminate the most recent results of current research.
GAP XVII and GAP XVIII will allow earlier-career mathematicians to disseminate
their ideas and to broaden their perspective, both mathematically and
internationally. Both summer schools, which will provide the opportunity for
researchers to exchange ideas with foreign peers and launch collaborations, will
include a poster session for individuals to present their recent work.

The theme of both schools is "Higher Structures: Deformations and Homotopy
Algebras". GAP XVII (2022) will be devoted to "Deformations" and GAP XVIII
(2023) to "Homotopy Algebras". Higher structures has emerged as a new field in
mathematics, as well as in mathematical and theoretical physics. Covering many
different topics, this field encompasses deformation theory, quantization,
homotopy algebras, derived geometry, enumerative geometry, representation
theory, Poisson geometry, mirror symmetry, noncommutative algebraic geometry,
string theory, and quantum field theory. The event will be devoted to bringing
together different aspects of higher structures, in particular deformations and
homotopy algebras, as well as identifying new emerging directions of
investigation. Deformation theory has become an important area of mathematics.
Deformation quantization lies on the boundary between classical and quantum
mechanics. Roughly speaking, it is the study and prediction of quantum
phenomena, which are normally described by noncommutative associative algebras,
from the geometry of their underlying classical counterparts. Homotopy algebras
provide a powerful machinery for studying many interconnected questions in
different areas of contemporary mathematics and mathematical physics. This award
will allow US scholars to abroad to attend these impactful events. For more
information on the conference series, see http://www.geometryandphysics.org/

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
