
* 2203287
* Moduli Spaces and Vector Bundles, New trends
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 06/01/2022,02/16/2022
* Montserrat Teixidor-i-Bigas,MA,Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 05/31/2023
* USD 13,620.00

The grant will provide support for several early-career mathematicians based in
the US to attend a five-day international conference, "Moduli Spaces and Vector
Bundles, New Trends", to be held at the University of Warwick, U.K. The study of
moduli spaces for curves and vector bundles continues to be at the forefront of
Algebraic Geometry, and this conference will present recent developments of the
theory of moduli spaces and explore further open questions. The award will allow
the early-career mathematicians to attend lectures, present in poster sessions,
discuss questions with experts in the field, and receive advice and mentorship
that will enhance the ability to continue their work. The organizers of the
conference have a track record of promoting diversity and encouraging the
incorporation of new talent into the field, and women and members of under-
represented minorities will be encouraged to participate. For more information,
see the conference page http://vbac.wikidot.com/vbac2022.

The main topic of the conference will be moduli theory and applications with an
emphasis on questions related to vector bundles. One focus will be general
theory of stability conditions in derived categories. The theory of Bridgeland
stability has matured to provide a powerful tool to study classical problems in
algebraic geometry and to analyze moduli spaces of sheaves. A second focus is
non-reductive geometric invariant theory, which can be used to construct moduli
spaces that include unstable objects or involve non-reductive group actions;
important work on the cohomology of such quotients is in progress. Next, higher
rank Brill?Noether theory, an ongoing enterprise, has already born some fruit in
applications such as computing the Kodaira dimension of spaces of Pryms. The
final subtopics, moduli of Higgs bundles and character varieties, are related
via the non-abelian Hodge Theorem. World experts in these fields will
participate in the conference and present their latest results. Discussions
taking place during the conference are likely to lead to further progress in the
field. This award will allow US scholars to travel to the UK to attend this
impactful event. For more information, see the conference page
http://vbac.wikidot.com/vbac2022.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
