
* 2208246
* From Subfactors to Quantum Topology
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 06/01/2022,04/20/2022
* Thang Le,GA,Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 05/31/2023
* USD 30,564.00

The conference ?From Subfactors to Quantum Topology? will be held in Geneva,
Switzerland, June 27 - July 1, 2022. The topics will cover quantum invariants in
low-dimensional topology, subfactor theory, and their connections to many
branches of mathematics and theoretical physics. The conference will consist of
talks by leading experts as well as early-career mathematicians. Many talks are
survey talks directed to a wide audience and suitable for graduate students and
young mathematicians. This award provides partial travel support to US-based
mathematicians, particularly those in the early stages of their careers. The
conference will address topics on quantum invariants, topological quantum field
theories, Khovanov and Heegaard Floer homology, the volume, AJ, slope, and knot-
quiver conjectures, subfactors, and planar algebras,. It will provide a venue
for sharing new results in the related fields; it will increase collaboration
and communication among research experts globally; and it will introduce
researchers, especially students and early career researchers, to important
areas of current research. The conference website is https://www.nccr-
swissmap.ch/news-and-events/events/subfactors-quantum-topology-memory-vaughan-
jones

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
