
* 2210602
* Summer School and Conference: Poisson 2022
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/01/2022,06/14/2022
* Rui Loja Fernandes,IL,University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 06/30/2023
* USD 32,000.00

Poisson 2022 is the 12th in a series of biennial international conferences and
schools in a subfield of mathematics known as Poisson geometry. The 2022 event
includes an Advanced School at the Centre de Recerca Matematica, Barcelona,
Spain, July 18-22, 2022 and a Conference at the headquarters of the Spanish
National Research Council (CSIC), Madrid, Spain, July 25-29, 2022. Poisson
geometry is an area originally inspired by physics, which has found a huge
number of applications both in mathematics and other areas of science. This
activity will bring together a diverse group of mathematicians to explore the
modern interplay between Poisson geometry and its many applications in different
fields. The school will consist of four mini-courses given by leading junior and
senior mathematicians. It will introduce the participants, mostly early-career
mathematicians, to a broad spectrum of ideas on the forefront of modern research
in Poisson geometry. The conference program will feature 21 talks given by
leading experts, covering the most active topics in Poisson geometry and its
applications. The goal of these activities is to make recent developments in the
field accessible to all participants, to broaden their perspective on major
areas of current research, and to create a stimulating environment in which they
can share ideas and begin lasting interdisciplinary collaborations. The purpose
of the award is to support the participation of US-based researchers in this
event.

This meeting aims to promote interaction between mathematicians, physicists, and
groups working on related areas from different points of view. The Conference is
the forum where the most significant recent advances in the area are announced
and discussed, and the potential future directions of the subject are addressed.
Topics cover a wide range of areas arising from Poisson brackets and its
applications, including symplectic, Dirac, generalized complex and related
structures, Lie algebroids and Lie groupoids, geometric mechanics, Poisson
algebras and Poisson varieties, cluster algebras, integrable systems,
quantization and higher structures, non-commutative geometry, quantum groups and
representation theory. The School has a strong training component, including two
introductory courses in Poisson Geometry and Foliation Theory, and two more
advanced level courses in Geometric Quantization and Wonderful
Compactifications. During the opening of the conference, the winner(s) of the
Andre Lichnerowicz Prize in Poisson geometry will be announced. The prize is
awarded for notable contributions to Poisson geometry and its applications, to
researchers who completed their doctorates at most eight years before the year
of the Conference. More information about the school is at
https://www.crm.cat/2022-advanced-school-poisson/ and conference information is
at https://www.icmat.es/congresos/2022/poisson/index.php.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
