
* 2211813
* Objective Bayes 2022 Methodology Conference
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 09/01/2022,03/08/2022
* Paul Parker,CA,University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 08/31/2023
* USD 10,000.00

The conference "Objective Bayes 2022 Methodology Conference" will be held at the
University of California Santa Cruz, in Santa Cruz, CA, on September 6-10, 2022.
Focusing on recent developments in objective Bayes theory, methodology and
applications, and related topics, the conference will feature one day of
tutorials for new researchers and four days of scientific sessions with
discussion and a poster session open to all participants. This conference will
bring together experts as well as a group of students and young researchers from
a broad set of areas within and related to objective Bayesian methodology. The
primary goal is to spark the development of new objective Bayesian techniques,
which will serve as invaluable tools in various disciplines that deal with
modeling uncertainty such as climatology, economics, and ecology. Emphasis will
be placed on the interaction between new and established researchers, and
researchers in different methodological areas.

Today, more than ever, Bayesian approaches have become increasingly widespread.
Driven in part by the computing revolution and the need for principled
uncertainty quantification, Bayesian methods are being applied widely across the
sciences and within industry settings. The conference is aimed to respond to
these demands, and will encompass many aspects of objective Bayesian
methodology, from theoretical, to applied and computational. The conference will
also cover recent developments in areas such as high-dimensional data analysis,
approximate Bayesian computation, Bayesian nonparametric, machine learning, etc.
For more details about the conference, please see the conference homepage:
https://obayes.soe.ucsc.edu.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
