
* 2212100
* Quality and Productivity Research Conference: Data, Statistics, and Responsibility
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 04/15/2022,04/11/2022
* Alexandra Piryatinska,CA,San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 03/31/2023
* USD 19,999.00

The 38th Quality and Productivity Research Conference (QPRC) will be hosted by
San Francisco State University in San Francisco, California on June 14-16, 2022,
preceded by a traditional one-day course on June 13. This conference is the main
annual meeting for the Quality and Productivity Section of the American
Statistical Association. The theme of the 2022 QPRC is "Data, statistics, and
responsibility." The conference aims to promote the highest level of scientific
integrity, reproducibility, public accountability, and social responsibility in
handling big, multidimensional data. It will include a comprehensive discussion
of cutting-edge modern methodologies in all aspects of data science and
statistics. Student participation is a vital part of the conference. NSF funds
are used to support the active participation of students in the conference and
its associated one-day course. Students from numerous universities and graduate
programs across the US, especially those from under-represented groups, will be
fully engaged. Students will have the opportunity to present their research,
build connections with others in the scientific community, and learn from
researchers and practitioners working at the cutting edge of statistics and data
science. They will be invited to submit contributed and poster presentations and
compete for travel scholarships.

This conference attracts prominent researchers from academia, industry, and
government. Participating statisticians, data scientists, quantitative analysts
will exchange novel ideas and experience in working with modern big data to
discover knowledge and apply it to diverse fields. The Conference will
demonstrate the power of knowledge gleaned from data and the importance of
scientific integrity and reproducibility. Plenary and invited sessions at the
38th QPRC are scheduled in the following subjects: data science, machine
learning, big data analytics, time series and forecasting, statistical process
control monitoring, design and analysis of experiments. The conference also
includes contributed and poster sessions and a technical tour. It is preceded by
a one-day course, "Empowering the Statistician with Spark, Machine Learning and
Deep Learning." This course will provide an overview of using R and Python for
some of the most popular machine learning and deep learning models in real-world
data science applications in a cloud environment. The conference details are on
its website, https://qprc2022.com/.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
