
* 2213723
* Nonlocal School on Fractional Equations
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 06/01/2022,05/20/2022
* Harbir Antil,VA,George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 05/31/2023
* USD 24,121.00

This award supports participation in the Nonlocal School on Fractional Equations
(NSFE) 2022, held on campus of Iowa State University on June 9 ? 11, 2022.
Fractional (nonlocal) models in science and engineering can account for long
range interactions and are notably flexible in being applicable to non-smooth
scenarios. Motivated by these facts and several applications, this research area
has attracted a significant amount of recent attention on both theoretical and
computational fronts. Examples include novel fractional-derivative-based models
in imaging, geophysics, plasmas, deep neural networks, minimal surfaces, and
phase transitions. These emerging applications have created a need for
development of a modern theory, new numerical methods, and subsequent control of
the nonlocal fractional models. The NSFE 2022 meeting aims to address most of
these topics. A primary goal of the school is to introduce students and early-
career researchers to current trends in nonlocal equations, as well as to
provide a vibrant networking environment. There will be two (three hour long)
mini-tutorial style lectures and six invited talks from leading researchers in
the field.

This meeting will advance knowledge in nonlocal modeling, optimal control,
numerical analysis, implementation, and software development. These topics
involve numerous aspects of probability theory, optimization and variational
analysis, convex analysis, and applied and computational mathematics. The school
aims to stimulate new developments in these important areas of mathematics and
their application to finance, physics, biology, data science, and engineering.
The meeting also aims to provide a unique opportunity for graduate students,
postdocs, and other early career scientists to interact with leading researchers
in fractional nonlocal models. The organizers are making a special effort to
recruit participants from minority groups in STEM and from minority serving
institutions. Videos of the lectures as well as lecture notes will be uploaded
on the conference website: https://pabloraulstinga.github.io/NSFE2022.html

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
