
* 2217293
* Conference on Symmetry, Invariants, and their Applications
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/01/2022,06/03/2022
* Irina Kogan,NC,North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2023
* USD 35,883.00

The conference "Symmetry, Invariants, and their Applications" will take place on
August 3-5, 2022 at Dalhousie University in Nova Scotia, Canada, both in person
and on line. The award funds will help defray travel and local expenses of US-
based participants, prioritizing support for graduate students, postdocs, early-
career researchers, and members of underrepresented groups. Symmetries are
transformations that keep a geometric object invariant, that is, unchanged. Many
biological, chemical, physical, and man-made structures exhibit symmetries as
fundamental design principles or essential aspects of their functioning. In
geometry, the Erlangen program set forward by Felix Klein in 1872 clearly
identified the importance of symmetry and invariants in the geometrical study of
manifolds. Symmetry group methods are among the most powerful techniques
available for finding closed-form solutions to nonlinear differential equations
appearing in physics, engineering, and economics. Symmetries are essential in
our understanding of conservation laws in physics and occur in a wide variety of
modern applications including computer vision, automatic assembly of broken
objects such as eggshells, pottery, and bones, and more.

One of the central themes of the conference is the application of Lie point
symmetries and their extensions to obtain closed-form solutions of differential,
finite difference, differential-difference, integro-differential, stochastic,
and fractional differential equations. This theme intertwines with the
investigation of differential, integral, and joint invariants together with
their applications in general relativity, computer vision, automated assembly
problems, geometric numerical integration, and other fields. These invariants
can be computed using the method of moving frames where the recurrence relations
unlock the structure of the algebra of invariants. Moving frames play a crucial
role in solving equivalence problems and studying geometric spaces, invariant
geometric flows, and integrable systems.

Conference website: https://www.math.mun.ca/movingframes2022/

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
