
* 2219318
* Broadening Participation: 2022-2024 MPS Workshops for Young Investigators
* DMS,SPECIAL PROGRAMS IN ASTRONOMY, OFFICE OF MULTIDISCIPLINARY AC, INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM, XC-Crosscutting Activities Pro, BROADENING PARTICIPATION, PHYSICS-BROADEN PARTICIPATION
* 05/01/2022,04/26/2022
* Laura Blecha,FL,University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 04/30/2025
* USD 515,421.00

This award will support annual workshops in 2022-2024 for new and future PIs in
the NSF Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences (MPS). The two-full-
day workshop for 2022 will be held June 13-14 at the Westin Alexandria Old Town
in Alexandria, VA, and the meeting website is available at this URL:
https://reg.conferences.dce.ufl.edu/Physics. The conferences for 2023 and 2024
would be held in June of each year at the National Science Foundation (NSF)
headquarters in Alexandria, VA. The main goals of the workshop are two-fold: (1)
to provide PIs who have just received their first award or who are attempting to
obtain funding from the MPS programs with valuable information and advice on the
policies, procedures, and opportunities available at NSF, with an emphasis on
recruiting attendees from underrepresented minority groups, and (2) to train a
pool of future reviewers for NSF in the designated group. The scope of this
workshop is in line with the mission of NSF Diversity Initiatives: To recruit,
retain, and develop a diverse, high-performing workforce that draws from all
segments of society and values fairness, diversity, and inclusion to promote the
progress of science.

The workshop program is composed of two main parts: informational presentations
by NSF Program Directors and invited speakers and mock panel review activities.
The topics of presentations include (1) Individual investigator programs in MPS;
(2) NSF funded Centers and Facilities and Special programs; (3) NSF policies and
procedures; (4) Broader impacts of research; (5) Preparing successful proposals;
(6) Research integrity. Over two days, the participants will be engaged in the
activities emulating the full processes of panel review in breakout sessions
guided by Program Directors. This proposal also includes an assessment plan to
track the participants and to evaluate the efficacy of the workshop training
through the success rate in securing funding and participation in the review
process of the participants.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
