
* 2220824
* Pan-American School on Commutative Algebra (PASCA 2022)
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 06/01/2022,04/21/2022
* Jonathan Montano,NM,New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 05/31/2023
* USD 11,900.00

The Pan-American School on Commutative Algebra is a two week long summer school
focusing on a range of topics of current interest in the field. The school will
take place on the premises of Centro de Investigación en Matemáticas in
Guanajuato, Mexico, which has a long tradition of successful international
events. In addition to introducing active research topics to the participants,
another major goal of the school is to foster international connections among
the participants. This grant will fund the participation of US-based graduate
students to the school.

A number of significant breakthroughs have occurred in Commutative Algebra in
recent years. These results arrived by integrating various techniques in
Commutative Algebra and methods from other areas such as number theory, convex
geometry, and representation theory. The basic scientific purpose of this school
is to connect students with a range of questions and techniques of current
interest in Commutative Algebra. Topics for the school include lectures on toric
varieties, algebra structures on free resolutions, methods in positive
characteristic, and differentials and derivations with applications. For more
information on the summer school, see https://www.jack-
jeffries.github.io/PASCA.html.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
