
* 2221946
* Conference on Combinatorics, Computing, Group Theory, and Applications 2022
* DMS,Combinatorics, Secure &Trustworthy Cyberspace
* 07/01/2022,05/26/2022
* Daniela Nikolova,FL,Florida Atlantic University
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2023
* USD 49,138.00

This award supports the international conference "Combinatorics, Computing,
Group Theory, and Applications" (CCGTA), organized by Florida Atlantic
University (FAU), held in Deerfield Beach, Florida, August 14 - 21, 2022. Many
modern communication systems depend on mathematical ideas and algorithms. Group
theory and combinatorics are fundamental to these systems, with applications in
coding theory (safe transmission of data), cryptography (security of data),
signal processing, and related areas. The meeting features participation of
leading researchers in these fields from the USA, Europe, Israel, South Africa,
Canada, Australia, New Zealand, and Asia. The conference aims to enhance
academic partnerships among different parts of the world, contributing to the
competitiveness and national security of the United States and enhancing
infrastructure for research and education.

The primary goal of CCGTA is to promote state-of-the-art research,
collaboration, and scientific discourse on algebraic combinatorics with a focus
on group theory and its applications. The meeting's first objective is to
initiate innovative cross disciplinary research ideas and set the stage for new
research collaboration and new inventions. The second objective is to unveil new
areas of research within these key areas that have value for the economy and the
continuing upgrading of undergraduate and postgraduate programs. The third
objective is to provide students with opportunity to participate in a world
forum, to have first-hand interaction with experts in the field, and to advance
their research. These objectives will be achieved by inviting experts in
algebraic combinatorics, computational group theory, coding theory, quantum
information theory, and other demanding related areas such as computer security.
There will be three invited expository talks every day for the benefit of
graduate and undergraduate students, postdoctoral fellows, and other interested
audiences. The young researchers will be given the opportunity to give
presentations on their recent work. Special effort will be made to ensure
diversity by identifying one day of presentations given by successful women with
established reputation in STEM disciplines. This knowledge will be disseminated
to the larger mathematical community by publishing Proceedings of the talks.
More information can be found on the conference web page:
https://sites.google.com/view/ccgtainsouthfla/home

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
