
* 2223905
* Conference on Algebraic Topology and Topological Data Analysis
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/15/2022,06/14/2022
* Kirsten Wickelgren,NC,Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 06/30/2023
* USD 49,570.00

This award provides support for speakers and participants of the conference
?Algebraic Topology and Topological Data Analysis? to be held at the Institute
for Mathematics and its Applications in Minneapolis, during August 1-5, 2022.
The conference brings together researchers in pure and applied mathematics and
data science to promote the progress of the study of shape and its applications
to data. Furthering our understanding of the shape of data facilitates data
driven discovery in a wide range of fields, including national health. The week-
long conference will explore topics at the confluence of the theoretical area of
Algebraic Topology and the modern application oriented Topological Data
Analysis. As such it has a strong potential to seed new research directions
which will not only widen the landscape of topological techniques in data
analysis but would also suggest new possible directions within algebraic
topology. The conference talks will particularly benefit early career
researchers through exposure to some of the latest results across a wide swath
of topics in topology and its applications.

This conference will bring together researchers from both traditional aspects
within Algebraic Topology with more recently developed techniques such as those
from Topological Data Analysis and Applied Algebraic Topology. Conference topics
include various flavors of homotopy theory (categorical, stable, motivic),
topological vector bundles, Azumaya algebras, K-theory, persistent homology,
dimension reduction, topological time series analysis, configuration spaces, and
applications to other scientific fields. The conference webpage is
https://ima.umn.edu/2021-2022/SW8.1-5.22.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
