
* 2224003
* Conference: The Seventh Annual Meeting of SIAM Central States Section
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2022,08/03/2022
* Xu Zhang,OK,Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Stacey Levine
* 08/31/2023
* USD 20,000.00

The 7th Annual Meeting of Society of Industrial and Applied Mathematicians
Central States Section (SIAM-CCS) will be held at the Stillwater campus of
Oklahoma State University during October 1-2, 2022. The conference website is
https://siamcss2022.okstate.edu/. The SIAM Central States Section (SIAM-CSS) was
founded in 2014, and it serves SIAM members in eight central states in the
United States, including Arkansas, Colorado, Iowa, Kansas, Mississippi,
Missouri, Nebraska, and Oklahoma. The SIAM-CSS Annual Meeting has been held
annually since 2015, with the primary goal of improving the development of
applied and computational mathematics throughout all central states, as well as
facilitating knowledge transfer and promoting interdisciplinary collaborations
among applied mathematics and other disciplines in science and engineering.

The SIAM-CSS annual conference series provides an important forum for applied
and computational mathematicians from central states to present their latest
achievements, communicate and exchange ideas, and enhance collaborations. It
provides an excellent opportunity for researchers in all stages of their
careers, especially early career mathematicians, to establish interactions with
researchers from all over the U.S. and other countries. It is essential in
stimulating research activities in relatively less developed states. As the
first face-to-face meeting after the pandemic, the conference will bring
vitality to the applied math community in the region and promote the development
of the discipline. This NSF grant will solely support the participation of
students, postdoctoral scholars, early career faculty, and underrepresented
groups in STEM.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
