
* 2226539
* Texas Undergraduate Mathematics Conference 2022-2024
* DMS,INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
* 09/01/2022,08/25/2022
* Nicholas Long,TX,Stephen F. Austin State University
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 08/31/2025
* USD 13,075.00

This award supports undergraduate participants in three meetings of the Texas
Undergraduate Mathematics Conference (TUMC) series. The first will be hosted on
October 21-22, 2022, by the University of Texas at Austin. In fall 2023, TUMC
will be hosted by the Stephen F. Austin State University in Nacogdoches, and in
fall 2024 by University of Texas at Tyler. The conference series focuses on
research done by undergraduate students or in conjunction with undergraduates.
These conferences offer undergraduates the opportunity to see the research being
done by their peers and to start the transition into the larger community of
mathematical research.

Now in its 17th year, the Texas Undergraduate Mathematics Conference (TUMC)
seeks to provide students with a forum to present their work, to discover
research opportunities, and to learn more about graduate school and non-academic
careers in mathematics. Conference attendees often come from groups that are
underrepresented at research conferences: TUMC recruits many students from
community colleges, Hispanic serving institutions, historically black colleges
and universities, and institutions having many first-generation college
students. As part of this vital link between underserved undergraduate students
and the mathematical research community, to increase participation TUMC will be
run without any associated cost for undergraduate participants. The Executive
Committee for TUMC will collect information about subsequent activities of
student and faculty participants to investigate the ways in which the uptake of
research activities occurs in the year after attending TUMC. Additional
information about the conference can be found on the website:
http://sections.maa.org/texas/tumc/

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
