
* 2227218
* CAS-Climate: SIAM Convening on Climate Science and Clean Energy
* DMS,OFFICE OF MULTIDISCIPLINARY AC, INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM, MSPA-INTERDISCIPLINARY
* 07/15/2022,07/13/2022
* Suzanne Weekes,PA,Society For Industrial and Applied Math (SIAM)
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2023
* USD 326,118.00

The Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics (SIAM) will host a 3-day
workshop with a broad and diverse group of researchers and practitioners from
various disciplines and from a variety of institutions and companies around the
general theme of climate science, sustainability, and clean energy. This in-
person meeting will be held in the Washington DC area in fall 2022. Participants
will work together to develop recommendations to federal research and
development agencies for support of research and education to advance scientific
knowledge, anticipate future conditions, accelerate clean energy innovations and
sustainable practices, and increase resilience in the face of climate change.
The ultimate deliverable will be a synthesis report representing the major
challenges, themes, and suggestions. The report will include an appendix of
whitepapers that delve deeper into specific challenges, as well as links to
presentations that will be available on a SIAM webpage.

This SIAM Convening on Climate Science, Sustainability, and Clean Energy aims to
(i) result in a better understanding of the challenges and problems affecting
research innovation and translation gleaned from discussions across the various
sectors and communities; (ii) provide input and recommendations for addressing
the challenges and opportunities identified; and (iii) identify mechanisms to
encourage the growth and health of the research workforce. In 2021, SIAM
distributed to the NSF and to other federal agencies the document ?Research and
Education Priorities to Address Climate Change, Boost Environmental Resilience,
and Advance Clean Energy? which was prepared by a task force established under
the SIAM Committee on Science Policy. That report represented the applied
mathematics and computational science viewpoint; this convening will build on
the previous study by including other disciplines to expand the perspective and
broaden its impact.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
