
* 2228858
* Conference on Strengthening Community in Research Mathematics
* DMS,INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
* 09/01/2022,08/09/2022
* Ami Radunskaya,CA,Pomona College
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 08/31/2023
* USD 64,920.00

The Conference on Strengthening Community in Research Mathematics will take
place February 17-18, 2023 in Claremont, California. The conference will
strengthen the mathematical research community by gathering researchers in
cutting-edge mathematics, highlighting the strategic role and importance of our
professional organizations, and by disseminating successful strategies to enable
mathematicians from traditionally underrepresented groups to flourish. The
conference will not only enhance the flow of talent into the mathematics
research community but also help upgrade the demographic reach and capabilities
of the entire STEM pipeline.

The conference will achieve its goals in several ways. General audience research
talks will be in the core fields of number theory and algebraic geometry and
will be designed to facilitate future collaborations while providing a
supportive environment for young mathematicians from underserved backgrounds to
experience the beauty and power of number theory and algebraic geometry. We will
also address relevant questions that undergraduate and graduate students have
about the profession with talks and panel discussions on the graduate school
admission and matriculation process, navigating the mathematical discipline as a
member of a currently underrepresented group, the multitude of career
opportunities that one can pursue with a graduate degree in mathematics, and
managing academic and nonacademic job ladders. Faculty will in turn participate
in talks and panel discussions that address mentoring students from
underrepresented groups and how to engage undergraduates in their research. For
more information, visit the conference web-page
https://www.pomona.edu/academics/departments/mathematics-statistics/events-
colloquia/conference-strengthening-community-research-mathematics.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
