
* 2230164
* Workshop on Trends in Soliton Dynamics and Singularity Formation for Nonlinear Dispersive PDEs
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 09/01/2022,06/23/2022
* Jonas Luhrmann,TX,Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Constanze Liaw
* 08/31/2023
* USD 8,000.00

This award will support the 3-day workshop "Trends in Soliton Dynamics and
Singularity Formation for Nonlinear Dispersive PDEs" to be held on the campus of
Texas A&M University in College Station, Texas, on October 21-23, 2022. The
topic of the workshop lies at the forefront of research on nonlinear wave
equations. Wave equations are at the heart of a wide range of natural phenomena,
including electromagnetism, fluid dynamics, nonlinear optics, quantum mechanics,
general relativity, and particle physics. As such, the rigorous mathematical
analysis of these equations is fundamental in obtaining a deeper understanding
of the world we live in. This workshop aims to bring together leading
international experts and junior researchers, providing an opportunity for the
younger generation to interact with leaders of the field and to learn about
cutting edge mathematical developments. Junior researchers also can present
their research in the form of contributed talks. The workshop is structured to
create many opportunities for discussions and to foster an environment for
collaboration and for the exchange of ideas.

The mathematical focus of the workshop is on recent developments in the study of
soliton dynamics and singularity formation for nonlinear dispersive PDEs, and on
the interplay with developments in related areas. In the context of this
workshop, solitons refer, roughly speaking, to solutions to partial differential
equations that exhibit some form of coherent structure. It is expected that they
play an essential role for the overall dynamics. This is an active and fast
developing branch of research, where recent ideas and techniques are finding
applications in many other areas. The PIs hope this workshop will provide an
opportunity for all participants to learn about the fascinating new developments
in this area, to form new collaborations, and to explore interesting connections
to other areas. Funds will be used for the accommodation and travel costs for
junior participants. More information about the workshop and its goals can be
found on the website: https://sites.google.com/tamu.edu/solitons-workshop-
tamu/about

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
