
* 2241293
* Conference: Third Annual Data Science Workshop: Emerging Data Science Methods for Complex Biomedical and Cyber Data
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 02/01/2023,10/24/2022
* Jie Chen,GA,AUGUSTA UNIVERSITY RESEARCH INSTITUTE, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Jun Zhu
* 01/31/2024
* USD 19,089.00

This award provides support for the 3rd Annual Data Science Workshop entitled
?Emerging Data Science Methods for Complex Biomedical and Cyber Data? to be held
on Augusta University (AU) Riverfront campus, March 16-17, 2023. With the
increasing importance of the next generation of data, we strive to help students
and early career researchers develop analytical thinking, statistical reasoning,
communication skills, and creativity through this 3rd Data Science Workshop. The
workshop will be in the form of specific research overviews and lectures
provided by leading experts in the fields of statistical learning and data
sciences. At the end of each day, a panel discussion will be held, led by an
expert panelist and all the speakers of the day, for assimilating the various
topics presented on the day and for addressing questions and comments from the
audience. The Workshop participants will learn state-of-the-art forefront data
science research methods used in academia, industry, and the government sector,
facilitating them to be a more successful members of the future workforce in
STEM fields.

This award supports the expert speakers and approximately 15 undergraduate and
graduate students to attend the workshop. Graduate students will either present
posters or give five-minute oral presentations on their respective research
closely related to the theme of this workshop. The workshop aims to empower
participants with emerging statistical methods that could allow them to address
the complex data, arising from various applications and, in particular, from
biosciences and cyber science. The topics of the workshop include deep learning,
statistical machine learning, differential privacy, Bayesian data integration
and cybersecurity data modeling, among others. Detailed information about this
workshop is available at https://www.augusta.edu/mcg/dphs/workshop3/index.php

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
