
* 2243528
* Second South Central Topology Conference
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 01/01/2023,12/09/2022
* Hiro Tanaka,TX,Texas State University - San Marcos
* Standard Grant
* Eriko Hironaka
* 12/31/2023
* USD 22,519.00

This award provides support for the Second South Central Topology Conference
(SCTC II) to be held at Texas State University in San Marcos, Texas, on the
weekend of February 11-12, 2023. The primary goals of this regional conference
include developing a community of collaborators of varied interests in topology
in the region, disseminating current research directions in topology in the
South Central region and beyond, and continuing to create the foundations for a
vibrant future for topology in the region. This conference is timely in light of
the growing research activity in topology within the South Central Region.

The conference will be broad in its focus providing a representative sample of
recent research developments in fields such as Stable Homotopy Theory, Tropical
Geometry, Representation Stability, K-theory and Higher Category Theory,
Symplectic Geometry, and Low-dimensional Topology. The six plenary speakers,
Prasit Bhattacharya (New Mexico State University), Kalina Mincheva (Tulane
University), Peter Patzt (University of Oklahoma), Maru Sarazola (Johns Hopkins
University), Shira Tanny (Institute for Advanced Study), and Melissa Zhang (UC
Davis), will give one-hour colloquium-style presentations. There will also be
eight short talks given by graduate students and postdocs on a wide range of
topics. The conference web page is https://www.hiroleetanaka.com/sctc/.

Please report errors in award information by writing to: awardsearch@nsf.gov.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
