
* 2302532
* Conference: Midwest Several Complex Variables Conference at Ohio State University
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 04/01/2023,01/17/2023
* Kenneth Koenig,OH,Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Tyson
* 03/31/2024
* USD 23,750.00

The 2023 Midwest Several Complex Variables Conference will be held April 28-30,
2023 on the Columbus campus of Ohio State University. The Midwest Several
Complex Variables conference series has a long tradition serving as the primary
regional meeting in complex analysis and related areas. The event provides ample
opportunity for leading experts in the field and junior researchers to interact
with each other and to pursue new collaborative projects. This award provides
funding to cover travel expenses and accommodation of participants without
access to other sources of external support, particularly graduate students and
early career mathematicians.

The event focuses on recent developments at the interface of several complex
variables, harmonic analysis, operator theory, functional analysis, and complex
geometry. Several of the highlighted topics include Bergman spaces and
unexpected mapping properties of the Bergman projection (and other canonical
operators), singular integrals on domains with minimal smoothness, solvability
of the Cauchy-Riemann operator in new geometric settings, CR complexity theory,
and canonical metrics in several complex variables. In addition to the invited
talks, conference activities will offer a stimulating environment for
participants to discuss promising new directions in these areas. A poster
session for graduate students will afford an opportunity to present their work
and meet future colleagues in the field.

https://sites.google.com/view/mwscv-2023

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
