
* 2304646
* Conference: Statistical Foundations of Data Science and their Applications
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 02/01/2023,01/20/2023
* Matias Cattaneo,NJ,Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Jun Zhu
* 01/31/2024
* USD 25,000.00

This award supports a diverse and inclusive three-day conference titled
"Statistical Foundations of Data Science and their Applications" to take place
at Princeton University on May 8-10, 2023. Data science is a thriving broad
discipline that combines various existing fields including classical and modern
statistics, biostatistics, econometrics and machine learning, and has by now
transformed the way that quantitative research is conducted in the social,
behavioral and biomedical sciences, as well as in finance, industry and
government more generally. The main goal of the conference is to bring together
junior and senior scholars working on all aspects of foundational and applied
data science, while also offering unique opportunities for mentoring junior and
underrepresented scholars (e.g., underrepresented minorities, women, and persons
with disabilities) across a broad range of disciplines.

While data science combines and potentiates the best of many scientific areas of
study, it is regrettably not always the case that scholars working of those
specific areas interact with each other in a synergistic way. Furthermore, for
young scholars it is often hard to reach out outside their subfields, hampering
their intellectual and professional development. These intellectual barriers
sometimes reduce diversity and inclusion due to the socially inefficient
intellectual silos present in different academic and professional communities. A
key goal of the conference is to be highly interdisciplinary and open to new
intellectual ideas and approaches, hoping to reach out to academia, industry and
government. Another equally important and highly complementary key goal of the
conference is to foster junior and underrepresented scholars by offering them
specifically tailored activities to such goal, in addition to offering them
opportunities to interact and network with many top data science scholars from
around the world that will be in attendance. The website with details about the
conference is https://orfe.princeton.edu/events/dsconf/

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
