* 8900240
* Spatial Restructuring of San Francisco's Medical Care       Delivery System:  1870-1930
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/1989,01/31/1991
* Neil Shumsky, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 01/31/1991
* USD 62,394.00

A rapidly growing body of research in the social sciences relates to the
development and distribution of human services. Medical care is an especially
important service, but analyses of how and where care is available have been
limited by the absence of theory regarding the development of medical care
delivery systems that would integrate findings from numerous case studies. This
project will develop the theoretical basis for future research by building on
findings in the extant scholarly literature through a detailed analysis of the
reciprocal development of primary medical care and residential patterns in San
Francisco between 1870 and 1930. Information on the provision of medical care
and on the changing geography of people and housing will be gathered from
archival sources as well as from public data sources. This information will be
analyzed statistically and cartographically to determine how changing population
and housing patterns affected and were reflected in changing patterns of primary
medical care. Following the conclusion of the San Francisco historical study,
theory about the geographic evolution of urban medical care will be explicitly
reevaluated and enhanced in order to better explain and interpret how urban and
medical transformations have evolved. This research will provide one of the most
rigorous and well documented case studies of medical care system development
ever conducted, but even more important, it will explicitly expand the general
theoretical framework relating to service system development and residential
development. This theory will more effectively focus future research projects,
and the methodology used in the San Francisco case study will be replicable in
other locales and over different time periods to permit ongoing reevaluation of
the theory.