* 8900129
* Mathematical Sciences: Nonlinear Partial Differential       Equations in Lubrications: A Study of Cavitation in Thin    Lubricant Films
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1989,07/31/1992
* Sara Cohen, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 07/31/1992
* USD 24,993.00

Modeling and analysis of certain engineering questions will be taken up in this
mathematical study of free boundaries arising in the lubrication theory. The
work involves efforts to understand the dynamics of thin viscous fluid films
confined between solid boundaries, such as fluid flow between two concentric or
eccentric rotating cylinders - a journal bearing. An interesting and
mechanically significant aspect of journal bearings is the occurrence of
cavitation, a phenomenon in which the lubricant vaporizes due to its inability
to sustain large vacuums. On the mathematical level, a representation of this
phenomenon is given by a variational problem involving free boundaries. The
primary goal of the project is to determine properties of the free boundary:
regularity, shape and location. Two particular models will be analyzed. In both
cases the object is to describe the pressure in the lubricant film, with
vaporization pressure taken to be zero. The first is the solid or non-porous
bearing of finite length in which the outer and inner cylinders are not
concentric. For small eccentricity, the region of cavitation is known to have a
single component. Whether this condition remain under more general conditions is
yet to be resolved. The second model concerns the porous, concentric journal
bearing of infinite length. This journal is composed of a porous matrix which
permits continuous fluid flow between the matrix and the lubricant. The
regularity of the pressure function is better understood in this case and work
will concentrate on developing numerical approximations to the function by
finite element methods, with special emphasis on the convergence of the discrete
free boundaries.