* 8900103
* Hydride Transfer and Rates of Transport Across Synthetic    Membranes
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/1989,10/31/1992
* Maurice Kreevoy, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Benjamin F. Plummer
* 10/31/1992
* USD 193,760.00

This project by Dr. Maurice Kreevoy within the Organic Dynamics Program is aimed
at a better understanding of an important organic reaction known as hydride
transfer. The problem will be approached theoretically by calculation of the
detailed reaction pathway, and also experimentally by the measurement of
reaction rates. This work is quite significant in that the reaction to be
studied is a prototype for enzyme catalyzed oxidation-reduction reactions. With
the aid of the Truhlar POLYRATE program, a multi-dimensional potential surface
will be generated for the hydride transfer reaction. Using variational
transition state theory with least-action tunneling, it will be used to mimic
the experimentally observed relationship between rate and equilibrium constants,
the magnitude of primary and secondary hydrogen isotope effects, and the
relation between primary isotope effects and equilibrium constants. In the
second part of this project, the solvent dependence of the rate constant,
primary kinetic isotope effect, and equilibrium constant of the model hydride
transfer reaction between 1-benzyl-3-cyano- quinolinium ion and
10-methyl-9,10-dihydroacridine will be studied. The object of this investigation
is as follows: to establish and test a model for the reaction that will
facilitate the identification of dynamic solvent effects on reactivity; to
determine a parameter proportional to such effects; and to compare it with
current theory and other experimental measures of dynamic solvent effects.
Dynamic solvent effects are those that are not accounted for in conventional,
quasi-equilibrium, transition state theory.