* 8900304
* US-Finland Cooperative Research:  Electronic Structure and  Dynamics of Metal Clusters
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/1989,11/30/1993
* Purusottam Jena, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 11/30/1993
* USD 16,660.00

This award supports Professor Purusottom Jena of Virginia Commonwealth
University for continued collaborative research in materials science with two
Finnish physicists, Professor Matti Manninen of the University of Jyvaskyla and
Risto Nieminen of Helsinki University of Technology. Their previous
collaboration on the response of electrons to a variety of defect complexes has
produced twelve joint publications so far. Their primary interest now is the
electronic structure and dynamics of atomic clusters. Their collaborative work
plan involves a division of labor that efficiently exploits the complementary
expertise and facilities of the three laboratories. The U.S. group will
determine the atomic and electronic structure and properties of aluminum, copper
and iron clusters based upon self consistent LCAO-MO theory and the density
functional method. The Helsinki group will study the dynamics of these clusters
at elevated temperatures in a classical molecular dynamics simulation, using
realistic inter-atomic potentials. Finally, the Jyvaskyla group will work on
developing a new approximation method that will enable them to treat larger
clusters consisting of more than 100 atoms. Some of these computations will
require use of a supercomputer. Through reciprocal working visits, each of the
PI's will participate to some extent in the work being done at the other labs.
Atomic clusters are aggregations of atoms isolated in gas phase or in non-
interacting matrices. They represent a new class of matter, intermediate between
atoms and solids. They have unusual properties that depend strongly on their
size. While a great deal of experimental data is available on the properties of
clusters, a comprehensive theoretical understanding of the static and dynamic
properties of clusters is lacking. The proposed research is an attempt to bridge
that gap. The results may also have technological implications for catalyis and
new laser sources. Clusters may also have potential uses in photo-chemical,
magnetic and optical recording industries.