* 8900320
* A Theory of Eye Position Control in Reading
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1989,01/31/1992
* George McConkie, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Jasmine Young
* 01/31/1992
* USD 145,105.00

One way to study people's mental processes as they read or examine pictures,
charts, or maps is to monitor their eye movements and see where they look, in
what order, and for how long. However, interpretation of the pattern of eye
movements requires a theoretical framework that describes how the eyes respond
to mental activities. This research builds on the beginnings of such a theory,
constructed by McConkie and his associates as a consequence of their recent
research. The theory, so far, consists of a description of where the eyes are
sent during reading and perhaps during other tasks. This description assumes
that higher cognitive processes select an object (in the case of reading, a
word) to be the target for the next eye movement. The theory then describes four
principles that operate to determine where the eyes will actually land: 1. The
center of the selected object serves as a target for the eye movement. 2. There
is a systematic error in the eye movement control system, called the "saccadic
range error," that results in the eyes undershooting their target on long
saccades and overshooting it on short saccades. This error function is
quantifiable. 3. There is also unsystematic error, or random variability, in eye
movement control. It produces a normally-distributed spread of oculomotor
"landing sites." 4. The amount of spread of the landing sites is a non-linear
increasing function of the saccade length. This project will test the theory in
a number of ways, seeking to identify its limits, examining how the parameters
of the model must be modified in order for it to describe accurately data from
different people and conditions, and determining whether it can be applied to
tasks other than reading and to displays of materials other than text. Finally,
if the theory proves to be robust, it will be used to develop an algorithm that
will indicate, for each eye movement, which word was actually serving as the
target. Such an algorithm will make future eye movement research more powerful,
since it will provide a means of separating aspects of the data related to
higher cognitive processes from those that only reflect properties of the
oculomotor system. This research will provide a quantitative description of one
aspect of normal oculomotor functioning, thus contributing to our understanding
of the relation between mental activity and eye movement control. This
description may ultimately be useful clinically as a basis for identifying
abnormalities in eye movement control.