* 8900367
* Mathematical Sciences: Geometric Problems in Several ComplexVariables
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1989,11/30/1991
* John D'Angelo, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 11/30/1991
* USD 38,612.00

Two general directions of mathematical research in the field of several complex
varibles characterize this project. Both may be viewed as geometric in their
statement, but analytic in the methods employed. The first question is the
result of a long-term effort to understand the nature of proper mappings between
balls in spaces of several complex variables. A holomorphic mapping beween discs
in one dimension (continuous up to the boundary) can only be achieved by a
finite Blaschke product. In higher dimension, the only (proper) maps were shown
to be automorphisms. The question was reopened when it was discovered that when
the range was a ball of higher dimension, there were distinctly new and
interesting proper maps from the lower to the higher dimensional balls. They may
not be smooth up to the boundary, but if they are then one can say when they
must be rational. When the map is actually polynomial, then it factors
completely analogously to the finite Blaschke product. The thrust of this work
will be to take up the classification of those rational proper maps which are
not polynomial. It is believed that they too admit a factorization into simple
component parts. The second part of the work concerns the geometry of real
hypersurfaces in complex n-dimensional space and Cauchy-Riemann manifolds. This
is more technical in its description. The goal is to formulate some of the
extrinsic notions of multiplicities and orders of contact for real hypersurfaces
in an intrinsic manner that will extend to CR manifolds. Questions about the
geometry of real hypersurfaces are part of a larger effort to understand surface
geometry near points where the Levi form is degenerate. Some of the most
promising research taking place in several complex variables at the present time
centers on domains whose boundaries have degeneracies such as those studied
here.