* 8900497
* REU:  Fate of Chlorophyll-a During Zooplankton Gut Passage
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/1989,12/31/1991
* Maria Vernet, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 12/31/1991
* USD 242,892.00

For a decade field investigators have used the concentration of chlorophyll-
derived pigments in the digestive system of copepods as a way of estimating
natural feeding rates because the measurement can be done immediately on field
caught animals, thereby allowing estimates of natural variance in the feeding
process and bypassing incubation procedures which result in uncertainty and
artifacts. Recently, the method has been criticized because pigment budgets on
some occasions do not arrive at a full accounting for chlorophyll. However, the
method has been so insightful in oceanic ecology that it continues to be used in
spite of the contention that budgets indicate assimilation of pigment or other
unknown source of loss is of major importance. This investigation will try to
establish sources of error and suggest new methodology for field measurements of
chlorophyll-derived pigments in animal guts. %%% Feeding by grazers in the sea
is a fundamental process which underlies not only population dynamics and
individual growth, but also transformation of particulate material and release
of dissolved components utilized by microbial food webs. Much debate over the
years has turned on our inability to know how fast animals feed in nature in the
sea and how much variation is involved in the process. Most experimental
approaches involve confining animals in containers of various sizes with known
or natural food supplies. The errors introduced by catching and confining the
animals are almost always invoked as reasons why the results are not very clear
cut. A method that does not subject the animals to containers was considered a
important step ahead almost a decade ago. Not surprisingly, the method has been
shown to be very useful in describing feeding patterns and rates of natural
populations of grazers in the sea. It has also been shown to have some
deficiencies which this investigation will explore in an attempt to refine our
understanding of the method and suggest changes that will make results more
quantitative.