* 8900498
* Antitermination of Transcription by Phage Lambda's N        Mutational Analysis.
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1989,02/28/1993
* Naomi Franklin, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 02/28/1993
* USD 283,100.00

The long range objective is to characterize the molecular interactions among Nus
proteins of E. coli and N protein of bacteriophage lambda and a phage-coded
nucleic acid recognition site, the effect of which is to modify transcription
with respect to its ability to pause and terminate. The "antitermination"
consequence of lambdoid phage infection takes effect subsequent to transcription
initiation, and is thus distinct from regulation of the initiation process. Now
that the phage components for antitermination have been separated by DNA
cloning, we are well positioned to investigate the molecular structure of those
components and the means by which they interact, probably with the RNA
transcript, to modify the readthrough behavior of E. coli's RNA polymerase. An
"N-Tester Plasmid" transcribes from IPTG-inducible ptac to a terminator (t) that
blocks expression of downstream reporter lacZ. In the presence of N lambda and
host cell Nus proteins, lacZ expression becomes activated by the insertion of an
N recognition "nut" sequence between ptac and t. The 5-base loop of the nut
sequence, determining ability of N to antiterminate, will be mutated
exhaustively to determine the base specificity at each position. A larger effort
will be needed to understand the form of N protein, and the molecular basis for
its specific interactions at nut and with the host Nus proteins. N mutations,
located in a second plasmid compatible with N-Tester, will be tested in vivo for
function and specificity. In the long range, physical studies will augment
genetic analysis of N protein from lambda, and N-analog proteins from lambda-
related phages, proteins that share the antitermination function but differ in
specificity. The indication that N interacts with nut when it is in its RNA
transcript form will be tested by "gel retardation" of nut RNA and DNA during
electrophoresis on nondenaturing gels.