* 8900750
* Laser Photolysis/Laser Induced Fluorescence Study of        Hydroxyl Radical-Chloromethane/Chloroethane Reaction Rates  at Elevated Temperatures
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/1989,08/31/1991
* Barry Dellinger, University of Dayton
* Standard Grant
* MILTON J LINEVSKY
* 08/31/1991
* USD 141,278.00

Under oxidative conditions, the hydroxyl radical is probably the dominant
species responsible for initiation of the decomposition of organic molecules in
high temperature combustion environments. Laboratory flow reactor and full scale
emissions data have shown that chlorinated methanes and ethanes are among the
prevalent high temperature by-products from the thermal oxidation of chlorinated
hydrocarbons (CHCs). It is therefore proposed to measure the high temperature
reaction rates of OH radicals with chloro-methanes and - ethanes using a laser
photolysis/laser-induced fluorescence technique in conjunction with a specially
fabricated high temperature, atmospheric pressure quartz test cell. In the
absence of thermal decomposition, precise rate constant measurements may be
obtained up to 1373 K. The rate data will be used to validate or modify
currently available calculation techniques for the transition state theory of
bimolecular reaction rates. The growing use of incinerators to dispose of toxic
organic wastes has generated an interest in the combustion of CHCs, which appear
to be kinetically controlled. Successful modelling of the process requires
knowledge of the high temperature oxidation mechanism. The proposed research
will supply some of the key data for OH/CHC reactions at temperatures above 480
K, where data are presently unavailable.