* 8900283
* "Economic Growth in Modern Industrial Societies:  The UnitedStates and the Soviet Union" in Moscow, November 28-30, 1988
* SBE,SES
* 11/01/1988,04/30/1990
* Glenn Schweitzer, National Research Council
* Standard Grant
* Lynn A. Pollnow
* 04/30/1990
* USD 12,000.00

This project of the National Academy of Sciences (NAS) consists of a bilateral
seminar entitled "Economic Growth in Modern Industrial Societies: The United
States and the Soviet Union." The seminar is jointly sponsored with the Academy
of Sciences of the USSR (ASUSSR). It will be held in Moscow from November 28 to
November 30, 1988. The NAS chairperson for the seminar is Dr. Marina Whitman,
Vice-President and Group Executive of the General Motors Corporation.
Academicians Konstantin Frolov, Vice- President of the ASUSSR, and Leonid
Abalkin, Director of the ASUSSR Institute of Economics, have been designated as
the Soviet co-chairmen. The seminar will help to clarify some of the most
important factors affecting economic growth in the United States and the USSR by
bringing together leading economists and industrialists of the two countries for
presentations and discussions. Of particular interest are current Soviet
economic reform activities and the growing importance to the United States of
international economic and financial developments. The seminar is structured in
five topical areas: (1) patterns and trends in economic structure and aggregate
productivity; (2) economic aspects of technology innovation and diffusion; (3)
management issues; (4) marketing and finance; and (5) international aspects.
Following the seminar, American participants will meet with economists and other
relevant specialists at key institutions and will visit industrial facilities in
Moscow and Leningrad. The seminar and the subsequent industrial visits have the
potential for promoting greater interaction and understanding among American and
Soviet economists and for identifying areas of mutual interest for further joint
exploration.