* 8900806
* Cold Spring Harbor Summer Undergraduate Research Program
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/1989,11/30/1990
* Winship Herr, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Joanne G. Rodewald
* 11/30/1990
* USD 42,000.00

This award provides funds to recommence an NSF Research Experience for
Undergraduates Site at the Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory. To encourage the
development of young scientists in the field in the field of biology, the
Undergraduate Research Program at Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory has, since 1959,
annually sponsored between ten to twenty undergraduates from throughout the
United States for an intensive ten-week long summer research experience. The
students are housed on grounds and each one is assigned to a permanent
Laboratory staff member to perform an independent research project in the
mentor's field of expertise. Each student begins his or her project with the
advisor's close guidance and is subsequently encouraged to work independently.
This allows students to develop to their full potential and to sample first hand
the excitement of experimental science. During the program the students present
two series of seminars: one in which the students describe their proposed
research and a final series in which the results of each project are summarized.
There is also a series of seminars specifically for the undergraduates in
addition to daily lectures given as part of the Laboratory series of post-
graduate biology courses. This undergraduate research program is very
oversubscribed and, therefore, focuses on selection of individuals who, with
proper direction, are likely to make a serious contribution to science in their
ensuing careers. Particular emphasis is placed on recruiting women and
minorities who might otherwise not have an opportunity to experience such a
scientifically active environment. The success of the program is evidenced by
the number of past participants who have become eminent scientists.