* 8900576
* REU: Research Experiences in Cell Biology for Undergraduates
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/1989,10/31/1990
* Edna Kaneshiro, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Joanne G. Rodewald
* 10/31/1990
* USD 48,560.00

This award provides funds to establish a Research Experiences for Undergraduates
Site for Research in Cell Biology for Undergraduates at the University of
Cincinnati. Students will be directly involved with "hands-on bench research",
reading reviews and the primary literature, discussing their projects with the
investigator, graduate students, research assistants and postdoctorals in
individual weekly lab meetings, making presentations to the department, as well
as giving papers at regional and national professional meetings. Student-faculty
and undergraduate-graduate student interactions, student participation in
professional activities, the commitment and financial support provided by the
institution, the presence of support groups such as Sigma Xi, the opportunity
for participation in the national biology honorary, Beta Beta Beta, and exposure
to a group of dedicated faculty researchers representing both sexes and diverse
ethnic/race backgrounds who provide useful "role models", help to encourage
undergraduates to pursue research careers. Students from undergraduate colleges
in the greater Cincinnati area and several other liberal arts colleges and
public and private universities in the state of Ohio and neighboring state will
be recruited for this program. Approximately half of the students selected will
be from outside the University of Cincinnati in an effort to include those who
ordinarily do not have research opportunities available to them. Student
selections will be based on achievements in course work, taking into
consideration participation in other activities, evaluations of their
performance by persons who are familiar with the candidates, and previous
research experience. A statement of research interest will be used for matching
a supervisor with a trainee. Qualified, minorities and the disabled will be
recruited by direct contacts as well as normal means of recruitment.