* 8900493
* Wyoming Infrared Observatory's Summer Undergraduate ResearchAssistantship Program.
* MPS,AST
* 03/15/1989,08/31/1991
* Ronald Canterna, University of Wyoming
* Continuing Grant
* minette wilson
* 08/31/1991
* USD 69,300.00

The Wyoming Infrared Observatory (WIRO) proposes to continue its Summer
Undergraduate Research Assistantship Program (SURAP) as a National Science
Foundation Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site for the summers of
1989 and 1990. SURAP will continue to offer undergraduate students a fulfilling
research opportunity in modern astrophysics. The principal goals of SURAP are:
first, to introduce the undergraduate to a realistic experience in modern
astrophysics research; second, to acquaint each undergraduate to several of the
diverse research fields in modern astrophysics; third, to offer each student an
opportunity to work directly with active professionals and be given the
responsibility to become independent, creative researchers; and fourth, to
expose the undergraduate to a wide variety of additional scientific endeavors
unique to the Wyoming and Rocky Mountain region through a series of field trips.
Participants will come from colleges and universities throughout the nation.
Successful candidates are chosen by each faculty advisor and the final list of
candidates will be picked to fill our goal to obtain a diverse student
background. Special efforts will be made to actively recruit freshman and
sophomore undergraduates, women, and under-represented minorities. A concurrent
academic course will accompany the research experience to help the students
place this experience in a wider academic context and provide a general
direction of the program. Laboratory and observatory experience will be part of
our tutorial in research program.