* 8900190
* Comparative Study of the Protostelids (Eumycetoza)
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/1989,05/31/1993
* Frederick Spiegel, University of Arkansas
* Continuing Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 05/31/1993
* USD 159,000.00

Slime molds in the group Eumycetozoa are amoeboid protists which produce spore-
bearing fruiting bodies and have amoebae with acutely pointed pseudopodia. The
more commonly recognized members of the group are the widely studied
myxomycetes, or "true" slime molds, and dictyostelid cellular slime molds.
Members of both groups have been used as model systems in cell and developmental
biology. However, a third group, the protostelids, has received far less
attention. The protostelids have very simple fruiting bodies, but many different
types of amoebae are found in various species. If the protostelids can be
demonstrated to be a monophyletic group, then they would provide an excellent
model for: (1) the study of the evolution of patterns of amoeboid cell motility
and (2) the study of phylogeny in amoeboid protists in general. Previous work by
Dr. Spiegel of the University of Arkansas has shown that the seven genera of
protostelids with an amoeboflagellate state in the life cycle are members of a
monophyletic lineage along with the myxomycetes, and phylogenetic analysis gives
a clear picture of the relationships within the group. The present study will
attempt to determine whether members of the protostelids that have only
nonflagellate amoebae in the life cycle are related to these seven flagellate
genera. The work will concentrate primarily on the two large genera Protostelium
and Schizoplasmodiopsis. Preliminary work suggests that the former is
polyphyletic and will have species related to several flagellate genera while
the latter may be monophyletic. The species in these genera will be examined
with light microscopy, immunofluorescence microscopy, and electron microscopy to
determine the details of amoebal structure, fruiting body development, and some
aspects of mitosis. the characters that are discovered will be used to compare
the various species to the flagellate protostelids and to other protists to
which they might be related. It is hoped that the study will result in a
strongly supported phylogenetic classification of the protostelids.