* 8900517
* International Travel Funds for Foreign Participants to      Attend the Summer, 1989 Gordon Research Conference on       Chemical Oceanography in New Hampshire
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/1989,09/30/1990
* Alexander Cruickshank, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 09/30/1990
* USD 15,025.00

For the last twenty years the Gordon Research Conference on Chemical
Oceanography has provided a major forum for discussions, exchange of ideas and
information. The central theme of the Gordon Conference to be held in August,
1989 is " Chemical Processes in the Ocean.Atmosphere.solid Earth System." As in
previous years, one of the objectives for the 1989 conference is to include
several foreign scientists in the exchange of information. Significant research
in these areas has been accomplished by them. The grant will provide
international travel funds for foreign scientists to participate in this Gordon
Research Conference on Chemical Oceanography. Several benefits will be realized
by the participation of these individuals. Most of the marine geochemical
research topics to be discussed require a global perspective which would benefit
from increased international exchange. The foreign scientists can bring new
insights and perspectives to the U.S. participants at the Conference.
Approximately 100 U.S. scientists will thus have an opportunity to establish
personal communication with the foreign scientists. The foreign participants
will acquire in.depth information about the U.S. research programs. It will
benefit their work and may well lead to expanding future collaborative efforts.