* 8900039
* REU: Training Program in Biosocial Adaptation: Assessment ofPaleonutritional Techniques
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/1989,11/30/1990
* Marc Kelley, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Joanne G. Rodewald
* 11/30/1990
* USD 40,600.00

This award provides funds for a Research Experiences for Undergraduate Site and
the University of Rhode Island. Students will be trained in anthropometry,
osteopathology, tissue sample collection, trace metal and stable isotope
analyses, and biological differentiation of skeletal samples as tools for
studying adaptation to physical and cultural environments through time. Such
experiences have proven useful to students majoring in anthropology, biology or
ecology and interested in pursuing an interdisciplinary approach towards a
common objective--namely, paleodietary reconstruction. Undergraduate student
from these fields will work together as a team to realize this common goal. They
will acquire invaluable experience in the field and subsequently in the
laboratory as the data are collected and analyzed. The U.S. institutions
involved will be collaborating with the University of Tarapaca in northern
Chile. The faculty team has established a well-defined research project for
undergraduate training in paleonutrition reconstruction based on well-preserved
mummies and skeletal remains spanning the last 8,000 years from northern Chile.
The students will learn how to formulate and test hypotheses, they will learn
new techniques and be in a position to assess to value of these techniques for
future studies. Preparations are currently underway for a student symposium to
be held at the Plains Conference in Sioux Falls, SD, October 1989. Entitled "REU
Symposium: Diet Reconstruction and Paleoecology," this forum will allow the 1989
student team to present individual and joint papers summarizing their work from
the previous summer.