* 8900038
* U.S.-China Cooperative Research:  Search for and Study of   Impact Structures in China
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/1989,08/31/1993
* Virgil Sharpton, Universities Space Research Association
* Standard Grant
* Tonya Butler
* 08/31/1993
* USD 17,379.00

This proposal on "Search for and Study of Impact Structures in China" between
Drs. V.L. Sharpton and Kevin Burke of the Lunar and Planetary Institute of the
Universities Research Association Inc. and Professor XU Dao.Yi and HE Yong.Nian
of the Institute of Geology, State Seismological Bureau, People's Republic of
China is sponsored by NSF. Approximately 120 impact structures recognized
worldwide document the nature and effects of asteroidal and cometary collisions
with Earth. While such structures are obscured readily by subsequent geological
processes, the clustered spatial distribution within North American, Europe, and
Australia clearly illustrates the usefulness of intensive efforts to search for
these structures and the potential for initiating such efforts within the
remaining continental regions. For vast landmass of China, crater production
calculations suggest 10.15 craters with diameters (D) greater than 20 km should
be present but none have been substantiated. The American researchers have
documented 41 circular structures (3 km &lt; D &gt; 70 km) using orbital imagery
of China, all but a few, however, appear to be endogenic. The most promising
structures include Duolun, Shanghewan, Londoushe, Neidong and Tai Hu Lake. To
date, clear petrographic evidence of an impact origin for any of these features
has not been demonstrated. This study of impact craters in China will be
achieved by (1) extensive field study of the 5 aforementioned structures in
China, and (2) field study of 8 recognized impact structures in North America,
to provide the Chinese with an understanding of impact structures. This effort,
involving structural mapping and sample collection for petrographic analysis and
isotopic dating, will provide, in the short term, a clearer understanding of the
origin of the targeted Chinese structures, and in the short term, the basis for
continuing effort to search for impact structures in China.