* 8900029
* Log-Structured File Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/1989,11/30/1992
* John Ousterhout, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Forbes D. Lewis
* 11/30/1992
* USD 416,070.00

CPU speeds are improving at a dramatic rate, while disk speeds are not. This
technology shift suggests that many engineering and office applications will
become so I/O-limited that they cannot benefit from further CPU improvements.
Log-structure file systems will be investigated as a technique for improving the
I/O performance of general-purpose file systems. In a log-structured file
system, the only representation of data on disk is in the form of an append-only
log. New data can be appended to a log-structured file system without seeks,
even when writing unrelated small files; this potentially provides an order-of-
magnitude improvement in write performance over today's file systems. When a
log-strucuted file system is used in conjunction with an array of small disks
(which provides high bandwidth) and a large main-memory file cache (which
satisfies most read accesses), it may be possible to achieve 1000-fold
improvements in I/O performance over today's systems. This project will explore
implementation techniques for log-structured file systems, including log
management, log wrap-around, and the interaction of the log with disk arrays and
archival storage. A prototype log-structured file system will be implemented as
part of the Sprite network operating system and its performance in a network
file server will be measured.