* 8900472
* Research Experience For Undergraduates (REU):  Research     Participation in Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering
* ENG,EFMA
* 04/01/1989,09/30/1990
* Darshan Dosanjh, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 09/30/1990
* USD 31,995.00

A REU Site program is established involving eight student participants. The
program has both the summer and academic year components. At least three of the
eight participants will be selected for summer participation from smaller
regional colleges with limited research activity. A particular focus of
recruitment efforts is to attract participants from women, minority and disabled
student groups from within and without the university. Six faculty members will
supervise the research efforts of the REU participants. The areas in which the
faculty members are actively engaged in research span experimental and
computational fluid mechanics, gas dynamics, heat transfer, helicopter
aerodynamics and aeroelastic stability, aeroacoustics, noise control, automotive
engineering, paper technology and robotics. A REU participant may select
research problem in any one of these research areas of interest to him. Typical
research problems are: (1) modelling of two dimensional jets, (2) computational
fluid dynamics on parallel-architecture computers, (3) experimental unsteady
heat transfer, (4) aeroelastic stability of bearingless rotor blades, (5)
micromechanics modelling of short fiber composites, and (6) organized structures
in interacting coaxial supersonic jets.