* 8900514
* The Design of Supported Metal Composite Oxides by Selective Metal-Support Exchange
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/1989,02/28/1993
* James Schwarz, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Farley Fisher
* 02/28/1993
* USD 141,000.00

The objective of this work is the systematic preparation of metal catalysts
supported on composite oxides and the correlation of catalytic activity with the
properties of the support. In an agueous environment, metal oxides develop a
surface charge; the pH at which the charge in zero is defined as the "point of
zero charge" (pzc). The pzc of pure silica and that of pure alumina are
separated by about 4 units. Selective metal-support exchange uses the surface
charge to attach catalyst precursors (metal salts) to the support; thus by
adjusting the pH one can selectively introduce anionic or cationic catalyst
precursors. Furthermore, by preparing composite oxides of silica and alumina,
one can, in principle at least, control the pzc. In this study, supported cobalt
catalysts are prepared from both anionic and (separately) cationic precursors on
a series of silica/alumina composites, and the activities of the catalysts for
butene hydrogenation and cyclopropane hydrogenolysis are correlated with the
composition of the support and the method of preparation. This work is an effort
to introduce scientific principles and methods into preparation of supported
catalysts; traditionally these are prepared using "recipes" that represent more
of an art than a science. The study is designed in such a way that it can serve
as a "template" to obtain design data on a variety of systems. The principles
and approches involved are applicable to preparation of reactive ceramic
membranes as well.