* 8900633
* U.S.-Finland Workshop on Advances in Scientific Computing   with Emphasis on Linear Problems; Helsinki, Finland; August,1989
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/1989,10/31/1990
* Gene Golub, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 10/31/1990
* USD 14,250.00

This award provides partial support for approximately twelve U.S. computer
scientists to participate in a joint workshop in Finland on the state of the art
in large scale scientific computing. The meeting was organized by Professor Gene
Golub of Stanford University and Professor Olavi Nevanlinna of the Mathematics
Department of Helsinki University of Technology. It will be held in conjunction
with the annual meeting of the Nordic Section of SIAM (Society for Industrial
and Applied Mathematics.) Finland has a strong tradition in numerical analysis,
particularly in such topics as mixed finite elements, numerics on free boundary
problems, and numerics on integral equations. However, mathematicians there have
relatively little experience in large scale computing. The Finnish State
Computer Center has just acquired its first supercomputer, which has greatly
expanded the potential for scientific computing in Finland. The workshop will
focus on large scale computing in general and numerical linear algebra in
particular, and is expected to stimulate U.S.-Finnish cooperation in these
areas. The U.S. participants should benefit greatly from the experience of the
Finnish group in applying finite element techiques in a wide variety of
situations, including some novel applications. With the advent of new computer
architectures and more powerful computers, it is necessary to consider anew the
link between numerical analysis and computer architectures. Many algorithms
which have been discarded in the past are now returning to the forefront. These
algorithms can greatly affect a computation and can play a role in the
formulation of the design of the solution method. This workshop will focus
further attention on the relation between the problem formulation and the
methods which are used for solving these problems.