* 8900144
* REU:  Community Ecology of the Rocky Subtidal Zone:  An     Integrated Life-History Approach
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1989,01/01/1992
* Kenneth Sebens, Northeastern University
* Continuing grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 01/01/1992
* USD 196,979.00

The rocky subtidal zone of temperate coasts is characterized by complex
topography and equally heterogeneous distributions of marine algae and
invertebrates. Long-term studies of subtidal rock walls (1987-1988) in Northern
Massachusetts have produced and tested hypotheses concerning the long-term
stability and short-term regulation of community structure on such substrata.
Previous studies have focused on the interactions between species on rock walls,
on the population biology of a few dominant species, and on the effects of water
movement on individual, population, and community processes. The present this
research will extend the long-term studies including a detailed analysis of
separated population on nearby rock walls, and populations in contact with
competing species. A mathematical model of the subtidal rock wall community will
be developed. New information is needed on the role of larval dispersal and
recruitment in this system, and its influence on the maintenance of patchiness
of invertebrated populations. There are clearly three levels of larval dispersal
(adjacent, local, regional) that affect population dynamics and thus community
structure. These will be investigated using a combination of field studies,
laboratory investigations, and modelling of large scale flow patterns and to
incorporate the results into a realistic community model.