* 8900135
* REU: Biosystematic Research Experiences for Undergraduate Students
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/1989,09/30/1990
* Larry Pappas, Peru State College
* Standard Grant
* Joanne G. Rodewald
* 09/30/1990
* USD 28,226.00

This award will establish an REU site in the Science and Technology Department
at Peru State College. The REU site will: 1) provide scientific research
training to undergraduate biology students in a small rural college (FTE =
1,500), 2) integrate students with established scientists who will be involved
in implementing student research projects, and 3) further the scientific
knowledge of biosystematics and evolutionary theory. Eight undergraduate
students were selected to work on research projects. The areas of research to be
examined by students are insect chemosystematics, insect morphometrics, central
and marginal population theory, and classical taxonomy. These projects were
selected to give all student participants a full range of exposure to the
multifaceted disciplines of science. Individual research protocols were
developed by the principal investigator and faculty associate in conjunction
with the students working within this program. Each student is responsible for
the planning of experiments to be conducted. In addition, seven research
advisors from other colleges and universities will work with students during the
final planning, data gathering, and data analysis stages of this project. The
goal of this undergraduate research program is to involve students from the
planning stage through the completion and publication of results.