* 8900579
* Temperature-Sensitive Thymocyte Progenitor Cell Lines
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/1990,07/31/1993
* Robert Hyman, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies
* Standard Grant
* Maryanna P. Henkart
* 07/31/1993
* USD 120,000.00

A number of oncogene-containing retroviruses will be examined for their ability
to infect fetal thymocytes. The infected cells will be introduced into
lymphocyte-depleted fetal thymus rudiments which are known to supply all of the
factors necessary for thymocyte proliferation and differentiation. Infection
will be assayed by the ability of virus-infected cells to induce foci or drug-
resistant colonies in NIH 3T3 cells. The criterion for successful infection will
be the establishment of persistently infected lymphocyte populations which can
proliferate within rudiments and which have the phenotypic properties known to
be associated with thymocyte progenitors. This strategy will identify candidate
oncogene-containing retroviruses which can be used in attempts to establish
temperature-sensitive progenitor cell lines. T-lymphocytes are one of the major
cell lineages that comprise the cells of the imune system. There are two major
difficulties that currently impede study of T-lymphocyte differentiation: 1) the
relevant progenitors are minor constituents of a heterogeneous population of
cells, and 2) there is no simple in vitro system that permits the clonal
expression of thymocyte progenitors in quantity. This project, if successful,
will develop a cell culture system that would permit isolation of cloned
populations of thymocyte progenitors in quantity and the study of their
differentiation into mature thymocytes. Although at present this research must
be regarded as "high risk", the potential for the use of such a system in basic
studies of T-cell development is very great.