* 8900061
* Evaluation of Larval Transport Models using a Programmable, Vertically Migrating 'Zooplankton Mimic'
* GEO,OCE
* 11/01/1989,04/30/1993
* Richard Forward, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 04/30/1993
* USD 40,530.00

Our understanding of how populations in the sea are affected by the ocean
circulation to which they are subject during part or all of their life cycle is
restricted at the moment to large scale circulation and biogeographic
distributions. Mesoscale and small scale interactions, where the individual
organism is of primary importance, are difficult to study. The vertically
migrating Lagrangian drifter to be developed in this study will emulate the
small-scale vertical swimming behavior of decapod larvae in the field. Drifters
programmed according to laboratory and field observations of larval behavior
will be released where crabs are spawning to determine if vertical migration can
account for retention of larvae in estuaries and ultimate arrival at adult
habitats. A larger drifter, carrying an ARGOS satellite transmitter, will track
effects of behavior on transport of crab larvae exported from an esutary
(Callinectes sapidus in Chesapeake Bay). Some oceanographic models predict that
C. sapidus will be swept out of the mid-Atlantic Bight, but dense populations
remain within 50km of the mouth of Chesapeake Bay,k apparently re-entering the
Bay as megaloae and juveniles. Drifters programmed with alternative larval
behaviors will help resolve whether this is caused by wind-driven advection of
near- surface larvae, passive transport of megalopae in bottom currents, or
transport enhanced by vertical migration into flood tidal currents. %%% One of
the shellfish resources of considerable value to man is the blue crab of
Chesapeake Bay and other estuaries of the southeastern United States. Studies of
the distribution of the larvae have shown that they exit Chesapeake Bay during
part of their life cycle, but then re-enter the Bay when they near adulthood. It
is not clear how their position in the water column, their ability to move up
and down in the water column, and the local currents in the Bay and mid-Atlantic
Bight combine to maintain the populations in the Bay. A small drifter that can
mimic larval behavior is being developed. The drifter will carry a satellite
transmitter so that its position can be tracked as it is carried by the
currents, and its movement up and down in the water column can be specified. The
drifter will be deployed where the adult blue crabs spawn. The drifter will
allow various swimming behaviors to be tested to determine which combination(s)
of behavior and currents most realistically copy known larval distributions and
result in maintenance of the crab population in the Chesapeake Bay.