* 8900984
* Mathematical Sciences: Algorithms for Large Scale           Optimization
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1989,12/31/1990
* Stephen Wright, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 12/31/1990
* USD 17,200.00

Research will be carried out into algorithms for minimizing nonsmooth composite
functions of many variables. Instances of such functions are integrable and
bounded data fitting, and penalty functions for nonlinear programming. The
general approach is to use a trust-region framework, and iterative methods, in
the spirit of gradient projection methods, to solve the subproblem at each
iteration. It is intended that the algorithms will be most suitable for
nonlinear problems in which the constraints are partially separable (i.e. the
contraint derivative matrix has a block-diagonal structure). Important examples
of such problems include constrained discrete optimal control, and
multicommodity network flow. Particular attention will be given to
implementation of the algorithms on parallel computer architectures. Iterative
solution methods for large-scale linear programming problems will also be
investigated. These methods, which use as a framework some well-established
techniques for general constrained optimization, have the advantage that
factorization of the constraint matrix is never required. Instead, iterative
methods (such as successive over-relaxation or a gradient projection/conjugate
gradient technique) are used to solve the convex quadratic programming
subproblems at each iteration. Implementation of these various algorithms on
vector/parallel processors will be carried out, to determine both the
effectiveness of the underlying approach, and the extent to which computer
architectures can be utilized.