* 8900962
* An Onshore-offshore Large-offset Seismic Profile Across the Oregon Subduction Zone
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/1989,08/31/1993
* Anne Tréhu, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Bilal U. Haq
* 08/31/1993
* USD 171,678.00

The objective of this program is to understand the dip and curvature of the
subducting plate, the velocity structure of the overlying accretionary complex
and the configuration of the boundary between the subducting plate, the
accretionary complex and the overriding accreted terrane for the Oregon margin.
Program involves the emplacement of an array of ocean bottom seismometers
offshore and an array of receivers on shore to record during one day of shooting
from a high volume air gun array on a chartered commercial seismic vessel. The
one day refraction program is being added to an already funded high resolution
multi-channel reflectiion survey in the area. %%% The deep structure of active
continental margins is of considerable scientific interest. The Oregon margin is
of particular interest because there is great interest in the seismic hazard of
this region, and understanding of the shape, characteristics, and depth of the
subducting plate will help earth quake seismologists to identify that part of
the boundary which is most likely to sustain earthquakes. Dr. Trehu is a leader
in the field of seismic refraction, especially using ocean bottom recorders. She
has successfully carried out similar experiments in the Great Lakes and on the
California margin.