* 8900880
* REU: Field Training and Research: Primate Social Ecology
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/1989,09/30/1990
* Shaun Bennett, School for Field Studies
* Standard Grant
* Joanne G. Rodewald
* 09/30/1990
* USD 39,975.00

This award provides continuing support for a Research Experiences for
Undergraduates Site administered through the School for Field Studies. This
program will train eight students in research methods and theory of Primate
Social Behavior and Ecology at The School For Field Studies training site in
Catemaco, Veracruz State, Mexico. During the summer, students will take a 30 day
course in which they will conduct directed and individual research projects on
stumptail macaques, Macaca arctoides. Daily lectures and computer/statistics
laboratory sessions help students design their projects, collect data, analyze
those data, and interpret their results within a scientific framework. Projects
will focus on one of three areas: (1) influences of observers on social
interactions, (2) social ecological analyses and (3) fine grained analyses of
patterns of courtship and mating. Tentative statistical analyses of the data, a
preliminary paper, and an oral report are completed at the end of each course.
During the academic year following the field course, students take independent
study courses at their home institution in which they analyze and write up the
results of their research with the senior faculty member. By the end of the
academic year following the field course, students submit a paper describing the
results of their project for publication. A similar one year REU site proposal,
funded in 1988 and now at its midpoint, has proven successful.