* 8900456
* REU: Research Experience for Undergraduates
* BIO,DBI
* 05/15/1989,10/31/1990
* Paul Richardson, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Joanne G. Rodewald
* 10/31/1990
* USD 40,000.00

This award provides funds for a Research Experiences for Undergraduates Site in
the Department of Biological Sciences at Oklahoma State University. The program
will include ten participant projects, all concerned with improvement of green
plant performance through enhancement of growth conditions. The enhancement
methods to be studied will involve a variety of approaches from the field of
plant physiology and structure, plant pathology, ecology of research,
biochemistry. A brief orientation will be concerned with philosophy of research,
plant productivity, growth limiting conditions and how they may be circumvented,
literature survey, report writing and presentations of results. Each participant
works with a research advisor. Project planning and reading of background
material occur before the participants arrive. Group progress meetings are held
throughout the program focusing on problem areas and successes. Participants
visit each other's labs, discuss their projects and work with research
assistants, graduate students, and post doctoral personnel as well as the
advisor. Post program follow- up efforts will include presentation of results to
biology and science clubs in participants' home schools, state collegiate
academies of science and publication in appropriate journals.