* 8900040
* Shallow Stratigraphy, Structure, and Modern Depositional    Processes along Margins of Small Detached Carbonate         Platforms in an Active Tectonic Setting
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/1989,04/30/1992
* Albert Hine, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Bilal U. Haq
* 04/30/1992
* USD 162,218.00

The Nicaraguan Rise is a major structural/tectonic feature, consisting of
detached carbonate platforms, that separates the southwestern and northwestern
basins of the Caribbean Sea. During research cruises in March-April 1987 and May
1988, a large data set was collected that includes single-channel seismic
reflection profiling data, bottom samples, SCUBA diver observations, remote
operated vehicle and bottom camera pigment data. In their first two years of
research, Hine and Hallock- Muller have discovered corresponding east-west
gradients in platform depth (average bank top depth increases east to west),
sediment facies (gradients from chlorozoan to chloralgal sediment types),
benthic communities (algal-sponge dominance increases to the west), and biotic
pigment concentrations (doubling east to west). Documentation of these gradients
has important implications for understanding carbonate platform drownings in the
geologic record. In addition, their seismic reflection data have provided new
insights concerning the infilling of seaways, erosion/deposition on carbonate
slopes, and tectonic influences on carbonate bank development. They have also
discovered the first Halimeda bioherms to be described from the Caribbean. About
two thirds of the data remain to be analyzed. This renewal grant will enable
completion of this project examining processes controlling deposition on an
important, but poorly known system of modern carbonate platforms.