* 8900134
* Mathematical Sciences: Operator Theory and Differential     Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/1989,11/30/1991
* Jerome Goldstein, Tulane University
* Continuing Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 11/30/1991
* USD 83,156.00

Work supported by this award will focus on a variety of mathematical topics
approached from a point of view which emphasizes techniques from functional
analysis and the tools of nonlinear operator semigroups. Three problem areas
will be addressed. The first, quantum theory, involves properties of ground
state electron densities and several variants of Thomas- Fermi theory dealing
with spin polarized systems, exchange corrections, inverse problems and nuclear
theory. Nonlinear partial differential equations represent the spin polarized
Thomas-Fermi theory of generalized atoms. Work will be done to minimize the
interaction of pairs of chemical potentials. The Euler-Lagrange equations for
the energy functional yield a coupled elliptic system which remains to be
analyzed. A second line of research on semigroups of operators concerns a Hille-
Yosida type theory for certain first and second order semilinear evolution
equations. Work will concentrate on finding necessary and sufficient conditions
on semilinear equations to guarantee not only a strongly continuous semigroup of
operator solutions but also to obtain growth conditions on solutions in terms of
prescribed functionals. Related work will be concerned with continuing
investigations into equipartition of energy, approximation theorems, ergodic
theory and two-point boundary problems. The third area, nonlinear partial
differential equations, concerns model equations arising in fluid dynamics and
biology. The equations are nonlinear degenerate parabolic boundary value
problems; the object of the work is to determine when the corresponding abstract
differential operator is dissipative.