* 8900171
* The Role of Oral Argument in Supreme Court Decision Making
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/1989,10/31/1991
* Glendon Schubert, Alfred University
* Continuing Grant
* Lisa Martin
* 10/31/1991
* USD 156,132.00

Decisionmaking by the Supreme Court can be seen as a flow of steps and
procedures which include reviewing appeals and appli- cations to hear a case,
oral argument, conference discussion and vote, opinion assignment, opinion
writing and circulation, and announcement of the decision on Decision Day. Each
of the stages in the process has an impact on the final outcome. Research has
revealed much about each of the stages with the exception of oral argument where
very little is known. The oral argument can be seen either as a key event
influencing judicial decisionmaking or as an opportunity to observe the
decisional predispositions of justices. From either vantage, it is reve- latory
to understanding its relationship to individual justice's attitudes and votes as
well as to leadership and decisionmaking in the Supreme Court. By rendering oral
argument susceptible to identification, measurement, and analysis, this project
provides the first comprehensive behavioral study of the role of oral argument
in Supreme Court decisionmaking. A sample of 300 cases will be selected from the
Burger Court period, with half of the cases involving criminal procedure issues
and half randomly selected from other issue areas. Data will be developed from
transcripts and real-time audio recordings of the behavioral events that
occurred during oral arguments. Techniques of verbal content analysis and voice
analysis will be used to develop indicators of verbal and nonverbal aspects of
behavior. The issue content of the oral argument and the opinions will also be
coded. These data will be integrated with existing archived data on judicial
attitudes, attributes, and case characteristics. Theoretical objectives include
(1) analyzing the relationship between the verbal behavior of Justices in oral
argument and their voting decisions; (2) analyzing the issues considered in oral
argument and the content of majority and minority opinions; and (3) explaining
patterns of involvement, leadership, and affective behavior by Justices during
oral argument. In addition to filling an important gap in our understanding of
the Supreme Court decisionmaking process, this study will provide a unique
opportunity to observe directly expressions of judicial attitudes across issues,
across cases, and across time. Prior studies have inferred attitudes about
political ideology through voting behavior. This research will complement and
extend these studies with direct observation. The development and application of
techniques and methods for direct observation and measurement will have far
reaching impacts on many other areas in the behavioral and social sciences that
would be advanced by systematic observational methods.