* 8900610
* Collaborative Research on the Geography of High-Technology  Industry in Japan
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/1989,04/30/1991
* Martin Kenney, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 04/30/1991
* USD 0.00

As new patterns of industrial growth and development have emerged since World
War II, scholars have developed new theoretical frameworks to describe and
explain these patterns. One line of inquiry has sought to examine the
ramifications of changing labor requirements of different industries, while
other social scientists have focused on institutional dimensions of
technological innovation. This collaborative project aims to synthesize these
and other approaches through detailed study of the locational decisions made by
four high- technology industrial sectors in Japan -- semiconductors, computers,
biotechnology, and software. With the assistance of scholars in Japan, the
principal investigators will gather data on the location of these industries and
of related activities in production complexes, which will enable them to produce
maps of the geographic patterns of high-technology industries and complexes.
These maps will provide the bases for a second stage of research, which will
consist of a set of related inquiries into the processes and conditions that
have led Japanese high-technology firms to develop new patterns of activity.
Central to these inquiries are the conduct of structured interviews with a
carefully selected sample of corporate officials. Data from these interviews and
from other sources will be analyzed to test hypotheses relating industrial
organization and operations with locational patterns and processes. This
research will make significant contributions in a number of diverse ways.
Through careful analysis of one set of industries in Japan, the relative
contributions of each of the major current theoretical perspectives can be
assessed and possibly reconciled. The research also will provide valuable
empirical data and interpretations of value for those studying contemporary
industrial geography in any setting, and especially for those seeking more
complete understandings of the distinctive character of modern Japanese economic
organization.