* 8900189
* Photosynthesis and Calcification by Blooms of the           Coccolithophore Emiliania Huxleyi in the Gulf of Maine
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/1989,04/30/1992
* William Balch, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 04/30/1992
* USD 182,975.00

Satellite images of the sea surface taken by both the Coastal Zone Color
Scanner and the AVHRR show widespread occurrence of coccolithophore blooms,
especially in the Gulf of Maine and the North Atlantic Ocean. The
coccolithophore Emiliani huxleyi is probably the dominant organism in these
blooms, and it is the most abundant calcite producing organism on earth. In
order to establish the role of these organisms in global carbon production, it
is necessary to know rates of primary production of organic material and
calcite. The Gulf of Maine provides an environment in which blooms can be
located by AVHRR and their production dynamics studied. Field studies will
determine natural rates of photosynthesis and calcification in the blooms.
Laboratory studies on isolates from the blooms will establish the effects of
light, nitrate and iron on coccolithogenesis, and the balance between
calcification and photosynthesis. These blooms are a potential source of both
organic and inorganic carbon to the deep-sea, and a unique pathway for carbon in
the biogeochemical cycles of the world's ocean. %%% Satellite pictures of the
sea surface often show areas of enhanced reflection due to small, single celled
organisms known as coccolithophores. The calcite plates on the surface of these
algal cells have been extensively studied by physiologists intested in
calcification processes. Because the plates can be shed by the organisms, and
the organisms themselves can sink in the sea, they provide a means by which both
organic and inorganic carbon is transferred from the sea surface to greater
depths. These organisms are found virtually everywhere in the world's ocean, but
are especially abundant in the Gulf of Maine and North Atlantic Ocean, at times
forming large concentrations or blooms. When this occurs, the plates themselves
may alter the way light is transmitted in the sea, and the organisms may grow
faster or slower accordingly. This study will reveal to us the rates at which
calcification takes place via these organisms in the sea and the associated
rates at which primary organic production takes place. Laboratory studies will
reveal the interaction of light, nutrients and iron on growth and calcification
in these organisms so that we can interpret satellite photos with increased
understanding of processes taking place in the sea.