* 8900151
* Dissertation Research: Systematics of Erythrina             (Leguminosae) and the Evolution of Pollination Systems
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/1989,05/31/1992
* Jeffrey Doyle, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* Penelope L. Firth
* 05/31/1992
* USD 8,500.00

Under the guidance of faculty adviser Dr. Jeffrey Doyle, graduate student Anne
Bruneau of Cornell University will study the molecular systematics, morphology,
and pollination biology of species in the legume genus Erythrina. Several
species are cultivated as street trees in the tropics, used as living fences, or
planted as shade trees in coffee and cacao plantations. All Erythrina species
have red or orange flowers and are pollinated by either hummingbirds or perching
birds (order Passeriformes). Species pollinated by perching birds have wide,
gaping flowers that are oriented toward branches or branch tips; species
pollinated by hummingbirds have narrow-tubed flowers that face outwards and only
birds that hover can obtain nectar, and thereby effect pollination. Hummingbird
pollination has been considered more specialized than pollination by perching
birds, but this has never been critically tested. Considerable biological and
horticultural interest has resulted in the availability of nearly all 112
species in the genus in living collections. Laboratory work will focus on
molecular markers of species diversification, obtained from analyses of
chloroplast DNA and nuclear ribosomal DNA. Combined molecular and morphological
evidence will produce a robust phylogenetic tree for the group. Field work will
document the specific pollinators of those remaining species not yet studied.
The researchers can then determine the evolutionary relationships between
hummingbird- and perching bird-pollinated species and test whether the
evolutionary change occurred once or several times among species of this genus.