* 8900490
* Mathematical Sciences: Project in Mathematical Modeling in  Population Biology
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/1989,11/30/1990
* Hans Othmer, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 11/30/1990
* USD 32,000.00

An REU site project will be conducted under this award focusing on problems of
mathematical modeling in the area of population biology. Students will be
introduced to techniques of dynamical systems theory, scientific computing and
statistical methods applied to problems of current interest in mathematical
biology. Specific activities include studies of the dynamics of simple
interacting populations, including predator-prey systems and evolutionarily
stable strategies. Several systems such as those studied in laboratory
chemostats will be introduced. Work on the dynamics of single and interacting
age-structured populations, including simple host-parasite systems, will also be
carried out. Other students will be involved with epidemiological models for
animal and human disease transmission. Based on basic assumptions about the
transmission of infectious disease agents in a homogeneous population, SIR
(Susceptible-Infected-Removed) models will be developed. A picture of the global
behavior of the resulting nonlinear ordinary differential equations systems will
be built up using phase space analysis. Work will also be done on resource
management and optimal harvesting strategies. The main object of this research
area is to develop continuous population models for a single species under
different harvesting strategies. At the beginning, a study of the species in the
absence of harvesting will be made to show how one attempts to find a model that
is biologically realistic and mathematically tractable. Then various harvesting
strategies will be introduced into the model and tested. The projects will be
selected to involve the students in formulating an original mathematical model
or modifying an existing one, doing qualitative analysis and statistical
estimation of the parameters where possible, devising a numerical scheme and
performing the numerical simulations. Understanding the numerical results in the
framework of the model and modifying the model where necessary will follow.