* 8900004
* US-Switzerland Cooperative Research on Intracellular        Location of Sucrose:  Sucrose Fructosyl Transferase
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/1989,12/31/1991
* Thomas Housley, Purdue Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 12/31/1991
* USD 17,470.00

This award supports Professors Thomas Housley and Nicholas Carpita of Purdue
University to collaborate in plant biochemistry research with Professor Philippe
Matile and others of the University of Zurich. These scientists share an
interest in the synthesis and degradation of fructans and other carbohydrates
and the physiological role of these storage polymers. The focus of their
collaboration is a study of the intracellular location of sucrose fructosyl
transferase (SST) in leaf mesophyll cells of wheat and tuber cells of Jerusalem
artichoke. They hypothesize that SST is associated with the tonoplast, the
delimiting membrane of the vacuole, and facilitates transport of sucrose into
the vacuole. Further, SST can dissociate from the tonoplast and that
dissociation alters SST activity. They plan to test these hypotheses empirically
after isolation of intact vacuoles. Dr. Matile offers expertise in the isolation
of pure, intact vacuoles from higher plants. He and his research group have
demonstrated convincingly that fructans, SST, and other enzymes of fructan
metabolism were solely in the vacuole. Drs. Housley and Carpita offer expertise
in fructan metabolism and carbohydrate structure analysis. They have
demonstrated that there are two separate pools of sucrose in the cell, and that
SST occupies a location in the cell where it can discriminate between these
pools. Vacuoles provide a unique system to study in vitro the regulation of
enzyme activity by membrane association. The proposed collaboration will use
vacuoles to test a model of fructan synthesis and thus contribute insights into
the kinetics of sugar incorporation in fructans of protoplasts and vacuoles.
Such information is important for understanding primary productivity in plants,
and is essential if we are to consider modifying plants to improve primary
productivity.