* 8900202
* US-Finland Cooperative Research on the Magnetic Structure ofof Stellar Atmospheres
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1989,01/31/1992
* Jeffrey Linsky, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 01/31/1992
* USD 15,750.00

This proposal on "The Magnetic Structure of Stellar Atmospheres" between Drs.
Jeffrey L. Linsky, James E. Neff, and Steven H. Saar of the University of
Colorado at Boulder and Dr. Ilkka Vilhelmi Tuominen of the University of
Helsinki, is jointly approved by NSF and the Academy of Finland under the
U.S.-Finland Cooperative Science Program. The emission from outer atmospheres of
late-type stars arises not homogeneously (as most current models assume), but
from discrete, magnetically confined regions. Attempts to probe this structure
on the most active, most rapidly-rotating start with spectral ("Doppler")
imaging techniques yield a picture of the magnetic field morphology but no
information about the field strength. Measurements of field strengths on slowly
rotating, relatively inactive stars, provide the mean field strength but no
information about the field morphology. However, simultaneous measurements of
broad-band linear polarization (BLP) can help interpret the results of each
program, as BLP provides some magnetic flux information for rapid rotators and
some field morphology information for slow rotators. The researchers propose to
exploit the potential of BLP observations by bringing together the unique
magnetic field and spectral imaging data sets of the University of Colorado at
Boulder with the best available BLP data, that of the University of Helsinki
Observatory. The American researchers will obtain new observations using the
University of Helsinki photopolarimeters and high- resolution spectrographs at
the Crimean Astrophysical Observatory and at the Nordic Optical Telescope with
their other observing programs.