* 8900990
* Research Experience For Undergraduates (REU): Aerospace     and Engineering Mechanics
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/1989,08/31/1991
* Prem Khosla, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* None
* 08/31/1991
* USD 33,063.00

A REU program is to involve at least eight undergraduate engineering students in
current aerospace and engineering mechanics. These students will be recruited
primarily from other universities in the region and selected for the program on
basis of their academic achievements. Specific research projects are chosen from
the areas of computational fluid mechanics, biomechanics, experimental fluids
and propulsion, large space structures, material mechanics, rocket engine
diagnostics, and guidance and control. In the proposed program, student
participants in the program spend one summer usually between their junior and
senior year. Student activities during the summer will include: (1)
Participation in research with defined periods of topic familiarization, intense
research and project reporting. This activity provides the primary opportunity
for interaction between the students, the faculty, and current graduate student.
(2) Attendance at weekly REU meetings. These meetings will guarantee contact
among the REU students and will also provide contact with faculty from other
areas. They also provide a natural forum for the presentation of project results
and summaries of research. (3) Attendance at local professional meetings. (4)
Visits to private and government research facilities. The REU program will be
administered by a faculty coordinator. The coordinator will organize the student
recruiting efforts, manage the process of student selection and assignment,
coordinate weekly meetings of participants, and arrange visits to research
facilities.