* 8900566
* Purification of Complex Biological Mixtures by Displacement Chromatography:  Extension to Group-Specific Affinity       Supports and Development of Novel Displacer Compounds
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/1990,07/31/1992
* Steven Cramer, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Foltz
* 07/31/1992
* USD 60,000.00

Previous work on the simultaneous purification and concentration of biomolecules
by displacement chromatography is expanded to include: separations of complex
mixtures of biomolecules, development of novel displacer compounds and an
investigation of affinity displacement chromatography. Adsorption data obtained
from frontal microscale chromatography is used to select appropriate displacers
and chromatographic conditions for the displacement experiments. Displacement
experiments are carried out with analytical and preparative columns packed with
a variety of stationary phase materials. New classes of displacer compounds are
identified and synthesized for various chromatographic systems. This research
significantly increases the arsenal of available displacer compounds and
provides basic guidelines for the selection of appropriate displacers for future
bioseparation problems. Group-specific affinity chromatographic materials such
as immobilized reactive dyes, lectins, and metal chelate systems are
investigated for their potential use in the displacement mode. The use of
affinity supports in the displacement mode is expected to significantly increase
the throughput and purity attained with these selective chromatographic systems.
This research will significantly expand the scope of displacement chromatography
and will facilitate the widespread use of the technique for the purification of
biopharmaceuticals.