* 8900704
* Molecular Structural Design of Miscible Polymer Blends
* MPS,DMR
* 12/01/1989,05/31/1993
* Joel Barlow, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 05/31/1993
* USD 265,000.00

Miscible polymer blends have a simple continuous relationship between
properties and composition, when amorphous, unlike many immiscible blends whose
properties may fall below those of the components. Miscible blends of high-
preformance polymers with less expensive polymers consequently offer the
advantage of specifying performance levels within wide limits for minimum cost.
The goal of this research is to advance the principles, through example, for
controlling phase behavior of blends of this type through molecular structural
design. In particular, this research focuses on identifying examples of miscible
blends of existing or new high-performance polymers, such as polycarbonates,
polysulfones, polyacrylates, etc. with less expensive polymers based on
commodity monomers like styrene, methyl methacrylate, acrylonitrile, etc. The
strategy is to find homo-polymer pairs that are energetically close to the
border of miscibility and then use copolymerization to make them usefully
miscible via the benefits of intramolecular repulsion effects. A search for such
systems must be guided by principles, since the number of compositional
variables is too great to randomly explore them all. This work involves
application of the latest theories of miscibility and techniques for quantifying
interactions in addition to synthesis of targeted polymers or copolymers. In
addition to identification of potentially useful materials, this work should
answer important basic question aboutintermolecular interactions.