* 8900291
* Collaborative Research on Applied Equilibrium with          Increasing Returns:  A Non Parametric Approach
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/1989,12/31/1992
* Rosa Matzkin, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 12/31/1992
* USD 84,038.00

Applied general equilibrium models are becoming the primary method for analyzing
the interrelations among households, firms, governmental policy, and the
international economy. At present there exist two main methods of specifying
general equilibrium models before equilibrium values are computed. These are
econometric specification and calibration. Both methods have certain
shortcomings, particularly in empirical application where there are errors in
measurement. The work done in this project will overcome those difficulties by
using a non-parametric approach in specifying the general equilibrium model.
This project avoids the difficulties associated with the econometric and
calibration methods by making no assumptions about the form, either
distributional or exact value, of the errors. Rather, a set of necessary
conditions is derived for testing whether a given set of data could have been
generated by market participants acting under the usual behavioral assumptions.
That is, the firms maximize profit, and the consumers maximize utility. Tests
for the existence of utility functions are derived, and applied to the empirical
data. This project is done in collaboration with Professor Donald Brown of
Stanford University. %%% During the past several decades various methods for
analyzing the economy in its entirety have been developed. Input-output
analysis, linear programming, and activity analysis have been the mainstays for
modeling all the interrelationships (firms, consumers, and government) in an
economy, and estimating values at which the economy will reach equilibrium.
These methods have increasingly given way to a more fundamental methodology
which actively incorporates the behavioral assumptions underlying the activities
of the individual market participants. That is, the consumers are assumed to
maximize utility according to a parametric specification of a mathematical
function with known properties. Likewise, firms are assumed to maximize profit
according to a mathematical function. The difficulty with this parametric
approach is that very strong assumptions must be made about the values or
distribution of errors occuring in empirical data. This project overcomes that
difficulty by deriving a set of necessary conditions to be applied to a set of
observed empirical data to test whether those data could have been generated by
a model with the assumed behavioral properties. Therefore, this non-parametric
approach avoids the maintained hypothesis of parametric specification for the
behavior of the market participants. These non-parametric tests provide a
fundamental theoretical basis for further parametric analysis. This project is
done in collaboration with Professor Donald Brown of Stanford University.