* 8900399
* Dissertation Research:  Dispersal Distance, Deposition Site,and Survivorship of Cassowary-Dispersed Seeds
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/1989,06/30/1991
* Theodore Fleming, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Althea Ball
* 06/30/1991
* USD 11,000.00

Zoochory is the predominant dispersal syndrome in most tropical forests. Few
studies directly address what selective advantages tropical plants gain from
zoochory or what the demographic effects of frugivore-mediated seed dispersal
are to tropical trees. The paucity of empirical data on tropical zoochory after
removal stems from the extreme difficulty of finding seeds where they have been
deposited by frugivorous dispersers. Seed dispersal by cassowaries is an ideal
system for study because cassowaries are specialist frugivores, virtually the
sole disperser for many large-seeded trees and lianas, and are commonly found in
the vast undisturbed forests of New Guinea. Most importantly, their droppings
which contain dispersed seeds are numerous and conspicuous at the study site.
Seeds will be marked with tags or small radio-transmitters before cassowaries
disperse them. Tagged seeds found in visual searches and transmitter-seeds found
by radio tracking will reveal dispersal distances, including those seeds carried
long distances. Within- dropping parameters (e.g. parameters (e.g. insolation)
will be measured for every dropping found. Droppings will be monitored up to
three years for germination, seedling growth, and survivorship. The effects of
within-dropping parameters and site parameters on germination, growth and
survivorship of seedlings will be analyzed. Data on dispersal distances, within-
dropping parameters and site parameters will be pooled in probability matrices
to test published hypotheses regarding the consequences of vertebrate mediated
seed dispersal. In the second half of the study the effects of dispersal will be
experimentally examined. Seeds voided by a captive cassowary to make "pseudo-
droppings" to test hypotheses based on observations of naturally-dispersed seeds
will be used.