* 8900411
* Mathematical Sciences: Studies in Numerical Solution of     Functional Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/1989,11/30/1991
* Zdzislaw Jackiewicz, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Izenman
* 11/30/1991
* USD 64,000.00

The purpose of this project is to study the numerical solution of functional
differential equations and Volterra and Abel integral equations. The principal
investigator plans to examine the implementation of fully implicit one step
methods and predictor-corrector methods for functional differential equations
with step and step/order changing strategies based on the estimation of the
local defect rather than the local discretization error. This technique has been
recently suggested by Enright in the context of ordinary differential equations.
Since the local defect depends on the approximate solution at the grid points as
well as the interpolation scheme it is expected that, as in the case of ODE's,
this technique will be more reliable than the technique based on the estimation
of local discretization error alone. The principal investigator also plans to
study stability properties of numerical methods for Volterra and Abel integral
and integrodifferential equations with respect to various test equations. These
include convolution and nonconvolution test equations, equations with degenerate
kernels and equations with completely positive kernels. In many cases the
application of numerical methods to these equations lead to recurrence equations
with variable coefficients which are difficult to investigate. Some novel
approaches to the study the behaviour of solutions to these difference equations
will also be investigated.