* 8901476
* Studies on Phosphoinositide Compartmentalization in WRK-1   Cells
* NONE,NONE
* 12/15/1989,05/31/1993
* Marie Monaco, New York University Medical Center
* Continuing grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 05/31/1993
* USD 300,000.00

Our present understanding of the regulation of cellular metabolic events is
limited by our ability to reproduce subcellular organizational components in
vivo. In the present proposal, we outline a series of experiments designed to
investigate the organization of the hormone- responsive phosphoinositide cycle
in the rat cell line, WRK-1. We have previously reported the existence of both
vasopressin-sensitive and insensitive phosphoinositides in these cells, and more
recent data suggests a physical compartmentation of the cycle, as well. Our
present goals are three fold: 1) Using two different agonists, vasopressin and
bradykinin, we will determine whether a common or distinct phosphoinoitide lipid
pool is involved in the cyclic metabolic response to different stimuli. The
results of these experiments will indicates how closely the receptor is
associated with hormone-responsive lipid pools. 2) To determine the degree to
which the phosphoinositide cycle is a closed metabolic phenomenon within the
cell, we will carry out experiments designed to test whether or not exogenous
substrate intermediates can participate in hormone-stimulated cycling. A
negative result in this instance would suggest that all the enzymes of the cycle
are arranged in such a manner that the product from one reaction is channeled
directly to the next enzyme in the pathway. 3) We will examine the mechanism by
which phosphatidylinositol resynthesis is stimulated during cycling using a
combination of whole cell and broken cell protocols. We will determine whether
the hormone induced increase in synthesis of phosphatidylinositol is the result
of increased substrate concentrations or enzyme activation or both. The combined
results of these studies should provide insight into the organizational aspects
of phosphoinositide cycling, giving us a more accurate picture of the
biochemical events involved in cellular regulation. It has for a number of years
been appreciated that one of the major pathways of transmembrane signaling by
hormones involves the breakdown of particular phospholipid components of the
cell membrane. Dr. Monaco's prior work has demonstrated that only a fraction of
the total phospholipid present in the membrane is susceptible to hormone-
stimulated breakdown. Thus, only that portion is capable of serving as a source
of second messenger in the cellular response to hormone. The continuation of
this research is directed toward further identification of the mechanisms that,
in effect, compartmentalize the cell membrane phospholipids into hormone-
sensitive and insensitive fractions. The results of this research will
contribute to our fundamental understanding of the complex mechanisms by which
cells respond to extracellular signals.