* 8901458
* Structural and Algorithmic Problems in Topological Graph    Theory (Mathematics)
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/1989,12/31/1990
* Joan Hutchinson, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Lola E. Rogers
* 12/31/1990
* USD 62,002.00

There has been increasing, mutual benefit between the mathematical field of
graph theory, a study of finite configurations and their interconnections, and
the theoretical study in computer science of combinatorial (finite) algorithms.
This research focuses on topological graph theory, an area particularly enhanced
by these interrelations: this field and this proposal, in particular, consider
the embedding (or drawing) of graphs on surfaces (the sphere plus handles) and
seeks solutions to questions both abstract and algorithmic. The project will
extend knowledge about noncontractible cycles in embedded graphs and about sets
of vertices whose removal decreases the genus or after repeated deletion leaves
a planar graph. Results on these structures would lead to information on other
embedding parameters, such as thickness and layout, and would try to extend
results about the well-understood planar graphs, for example, in the areas of
graph colorings and embedding algorithms. The interactive activities include
teaching a topics course in combinatorial theory; giving a series of seminars in
the mathematics department's weekly combinatorics seminar and inviting a number
of distinguished women combinatorics researchers to that seminar; and presenting
one or two panels, including Northwest-area women mathematics researchers, on
"Some experiences of women in mathematics" and "On being a research
mathematician." This project furthers VPW program objectives which are (1) to
provide opportunities for women to advance their careers in engineering and in
the disciplines of science supported by NSF and (2) to encourage women to pursue
careers in science and engineering by providing greater visibility for women
scientists and engineers employed in industry, government, and academic
institutions. By encouraging the participation of women in science, it is a
valuable investment in the Nation's future scientific vitality.