* 8901061
* Computer and Computational Algebra
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/1989,08/31/1993
* Moss Sweedler, Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* S. Kamal Abdali
* 08/31/1993
* USD 481,258.00

This is an interdisciplinary research project for development, implementation,
and application of algorithms in computer and computational algebra. Research
will be done in four areas: Computational Algebra and Algebraic Geometry; Real
Closed Fields and Algebraic Cell Decomposition; Integration and Root Finding
Techniques; and Applications in Flows and Dynamical Systems. In the area of
computational algebra and algebraic geometry, such problems as finding improved
methods for computing primary decompositions, finding versal deformations,
computing with inverse systems of ideals, and calculating Hilbert functions will
be investigated as well as developing parallel algorithms for finding Groebner
bases, applying subalgebra membership determination to finding polynomial
functional decomposition and improving subalgebra algorithms for computing with
subfields of rational function fields. A generalization of multivariate
resultants to general commutative rings will be investigated. The computer
algebra system Macaulay will be extended to handle splines, primary
decompositions, ideal radicals, inhomogeneous Groebner bases, polynomial
factorization, rational arithmetic and floats. Macaulay will be improved with
regard to root finding, Hilbert function calculation, data structures
representing monomial ideals, and reducing virtual memory thrashing. In the area
of real and algebraically closed fields and algebraic cell decomposition, the
Ben-Or, Kozen, Reif decision procedure will be improved and implemented and
polynomial root finding techniques will be used to give an improved algorithm
for computing full adjacency relations in algebraic cell decomposition. In the
area of integration and root finding techniques, the problem of lifting positive
characteristic integration back to characteristic zero will be investigated and
the Ben-Or, Feig, Kozen, Tiwari algorithm for approximating all real roots of a
polynomial with real coefficients will be implemented. Finally, in the area of
flows and dynamical systems, Groebner basis techniques will be applied to the
problem of calculating a bound on the number of limit cycles of a polynomial
flow and general utilities for the implementation of several related
perturbation methods will be developed and implemented.