* 8901117
* Dissertation Research: Functional and Mechanistic Aspects ofPolyphagy in the Grasshopper Dactylotum Variegatum
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/1989,05/31/1990
* Elizabeth Bernays, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Tarri Joyner
* 05/31/1990
* USD 8,328.00

While many plant-feeding insect species are quite specific in their food
choices, selecting only one or two plant species for food, many grasshopper
species feed on a wide range of different plants. This study will focus on
grasshopper Dactylotum variegatum which inhabits the grasslands of the
southwestern United States; this habitat contains a diverse array of food
plants. Through detailed observations of individual insects in field, the PI's
will determine whether each individual insect feeds on a number of different
plant species or whether individuals tend to restrict their feeding to only one
or two of the many foods utilized by the species. Associated with these field
observations will be controlled experiments in which we will determine whether
an insect's growth and development is enhanced by feeding on a mix of plants
species rather than feeding on only a single plant. Finally, the PI's
investigate what role learning, which has been previously demonstrated in
grasshoppers, plays in determining the food choices of individual insects. This
study will be one of the few detailed analyses of food selection by plant-
feeding insects in the field and will contribute fundamental research
information on the behaviors involved in the selection of food. A better
understanding of why some insect species feed on many plants, while other
species are very restricted in the plants they will feed on a likely result of
the project.