* 8901721
* US-Mexico Cooperative Research:  cGMP Regulated Ionic       Channels in Sperm
* O/D,OISE
* 07/15/1989,12/31/1991
* Bennett Shapiro, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 12/31/1991
* USD 10,556.00

This award will support Prof. Bennett Shapiro of the University of Washington in
a research collaboration with Prof. Alberto Darszon of the Centro de
Investigacrones y Estudios Avanzador (CINVESTAV) in Mexico City. The
reserarchers intend to explore the mechanism whereby sea urchinsperm respond to
eggs of the same species. It is known that peptides that diffuse from the egg to
bind at the sperm surface cause the sperm to alter several ultra cellular
parameters. The pepticles may play a chemotactic role and also cause transient
elevations in ultracellular ıCa2+! and ıcEMP!. Preliminary data suggests the
presence of a cGMP- dependent Ca2+ chfannel in plasma membranes from the sperm.
Possible candidates for such a channel will be purified and their
characteristics explored in reconstituted bilayer systems. Such a channel may be
a component of the signal tranduction pathway of sperm chemotaxis; an analysis
of its properties may clarify the mechanism of the analogoris channel that is
responsible for photo transduction.l The sea urchin sperm offers some distinct
advantages one more complex cell types as a basic model for chemostraxis. Many
of the superflous (in this context) cellular activities related to the cell
cycle, growth, and differentiation are absent from the spermitozoan. The
amplified metabolism of this non-dividing cell and its limited stimulus for
chemotaxis are in contrast to E. coli, which respond to a host of attractants
and repellants and are actively growing and dividing. Thus the metabolically
mono focused sperm array allow researchers to unearth some biochemical mechanism
in the pathway of chemotaxis. By combing the strengthsof the Mexian group in
planar bilayer studies with special interests in the recoinstitution of
membraneprotein channels, with the experience of the U.S. group in functional
studies of purified proteins that mediato cellular behavior, this study has the
potential to increase our understanding of sperm chemotaxis and egg-sperm
interaction.