* 8901436
* Mathematical Sciences: Index Theorems on Noncompact         Manifolds and for Actions of Noncompact Groups
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1989,05/31/1992
* Peter Haskell, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* William Y. Velez
* 05/31/1992
* USD 32,195.00

Professor Haskell will investigate the index theory of elliptic Fredholm
operators on certain noncompact manifolds, and the index theory arising from
actions of noncompact groups on manifolds. The former project will be
particularly concerned with the case in which the manifold is the smooth part of
a singular algebraic variety. A general aim is to relate the behavior of indices
to the global topology of the variety and to geometric information about the
singularities. The second project will be approached via the crossed product
construction from the theory of operator algebras. Elliptic operators in this
setting give rise to maps on the K-groups of the crossed product algebra, whose
nature Professor Haskell will attempt more precisely to elucidate. A fundamental
object in the study of crossed products is Kasparov's representation ring of a
connected Lie group. This ring can be realized as equivalence classes of almost
intertwining Fredholm operators between unitary representations of the group.
Professor Haskell will analyze the structure of this ring for certain semisimple
groups by studying intertwining operators with additional structure. Three
fundamental subject areas in mathematics are involved in this project, namely
differential operators on manifolds, the representation theory of Lie groups,
and the theory of operator algebras. The first subject may be thought of as a
far-reaching outgrowth of calculus on manifolds (surfaces and their higher-
dimensional analogues). The operations of calculus, which are defined in terms
of the geometry of the manifold (distance, curvature, and the like on a local
scale) turn out to yield information about its topology (overall shape and
conformation). When the manifold arises algebraically, say as the zero set of a
polynomial, there is even more information that can be harvested from studying
differential operators. Lie groups, named after the Norwegian mathematician
Sophus Lie, are used by mathematicians and physicists to embody symmetry,
roughly the totality of all allowable motions of a given situation that preserve
its essential features. Lie groups often act on manifolds in interesting ways,
and the important features of such an action can often be detected by certain
differential operators. The theory of operator algebras, finally, provides a
technical and conceptual framework within which apparently disparate
mathematical structures can interact with one another.