* 8901115
* Dissertation Research: Selection Allocation and Gamete      Production in Drosophila Pachea
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/1989,11/30/1991
* Therese Markow, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Tarri Joyner
* 11/30/1991
* USD 8,000.00

Females of a species generally produce relatively few, large gametes (eggs),
while males produce many small gametes (sperm). A general principle in
behavioral ecology is that this disparity differences observed between females
and males. To understand this principle one must consider the causes of
variation in reproductive success for each sex. Successful females, those which
best pass their genes to the next generation, are those that most efficiently
convert resources into eggs and that have a genetic predisposition to mate with
a genetically superior male. A female tends not to benefit from mating with
several males, since a single mating can fertilize all of her eggs. By contrast,
a male can greatly enhance his reproductive success through several matings. One
of the few exceptions to this rule may be Drosophila pachea, a fruit fly endemic
to the Sonoran desert that lives only within rotting tissue of senita cactus.
Reproductive success of D. pachea males may be limited by the number of sperm
they produce. Sperm are huge, 12.5 mm long, and very helical, resembling the
spring of a ballpoint pen. Males exhaust their supply of stored sperm after a
few copopulations. Additionally, females tend to not receive an adequate supply
of sperm to fertilize all of their eggs. Consequently females will remate
several times daily. The investigators' research goal is to pattern of sperm
production by D. pachea males and to describe male and female mate choice and
mating strategy. Studies of the reproductive biology of Drosophila pachea should
greatly contribute to the understanding of the evolution of life history traits.
Further, because several close relatives of D. pachea are agricultural pests,
understanding the mating system of this fly may benefit biological control
programs.