* 8901346
* Dissertation Research: Mate Choice and the Evolution of BeakColor in the Zebra Finch
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/1989,11/30/1991
* Nancy Burley, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Tarri Joyner
* 11/30/1991
* USD 4,070.00

Throughout much of recorded history, people have been fascinated by the
intricate and often brightly-colored patterns displayed by birds. In recent
years, evolutionary biologists have reconsidered the importance that mate choice
can have in causing the evolution of these patterns. In this project the PIs
will investigate two types of mate preferences ("adaptive" and "aesthetic") that
may lead to bright coloration and the commonly observed tendency for males to be
more brightly colored than females. Female animals (and sometimes males) are
often thought to choose their mates based on adaptive traits such as state of
health or the ability to be good parents; possibly bright coloration may be
indicative of mating quality. In addition, it has been suggested since Darwin's
time the female birds have aesthetic mate preferences, preferring "good-looking"
males that in turn produce "good-looking" sons. In this research the PIs will
use the zebra finch, a small bird native to Australia, to study the significance
of sex differences in beak color (males' beaks are redder than females') and
preferences for beak color. Females prefer to mate with males with very red
beaks. Experiments will be performed to determine if beak color is an adaptive
or aesthetic criterion of mate choice. For example, do males with the most red
beaks make better fathers? Do their offspring grow at faster rates? Males do not
prefer females with red beaks, although females with red beaks do occur both in
nature and the lab. The investigators will explore the possibility that this
results from genetic constraints that may cause female beaks to evolve to be
redder than optimal and male beaks to be less red than optimal. The long-term
goal is to elucidate the components of mate choice for animals in general and to
understand how mate choice influences evolution species' appearance.