* 8901042
* Dissertation Research:  Genetic Determination of Parentage  in Cooperative Groups
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/1989,12/31/1991
* Kerry Rabenold, Purdue Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Tarri Joyner
* 12/31/1991
* USD 10,496.00

For twelve years the PIs have studied several populations of wrens
(Campylorhynchus griseus) that practice cooperative breeding in Venezuela. These
birds live in extended family groups on permanent communal territories, a habit
that is widespread among tropical birds. These populations are an especially
revealing test case of the above evolutionary ideas about cooperation because it
so effectively increases the number of young that can be produced. Genealogies
are available for 85 groups (more than 700 marked individuals) of this species
in two distinct habitat types. Using newly-developed DNA fingerprinting
techniques, the PIs will establish whether the presumed breeders are the only
birds reproducing in these family groups, and whether putative nonbreeding
helpers are aiding in rearing siblings. This test will now be based on
conclusive evidence from the genetic material itself rather than on fallible
inferences based on behavioral observation. They will document the extent to
which parentage is shared within and between groups, and analytical models and
computer simulations will quantify the potential importance of parentage shared
beyond a principal pair in social groups. They will continue field experiments
examining the processes of competition for productive breeding positions and
group defense against predators, the suspected mechanism of the advantage of
breeding in a group. They will also explore the implications of short-distance
dispersal for the genetic structure and distinctness of populations, using
restriction- fragment-length polymorphism (RFLP) analyses and our long-term data
on differences in dispersal tendencies between populations.