* 8901347
* REU: Research Opportunities for Undergraduate Students in Laboratory and Space Physics at NASA Goddard Space Flight Center
* NONE,NONE
* 05/15/1989,04/30/1990
* Carl Werntz, NASA/GODDARD SPACE FLIGHT CENTER
* Standard Grant
* Sherry O. Farwell
* 04/30/1990
* USD 29,600.00

This grant will provide opportunities for undergraduates to be active
participants in laboratory and space physics research. These opportunities
include the special advantages of a high- technology environment in a NASA
laboratory with guidance provided by researchers who are, in addition, committed
to education. The research team is engaged in experimental and theoretical
nuclear physics studies, detector development, and high-energy solar flare
investigations. This balanced program of laboratory measurements, observations,
analysis, and interpretation is focused on addressing questions about the
fundamental physical nature of mechanisms responsible for energetic particle
acceleration, confinement, and transport. The key team members are each
associated with NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, the institution will be the
REU Site providing the proposed research environment, The Catholic University of
America, the institution through which the students will be employed. Nine
specific research topics in the aforementioned fields that are appropriate for
undergraduate participation are available. Twenty undergraduates have worked
with the group since 1983. Eight of the ten with baccalaureates have pursued
advanced degrees in the sciences and in mathematics. This will provide a firmer
foundation on which to base student involvement and will provide the opportunity
to actively recruit students from a much broader range of backgrounds,
especially those from groups underrepresented in the scientific community.