* 8901918
* US-Brazil Cooperative Research on The Cause of Erosion and  Deposition Cycles in Humid Landscapes:  An Integrated Study of Process and Stratigraphy in Southeastern Brazil
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/1989,01/31/1992
* William Dietrich, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 01/31/1992
* USD 20,000.00

This award supports cooperative research in stratigraphy to be carried on by
William Dietrich of the University of California at Berkeley and Ana Coelho
Netto of the Federal University of Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. They will investigate
the cause of erosion and deposition cycles on hillsides and river valleys in
southeastern Brazil. A mechanistic explanation for these features is sought
because the interpretation that these are evidence of climatic variation of late
Pleistocene and Holocene climates is based on inadequate chronologic controls
and limited understanding of erosion and runoff processes. In the proposed work
the investigators will date a sufficient number of layers to determine whether
the regionally extensive colluvial layers are synchronous enough to provide a
climatic interpretation. These two groups have been working independently on
this problem for over ten years. The different skills and insights developed by
each group will complement those of the other and lead to further understanding
of the cause of erosion cycles in landscapes. Dietrich's work on colluvial
hollows and landslides in California have contributed greatly to geomorphology
and the opportunity to study the Brazilian landscape will augment this work. In
addition to the significance to basic research, there are important implications
for hazard (landslides) mitigation.