* 8901923
* Mathematical Sciences: K-Theory and Cyclic Cohomology       Related to Operator Algebras
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1989,05/31/1992
* Toshikazu Natsume, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing grant
* William Y. Velez
* 05/31/1992
* USD 37,910.00

Professor Natsume's project has to do with functorial invariants, called
K-theory and cyclic cohomology, for algebras of operators. The problems to be
tackled concern noncommutative ramifications of ideas from geometry. One such
problem is to exhibit geometrically an explicit nontrivial generator for K-
nought of certain operator algebras associated to the fundamental group of a
closed Riemann surface, and to find as well a cyclic cocycle on an appropriate
dense subalgebra that pairs nontrivially with this generator. Another facet of
the project involves foliated manifolds and the operator algebras to which they
give rise. The fundamental insight of the area of mathematical research in which
Professor Natsume works is the following: complete information about the
structure of a space (a surface, say, or some higher dimensional analogue) is
stored in an appropriate algebra of functions on the space. (Functions assign
number values to points in the space.) Everything one would want to say about
the geometry of a compact manifold, for instance, can be stated in terms of the
algebra of infinitely differentiable complex functions on the manifold. This
algebra, like so many interesting objects in mathematics, can be represented
usefully as an algebra of operators on Hilbert space. Quite often, geometrical
or topological notions that make sense for algebras of smooth or continuous
functions also make sense for more or less arbitrary operator algebras. Working
algebraically has the twofold merit of clarifying ideas, and also of permitting
the use of machinery such as K-theory that works much better in the context of
algebras than of spaces. Professor Natsume's project will consider several
specific problems in pursuit of this agenda of looking at geometric phenomena
through an operator-algebraic lens.