* 8901004
* REU: An Interdisciplinary Program in Ecology and Evolution
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/1989,09/30/1992
* Bruce Waldman, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Joanne G. Rodewald
* 09/30/1992
* USD 124,112.00

This award will provide continuing support for a Research Experiences for
Undergraduates Site in the Department of Organismic and Evolutionary Biology at
Harvard University. The past REU program in ecological and evolutionary biology
has successfully trained undergraduates from Harvard/Radcliffe and 12 other
universities during the past two years. The program is designed to provide
juniors and seniors contemplating a career in research with: (1) a realistic
orientation to the rewards and frustrations experienced in the process of
conducting original research; (2) instruction in methods for planning,
executing, interpreting, and presenting research, as well as specialized
training in a field the student chooses; (3) exposure to and active involvement
in a rich academic environment, consisting not only of peers and participating
faculty, but also graduate students and postdoctoral fellows. Students receive
orientation and attend weekly meetings together with other REU Site
participants. Students are thus encouraged to exchange ideas and impressions
with their peers specializing in other topics. Within the field of their choice,
students are encouraged to become familiar with an assortment of ongoing
projects before developing and designing their own study. Throughout each phase,
students work closely with a faculty member who encourages their scientific
maturation. Students become progressively more independent as their work
proceeds. By the conclusion of the program, students should be both competent
and confident in their scientific abilities, and should be able to make informed
decisions concerning the graduate training they wish to pursue.