* 8901284
* Ecuador and Galapagos Island Research:  The Evolution of    Cooperative Breeding in Tropical Raptors
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1989,11/30/1991
* John Faaborg, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 11/30/1991
* USD 20,000.00

This award will support collaborative research between Prof. John Faaborg of
the University of Missouri and Prof. Tjitte de Vries of the Pontificia
Universidad Catolica del Ecuador. The purpose of this collaborative work is to
continue work on the polyandrous breeding groups of the Galapagos Hawk, initiate
the first studies of the Harris Hawk in truly tropical conditions, and continue
observations on other raptors in Andean study sites. Emphasis will be placed on
describing demographic traits of these species and the ecological conditions
under which they live. Cooperative breeding systems appear to occur in about 3%
of bird species overall. However, stable breeding groups have been documented in
only two hawks, the Galapagos Hawk (Buteo galapagoensis) and the Harris' or Bay-
winged Hawk (Parabuteo unicinctus). In the former,, these breeding groups are
composed of multiple males and a single female that share a single nest; in the
latter species, these groups are apparently monogamous pairs with helpers. By
providing further information on the nesting habits of tropical raptors, and
involving researchers from Ecuador, this research should increase our knowledge
of cooperatively breeding raptors and advance the objectives of the Science in
Developing Countries Program.