* 8901680
* Effective Management of Science and the Development and     Transfer of Technology, Joint U.S.-Bangladesh Symposium,    Dhaka, Bangladesh, March 21-24, 1989
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/1989,08/31/1990
* J. Ratchford, American Association for the Advancement of Science
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 08/31/1990
* USD 20,000.00

Description: This project supports participation by six U.S. Scientists in a
joint symposium: "Effective Management of Science and the Development and
Transfer of Technology" which is organized by the American Association for the
Advancement of Science (AAAS) and the Bangladesh Association for the Advancement
of Science (BAAS) and is scheduled for March 21-24, 1989 in Dhaka, Bangladesh.
Objectives of the symposium include: identification and characterization of the
scientific and technical capabilities of Bangladesh; review and identification
of needed changes in the management of science and technology in that country;
identification of the science and technology needs of the industrial and
agricultural sectors and ways to incorporate the capabilities in universities
and other research institutions in the development of technology. The symposium
agenda will include: curricula in universities and relationship to needs in
industry; development of an adequate infrastructure in science and engineering;
policies to enhance interaction with international academic and research
organizations; intellectual property issues; and support of R&D by domestic
enterprises and multinational concerns. The Bangladesh coordinator is Dr. M.
Shamsul Haq, President of BAAS. Scope: The project involves a prestigious U.S.
organization, the AAAS, and its Bangladesh counterpart. Previous joint
activities, including a 1985 meeting, have resulted in concrete steps to focus
the collaboration between these two organizations on strengthening the
infrastructure of science and Technology in Bangladesh. This project is likely
to lead to further steps of collaberation by BAAS with the AAAS and with other
international science and Technol ogy organi- zations, and in turn to improving
the effectiveness of the science and technology infrastructure in Bangladesh.