* 8901457
* Formation of Super Bounding Surfaces in Eolian Sandstones:  Evidence from Modern Sand Seas
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/1989,01/01/1991
* Nicholas Lancaster, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 01/01/1991
* USD 31,576.00

Bounding surfaces (disconformities) of regional extent (super bounding surfaces)
have recently been recognized and described from a number of eolian sandstone
units in the western United States. These surfaces are a potentially important
tool for sub- dividing and correlating eolian sequences, leading ultimately to a
better understanding of how such sedimentary bodies evolve. However, features
diagnostic of super bounding surfaces formed by climatic, tectonic, eustatic or
endogenic causes have yet to be fully recognized and documented. The best way to
document such features and to understand how they form is to study their
occurrence in a modern sand sea that is known to have experienced episodic
eolian deposition. The Gran Desierto sand sea in northern Mexico is an excellent
example of a sand sea that been strongly affected by changes in the regional
tectonic, eustatic and climatic environment. These changes have resulted in an
episodic deposition of eolian sand, separated by long periods of stability and
non deposition or erosion. This study will undertake filed investigations of
relations between sand bodies of different ages and regional-scale bounding
surfaces formed by dune and sand sea migration, sea level change, and
interruption of sand supply due to climatic and other factors. Criteria for the
recognition of super bounding surfaces of different origins and more precise
models for the formation of super bounding surfaces will be developed on the
basis of these investigations.