* 8901992
* Mathematical Sciences: Analysis of Mathematical Models of   Ecological Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/1989,03/31/1993
* Paul Waltman, Emory University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 03/31/1993
* USD 147,820.00

The chemostat is a piece of laboratory apparatus that is used in ecology to
study exploitative competition. (It is a model of a simple lake.) It is one
place where both the mathematics and the biological experiments are tractable ..
all of the needed coefficients are measurable in the laboratory. The basic model
does not allow for the delay between nutrient uptake and reproduction (cell
division). A model which does allow for a delay does so in a way which tries to
capture the complicated physiology involved in a single constant. This project
will develop new mathematical methods wich incorporate the cell cycle (or cell
growth) and will analyze their behavior. The models will be either functional
differential equations (cell cycle) or partial differential equations (cell
growth). Another modification of interest is to remove the well stirred
hypothesis of the chemostat and let the nutrient and the cells move by diffusion
or convection .. resulting a reaction diffusion equation or (in the
discretization) a gradostat. The project includes an analysis of these models as
well. The notion of persistence captures the ideas that all components of a
model ecosystem "survive". Recent results extend this idea to asymptotically
smooth semi.dynamical systems which includes delay equations and some partial
differential equations. Professor Waltman will investigate the applications of
this work to meaningful biological problems of this type, particularly those
describing competition.