* 8901496
* Mathematical Sciences: Function Theory on Symmetric Spaces
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1989,11/30/1992
* Adam Koranyi, Research Foundation Of The City University Of New York (Lehman)
* Continuing Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 11/30/1992
* USD 130,121.00

Koranyi 8901496 This work seeks to exploit the connections between the
mathematical theories of differential geometry, representation theory and
classsical analysis. It is part of a continuing program of research combining
classical topics such as Bessel functions. Hankel transforms and Luzin's area
theorem with more recent topics and their generalizations such as quasi-
symmetric spaces and more general nilpotent continuous groups. A relatively new
thrust in the research concerns the development of a theory of quasiconformal
mapping on Cauchy-Riemann manifolds, especially the Heisenberg group. Work of a
continuing nature will also be carried out in the study of function theory on
symmetric cones. Most of the earlier research on generalized hypergeometric
functions in the case of real and complex matrices has been extended to
arbitrary symmetric cones. What must be done now is to tie together the various
existing theories and find the most general appropriate setting. A new idea is
being considered in the still open problem of finding a generalization of
Luzin's area integral for Riemannian symmetric spaces. It is based on the
construction of a jump process which concentrates in neighborhoods of the
distinguished boundary much less rapidly than Brownian motion but for which the
harmonic functions are still martingales. There are many applicatons to boundary
properties of solutions of differential equations which will not be resolved
until successful Fatou-type theorems can be developed in this setting.