* 8901300
* Expertise of the Architect and Design Decision Making
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1989,01/31/1992
* Omer Akin, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Alice C. Hogan
* 01/31/1992
* USD 19,970.00

Abstract Narrative Description: This proposal supports the collaboration of Dr.
Omer Akin, Professor of Architecture, Carnegie-Mellon University and Dr. Nur
Esin and Assistant Professor of Architecture, and his graduate student, Mr.
Belkis Uluoglu, both of the Faculty of Architecture, Istanbul Technical
University. These collaborators intend to examine the design decision making
process and structure of design knowledge used in architectural offices or firms
both in the United States and in Turkey. There is an professional concern
internationally among architects about their profession and its educational
processes. This comparative study of skill of architects and the implications
for architectural education will have its main focus on the structure of the
information network between members of design teams, the content of this
information, what are the knowledge areas used by architects in their collective
design efforts and the integration of these knowledge or information areas with
each other and with whole design effort. Scope: The study method proposed will
be undertaken in three major stages. The first will build a theoretical model
for design decision making in architectural office settings. In the second stage
different office settings will be selected for data collection concerning
structure and the content of the information flow between design team members at
sites in the U.S. and in Turkey. The last stage will be to develop a descriptive
model of design decision making in architectural office settings. The goals of
this study are: o to advance the exchange of knowledge between the U.S. and
Turkey o to advance the exchange of knowledge between the two collaborating
universities o to contribute to the development of a theory of the expertise of
architects and to describe the design decision making process in architectural
office settings, and o to increase understanding of the collective design
process for potential contributions to education and practice in architecture
This proposal does meet the objectives of the Science in Developing Countries of
advancing the international exchange of scientific knowledge and of contributing
to the enhancement of science in the developing country.