* 8901268
* Mathematical Sciences: Several Complex Variables and PartialDifferential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1989,05/31/1994
* M. Salah Baouendi, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 05/31/1994
* USD 214,956.00

Work will be done on mathematical problems arising in the field of several
complex variables and certain partial differential equations which occur
naturally in this context. In all, five areas will be treated. The first
concerns a reflection principle analogous to the classical one. One is given a
holomorphic mapping defined on one side of a surface within the space of several
complex variables and would like to extend the map across the surface to a full
neighborhood. Recent results in two complex dimensions completely resolve the
question for non- Levi-flat hypersurfaces. This condition is not sufficient in
higher dimensions and efforts will be made to find the additional conditions
necessary on the surface to ensure the reflection principle. A second line of
investigation concerns properties of holomorphic mappings between hypersurfaces
which are related by means of a holomorphic map from one into the other. Two
main questions to be addressed concern conditions in which the map is
essentially finite and the determination of conditions under which one can
decide whether one given hypersurface can be holomorphically mapped into another
(in some nonsingular fashion). Work will also be done on holomorphic extensions
of functions defined on generic manifolds or, equivalently: can one identify
restrictions of holomorphic functions along sector of the boundary of a domain,
for example, when the domain is a wedge and the boundary is the edge of that
wedge? It is known that under certain restrictive conditions CR-mappings between
pseudoconvex smooth hypersurfaces which are diffeomorphisms are actually
infinitely differentiable. Work is continuing in an effort to obtain smoothness
information on such mappings under the weakest possible conditions, both on the
manifolds and the mappings. Considerable progress has been made during the past
year in this regard. The final theme of this research concerns a boundary
analogue to the well-known result that a holomorphic function which vanishes to
infinite order at an interior point of a domain vanishes throughout the
connected component of the point. This need not be the case at a boundary point,
although the same phenomenon obtains at boundary points for a large class of
functions. It will be one objective of this project to determine precise
conditions where this property of "unique continuation" can occur.