* 8901009
* Mathematical Sciences: Viscosity Solutions of Nonlinear     Partial Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1989,11/30/1991
* Robert Jensen, Loyola University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 11/30/1991
* USD 38,835.00

The focus of this work will be on the investigation of a class of solutions of
fully nonlinear partial differential equations. A comprehensive theory of these
solutions (known as viscosity solutions) for second order equations is rapidly
evolving. Uniqueness, regularity and comparison results have been achieved. Work
to be done on this project will continue the development of the theory in the
direction of obtaining extensions of the maximum principle for viscosity
solutions of the fully nonlinear equations. Viscosity solutions, a type of weak
solution, were first introduced in 1983 for first order equations. The concept
is motivated by the weak maximum principle which distinguishes it from other
definitions of weak solution such as those depending on integration by parts.
Viscosity solutions always agree with classical solutions when they exist. On
the other hand, it is possible that they may only be semicontinuous and not
differentiable. Such properties are particularly useful when one is considering
limits of sequences of solutions. Because these solutions are obtained by a
method of vanishing viscosity, they also lay claim to being the correct physical
solution where appropriate. The present work will continue studies of different
versions and extensions of the classical maximum principle applied to viscosity
solutions, including problems involving discontinuous boundary data. Efforts
will also be made in treating singular perturbations which arise naturally in
several contexts such as differential games determined by stochastic
optimization problems with risk averse utility functions. Other applications
will be made to problems in stochastic control. Two specific areas include the
problem of characterizing a stochastic process which jumps between diffusion
processes and questions arising in option pricing and risk averse financial
systems.