* 8901567
* Japan Long-Term Visit: Advanced Construction Robotics       Research at Technology Development Institute of Shimizu     Corporation in Japan
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1989,07/31/1991
* Roozbeh Kangari, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Alexander P. DeAngelis
* 07/31/1991
* USD 59,993.00

This award will support a one-year research visit by Dr. Roozbeh Kangari, School
of Civil Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, to the Advanced Robotics
Laboratory of the Shimizu Corporation, Tokyo, Japan. The Shimizu Corporation is
the largest construction company in Japan, and has a highly advanced
construction robotics laboratory. Dr. Kangari will carry out research there in
the area of robotics and automation in construction, and he expects to establish
a base for continuing collaboration between Georgia Tech and Shimizu in this
field. Information, ideas, skills, and techniques used in the research and
development of robots will be exchanged between the U.S. investigator and the
Japanese researchers. The ultimate goal of this project is the establishment of
a world-class construction robotics center within the Computer Integrated
Manufacturing Systems (CIMS) Robotics Laboratory at Georgia Tech. An important
aim of this center will be to help increase productivity in the U.S.
construction industry, and make U.S. contractors more competitive in the world
market. Robotics and automation are likely to play an increasingly important
role in the construction industry in the years ahead. They are expected to
increase productivity, improve quality, reduce costs, increase efficiency, and
improve safety in the construction work environment. Japanese construction
companies have been actively involved in research and development of
construction robots, and are aggressively transferring advanced technology from
the research laboratory to the construction site. Dr. Kangari's visit to the
Advanced Robotics Laboratory of the Shimizu Corporation is expected to provide
him with knowledge and experience that should greatly facilitate the
establishment of a construction robotics center at the CIMS Robotics Laboratory
at Georgia Tech.