* 8901123
* Dissertation Research: Evolution of Senecio and Lobelia in  the East African Mountains
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/1989,11/30/1991
* Jeffrey Palmer, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Penelope L. Firth
* 11/30/1991
* USD 23,000.00

Under guidance from Dr. Jeffrey Palmer, graduate student Eric Knox at the
University of Michigan will continue field collecting in East Africa of the
montane "giant rosette" plants of the genera Lobelia and Senecio. These plants
display several unusual morphological features associated with their giant-
rosette life-form: (l) daily opening and closing of the massive terminal leaf-
rosettes; (2) retention of an insulating jacket of old, dead leaves; (3) greatly
enlarged pith volume which provides an internal reservoir of water; and (4)
secretion of polysaccharides that affect the freezing characteristics of water
impounded by the leaf-rosettes (and in the hollow inflorescences of Lobelia).
The several species of giant lobelias and senecios are thought to provide a
spectacular example of evolutionary adaptive radiation throughout the range of
East African mountains, where individual species are endemic to particular
mountain tops or native to particular elevational bands. The purpose of the
research is to reconstruct the evolutionary histories of these two plant groups.
Phylogenetic hypotheses based upon restriction-site variation in chloroplast and
nuclear ribosomal DNA will be used to interpret patterns of morphological change
and of geographic distribution. This research will provide insight into the
frequency of geographic (between mountains) versus elevational (within
mountains) radiation, the relative importance of migration versus long- distance
dispersal, and the extent of evolutionary convergence in adaptive morphological
traits. If the pattern of geographic radiation for Senecio and Lobelia
corresponds to the known sequence of volcanic mountain formation in East Africa,
then the established geochronology may provide an independent line of evidence
for evaluating the operation of a molecular clock.