* 8901966
* Synchronization in Concurrent Algorithms
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/1989,08/31/1992
* Arthur Bernstein, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 08/31/1992
* USD 177,796.00

The objective of the research is to investigate synchronization in concurrent -
perhaps distributed - algorithms. Such algorithms involve a number of
independent tasks, or transactions, which synchronize with one another
periodically. Unfortunately, synchronization impairs performance since tasks
must wait for one another. Techniques for improving performance by reducing
synchronization will be investigated and the structure of an asynchronous
algorithm as it relates to synchronization will be modelled. A major cause for
synchronization is the need for concurrent tasks to access shared data. Data is
frequently characterized by integrity constraints and it is generally required
that these be true in all states viewed by the tasks. The research divides into
three related problems. The use of semantics to remove the requirement that
updates to shared data be performed atomically will be investigated. A strategy
for decomposing updates into smaller units which can be interleaved with the
execution of other tasks, hence reducing synchronization delays while
maintaining integrity constraints is being studied. The tradeoff between
increased concurrency and integrity constraint violation is under study.
Relaxing synchronization to the extent of permitting violations but not allowing
the state of the data to deviate too far from one in which the constraints hold
is being studied. Once again the emphasis is on improving the performance of
asynchronous algorithms which access shared data. Finally, the structure of an
asynchronous algorithm as it relates to synchronization will be studied to see
whether algorithms can be compared on the basis of the amount of synchronization
involved.