* 8901455
* Mathematical Sciences: Solvability, Regularity and          Embeddability of the Tangential Cauchy-Riemann Operators
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/1989,02/29/1992
* Mei-Chi Shaw, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 02/29/1992
* USD 34,684.00

This project continues mathematical research into basic problems at the
interface of the theories of several complex variables and partial differential
equations. The analytic object of concern is the tangential Cauchy-Riemann
operator, a differential operator acting on functions defined on the boundary of
a domain in the space of several complex variables (or on more general complex
manifolds). These operators agree with CR- operators defined on neighborhoods of
boundary points. The object of much current activity in this area today
addresses the issue of when can a function satisfying the homogeneous CR-
equations on the boundary be the restriction of a holomorphic function defined
on some surrounding open set? This is the extension problem and it involves
solving systems of complex partial differential equations. The equations
themselves are interesting because they serve as prototypes of overdetermined
systems of differential equations which are not elliptic complexes. Work will be
done investigating the regularity properties of the tangential operators on
weakly pseudo-convex boundaries. Specifically, one would like to make estimates
of how the functions in certain classes are (or are not) preserved under the
action of these operators. The case where the functions are square-integrable
has been worked out in detail. For the other Lebesgue spaces and for functions
which are Holder continuous, good progress has recently been made in two
dimensions. Efforts will be made to extend these results to higher dimension.
Additional work will be done in seeking a resolution of the problem of embedding
abstract strongly pseudo-convex CR-structures in complex space. For all odd real
dimensions this problem has been solved by Kuranishi's embedding theorem except
for the dimension three. This research will seek to exploit a new homotopy
approach to determine if the final case can be settled.