* 8901697
* Genetic Recombination and Genome Rearrangements             Copper Mountain, Colorado, July 1989
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/1989,06/30/1990
* Richard Kolodner, Federation of Amer Societies For Exper Biology
* Standard Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 06/30/1990
* USD 8,000.00

This grant supports a FASEB Summer Research Conference on Genetic Recombination
and Genome Rearrangements, held July 9-14, 1989 in Copper Mountain, Colorado.
The conference is under the auspices of the Federation of the American Societies
of Experimental Biology (FASEB). The format of this meeting will be the same as
that used by the Gordon Research Conferences. There will be nine major sessions
with 36 invited speakers. The chairperson of each session will give an
introductory talk on the historical background and the current problems to
acquaint all participants with the topics in that session. Poster sessions will
be held throughout the meeting. Informal workshops of small groups will be
arranged before or at the meeting. This conference is the only regularly
scheduled meeting in the United States that is devoted exclusively to genetic
recombination and genome rearrangements. The topics to be covered at this
meeting are current approaches to gene therapy, genome rearrangements that lead
to cancer, genetics of homologous recombination, enzymology of homologous
recombination (strand transferases, nucleases, and resolvases), physical
structure of recombination intermediates, repair of mismatch sites in
heteroduplex recombination intermediates, site-specific recombination and
regulation of gene expression, and bacterial and eukaryotic transposition.