* 8901254
* Dissertation Research: Effect of the Introduced Blow Fly    Chrysomya rufifacies on the Native Blow Fly Cochliomyia     Macellaria (Calliphoridae)
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1989,05/31/1990
* Bernard Greenberg, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Althea Ball
* 05/31/1990
* USD 3,830.00

The Old World blow fly, Chrysomya rufifacies, is one of four Chrysomya spp.
that have recently invaded the New World, and the first to enter the United
States. These flies are pests in their home range and pose a threat to U.S.
agriculture and human health. Displacement of native blow flies by these
introduced species has been reported, but no mechanism of displacement has been
demonstrated. The biology of blow flies suggests that important population
interactions occur during the larval stage. These experiments will measure the
impact of C. rufifacies on Cochliomyia macellaria, an native fly whose
ecological habits most resemble those of C. rufifacies. The time at which
females arrive at carrion and oviposit, along with the time larvae leave
carrion, will be used to determine the temporal overlap of fly species in
carrion of 3 sizes and in 3 types of habitat. Densities of these two species in
carrion will be manipulated to determine the interaction between larvae of C.
rufifacies and larvae of C. macellaria. Preliminary observations indicate that
the red imported fire ant, an exotic insect that has recently invaded the study
area may have become the dominant predator in the carrion community. Exclusion
experiments will define the role of this ant in carrion, and in particular, its
effect on the interaction of the two fly species.