* 8901023
* Mathematical Sciences: A Research Initiation for            Undergraduates Students: Difference Equations and Chaos
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1989,11/30/1990
* Willie Taylor, Texas Southern University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 11/30/1990
* USD 33,000.00

An REU site project supporting six students will receive funding through this
award. Research directed toward problems arising in the field of difference
equations with a focus on understanding chaotic behavior of solutions will be
carried out. Difference equations occur naturally in mathematical analysis from
many sources. One of the most important occurs in discrete approximations to
differential equations in which derivatives are replaced by differences. The
oscillation theory of these equations requires very little mathematical
background and the study of dynamical properties of first order difference
equations can be reduced to the study of iterations of continuous functions over
finite intervals. This project will emphasize two points of view. The first
concerns qualitative properties of higher order difference equations, especially
those of third and fourth order. The second thrust of the project will be the
study of first order difference equations as examples of simple dynamical
systems, where the orbit structure and bifurcation properties of specific
families of equations will be taken up. The importance of difference equations
in the study of mechanical vibrations, mathematical biology and economics will
be emphasized.