* 8901005
* Relative Importance of the Heterotrophic Bacterivory in     Oceanic Environments:  Microbial Loop
* GEO,OCE
* 06/15/1989,05/31/1993
* David Caron, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 05/31/1993
* USD 222,603.00

The role of pelagic microzooplankton in food webs of the sea has been explored
sketchily in field work. Small, delicate organisms are difficult to isolate and
study in the field situation. One method of studying their role is to compare
food chains of widely different marine environments. The goal of this research
program is to determine the relative importance of carbon transformation through
the microbial loop of an oligotrophic and euptrophic oceanic community,
including especially the consumers of bacterial biomass. The hypothesis to be
tested is that a greater percentage of the total amount of carbon fixed by
primary productivity is consumed and respsired by heterotrophic microorganisms,
i.e. bacteria and protozoa, in oceanic ecosystems than in coastal ecosystems.
Primary productivity, bacterial productivity, and bactivory will be measured at
a coastal site and a Sargasso Sea site during three cruises in the western North
Atlantic. The total amount of bacterial carbon produced and the percentage of
primary production that this bacterial carbon represents will be determined in
these oceanic environments and compared to the patterns of microbial carbon
tranformation in two neritic environments, Chesapeake Bay and Vineyard Sound.
Size fractionation and single cell isolation studies of common species of larger
protozoa and microm;etazoa will be performed using radiolabelled natural
bacteria in order to identify the primary consumers of bacterial biomass in
these communities. %%% Much of the carbon produced in the sea is in the form of
microorganisms too small to see or easily manipulate. In recent years it has
become clear that these organisms are quite crucial to the food chain of the
seas from the poles to the equator. One way to evaluate the importance of the
microorganisms is to compare their growth rates in several different
environments and to examine which organisms are able to feed on the
microorganisms. This study will measure rates of growth of several types of
microorganisms in contrasting environments, the relatively impoverished Sargasso
Sea and the relatively fertile Georges Bank. It will also identify which
organisms consume the bacteria. The expectation is that microbial production is
much more important in the food chain of the Sargasso Sea than it is in the
Georges Bank area.