* 8901988
* RUI:  Modeling Sodium Pump Regulation Using Gene            Amplification
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1989,01/31/1993
* Peter Pauw, Gonzaga University
* Continuing grant
* Maryanna P. Henkart
* 01/31/1993
* USD 126,015.00

The proposed research will develop cell culture model systems to study the
consequences of regulation of the sodium- and potassium-activated ATPase, the
sodium pump. This enzyme is found in the plasma membrane of cells in all
vertebrates and is evolutionarily related to cation transporting ATPases in
lower eukaryotes and bacteria. Regulation of the ATPase will be modeled by
generating gene amplified cell lines that have a range of expression of the
sodium pump. Amplification of the genes for the sodium pump will be accomplished
either by step-selection with ouabain or by transfection with minute chromosomes
from C+, a HeLa cell line expressing unstable resistance to ouabain. The sodium
pump is responsible for the generation of the sodium electrochemical potential
across the plasma membrane, as well as the membrane potential. Thus, regulation
of this enzyme may have profound consequences on the physiology of the organism.
Evidence that such regulation may actually occur includes the remarkable
evolutionary conservation of an inhibitory site on the enzyme which has been
proposed to be the target of some endogenous natriuretic factors. Compounds
which bind at this site include the important pharmacological probes for this
activity, the alkaloids, digitalis and ouabain. This research should provide new
information concerning the effect on cells of altered activity of the enzyme
which "pumps" sodium out and potassium in, and which thus regulates the ionic
composition of the cytoplasm, and contributes to the maintenance of the
physiologically important, electrical potential across cell membranes. In
addition, this research at an undergraduate institution will provide an
opportunity for college students to participate in modern experiments in cell
biology, and should stimulate their interest in research careers.