* 8901993
* Projections of Characterized Trapezoid Body Axons
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/1989,07/31/1992
* Philip Smith, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Platt
* 07/31/1992
* USD 240,420.00

Auditory information is first processed in the brainstem by neurons in the
cochlear nuclear complex, containing several cell types. Output axons of many of
these cells project forward in a major pathway forming a structure called the
trapezoid body (from its shape). These axons then terminate on neurons at the
next higher level called the superior olivary complex. We do not yet understand
how the signals from the cochlear nuclei are related to higher aspects of
auditory function, such as sound localization or startle responses, which are
handled by neurons in the superior olive. This project will determine the
signalling and target destinations of the these trapezoid body axons.
Intracellular recordings will be used to physiologically characterize the
response properties of single axons that extend into the trapezoid body, and
intracellular dye filling then will be used to trace the pathways, from cells of
origin to target cells, within the cat brainstem. Light and electron microscopy
will provide details of location of terminals for each cell, and of detailed
morphology of the synaptic endings, to morphologically characterize cell types.
This classification then will be correlated to the observed functional responses
of these cells. This work will provide a unique integration of information in
the central auditory pathway; it will clarify what kinds of signal processing
occur at the important level connecting the cochlear nuclei to the superior
olivary complex, and will clarify the functional significance of morphological
cell classification in the cochlear nucleus.