* 8901836
* Comparison of Risk Attitudes and Perceptions in Japan and   the United States
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1990,03/31/1994
* Paul Slovic, Decision Science Research Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Shelton White
* 03/31/1994
* USD 95,000.00

This is an ambitious project to address an important issue of national
consequence. The proposed research will compare risk attitudes and perceptions
in the United States and Japan. Although both the United States and Japan are
highly industrialized countries, their approaches to managing technological
risks are quite different. The United States relies primarily on a
"confrontational model" characterized by adversarial relationships between
interested parties, widespread public participation, and extensive use of the
legal system. The Japanese approach, in comparison, is based on a "cooperative
model" centered upon private negotiations between government and industry with
an emphasis on consensus building. The proposal hypothesizes that these
contrasting approaches are reflected in major differences in public attitudes
and perceptions of risk in general and risk management in particular. This
project will examine these differences by carrying out parallel studies of risk
attitudes and risk perceptions in both countries. The research will be conducted
in cooperation with colleagues in Japan. The investigators will draw upon their
extensive prior experience in analyzing the components of risk in various
populations. Besides providing information that will be relevant to the future
interactions between the two countries, this comparison will increase basic
understanding of national risk- management styles and approaches.