* 8901405
* Petrology and Tectonics of the Australian-Antarctic         Discordance and Adjacent Ridges
* GEO,OCE
* 01/15/1988,06/30/1990
* David Christie, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Bilal U. Haq
* 06/30/1990
* USD 95,490.00

The Australian-Antarctic Discordance is a unique and enigmatic bathymetric and
geologic feature of the mid-ocean ridge system whose origin is poorly
understood. We propose an integrated geophysical and geochemical program to
study the Discordance zone. The combination of a comprehensive geochemical
investigation with a SeaMARC II side-scan sonar survey and detailed magnetic and
gravity analyses will provide a unique data set which will focus on two problems
which are of fundamental significance, both on a global scale and with respect
to the nature and origin of the Discordance itself: (1) the geophysical and
geochemical nature of the eastern boundary of the Discordance which is one of
the most pronounced geochemical and bathymetric discontinuities in the global
mid- ocean ridge system, and (2) the interrelationships among axial depth, axial
morphology, ridge segmentation, and along axis petrologic variations, all of
which are unusually variable, both within and outside the Discordance. %%%
Secondary objectives include the nature of the anomalous, rough topography
within the Discordance, the morphotectonic signature of the propagating rifts
presently converging toward the Discordance, the geochemical effects of ridge
propagation in a region remote form hotspots, the relationship between abyssal
lava compositions and high amplitude magnetic anomalies, possible ridge
segmentation related major crustal thickness variation within the Discordance,
and the possibility of subaxial flow of magma or asthenosphere towards (and
into?) the Discordance