* 8901524
* Mathematical Sciences: Partial Differential Equations and   Quasiregular Mappings
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1989,12/31/1991
* Juan Manfredi, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 12/31/1991
* USD 38,819.00

Mappings from domains in Euclidean space of any dimension into the same space
are said to be quasiregular if the distortion remains bounded. This means that
infinitesimal dilations remain within fixed limits in all directions and at all
points. The concept is similar to that of quasiconformal mapping except that
quasiregular maps are not required to be univalent. Aside from their interest as
transformations which preserve reasonable geometric properties, they also occur
as solutions of quasilinear elliptic partial differential equations involving
the gradient of scalar-valued functions. The first goal of this mathematical
research is to determine the interior regularity of these solutions, which may
fail since the gradient of the solution can vanish at interior points (in
contrast to quasiconformal maps). A specific objective is to show that the
gradients of solutions are locally of bounded mean variation. This is a natural
question since it has recently been shown that the gradients are in all the
Lebesgue spaces (locally). Additional work will focus on the differential
operator known as the p-Laplacian which is receiving considerable attention at
this time. Gradients of solutions of the corresponding homogeneous equation have
their oscillation bounded by the maximum of their length. This is not the best
possible estimate on the oscillation - a better one has been found in two
dimensions. Efforts will be made to extend the sharper bound to higher
dimensions. In a more geometric vein, work will continue on the question of
boundary limits of quasiregular mappings. At issue is the extent to which a
quasiregular mapping or a solution of the p-Laplacian can be expected to
approach a limiting value as the independent variable approaches the boundary of
the domain of definition in a nontangential manner. When the domain is a ball,
the existence of nontangential limits is known to exist in sets of low Hausdorff
measure in the case of the p-Laplacian, but it is not known whether quasiregular
maps must have any such limits at all. Those with smooth distortion are
understood, but quasiregular maps do not always have smooth or even continuous
distortion.