* 8901840
* Immunochemical Studies on Polysaccharides
* BIO,MCB
* 10/15/1989,03/31/1992
* Elvin Kabat, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 03/31/1992
* USD 300,000.00

This study is concerned with the evaluation of the size of the repertoire of
monoclonal antibodies to a (1-6) dextran. The contribution to antibody diversity
and specificity in this system of individual complementarty defe mining regions
(CDRs will be explored by site-directed mutagenesis replacing individualCDRs by
glycines and then restoring the original CDR residues, one or two at a time.
Fine structures of sites will be characterized by parameters such as size and
shape, cavity vs. groove-type sites, association constants, relative
contribution of each sugar in the epitope to binding including the use of
fluorinated mono-and oligosaccharides. The repertoire of anti-idiotypic and
anti- antiidiotypic antibodies inluding internal image antibodies will be
defined. All these parameters will be correlated with derived amino acid
sequences. Molecular modeling of other hybridomas established by immunochemical
data to have cavity and groove-type sites will be continued. A human antibody
repertoire of an individual who has been studies over forty-five years with
respect to antibodies to various antigens, will be transferred to severe
combined immuno deficient (SCID) mice to evaluate various responses to renewed
immunization. An attempt will be made to synthesize the VH and VL expressed
germ-line nucleotide chains of the human antibody to the group B meningococcal
polysaccharide and attach them to human C 4 or C 1 and CL constant regions and
evaluate the protective and other properties of this synthetic human antibody as
a therapeutic agent since no effective group B vaccine is available. Further
structural studies on the antibody and lectin specificities of large fragments
of Smith and Carlson degrades blood group A,B,H substances, and on comparisons
of the repertoire of anti-blood group A,B,and H substances in humans and mice
will be carried out.