* 8901506
* Mathematical Sciences: Cyclic Cohomology, Local Index and   N-Tuple of Operators
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1989,11/30/1991
* Daoxing Xia, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* William Y. Velez
* 11/30/1991
* USD 58,535.00

Professor Xia's project will focus on situations in which operators on Hilbert
space almost satisfy various algebraic relationships, where almost means up to
perturbation by compact, trace class, or other suitably small operators. He is
particularly interested in almost Lie algebras of operators, and in n-tuples of
operators almost satisfying identities of Schrodinger type. Formulas explicitly
giving the trace of operators known in such contexts to be trace class will be
sought, and powerful generalizations of trace formulas involving the pairing of
cyclic cohomology with K-theory will be explored. This is mathematical research
in the theory of operators on Hilbert space. Operators may be thought of as
enriched numbers, obeying the same laws of arithmetic as ordinary numbers with
two notable exceptions: multiplication of operators depends upon the order in
which the factors are taken, and not every non-zero operator has an inverse. For
finite-dimensional operators, i.e. square matrices of numbers, these phenomena
account for the richness of the subject of linear algebra. In the infinite-
dimensional setting of Hilbert space, there is furthermore the phenomenon of
operators obeying the laws of arithmetic for numbers except for error terms that
are small in an appropriate sense and that contain important information about
whatever situation gave rise to the operators. In a broad sense, Professor Xia's
project is concerned with how one can extract this information efficiently.