* 8901391
* Photometric Studies of Magnetic Faculae and Photospheric Heat Flow
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1989,12/31/1991
* Peter Foukal, Cambridge Research & Instrumentation Inc
* Continuing grant
* Sherry O. Farwell
* 12/31/1991
* USD 149,600.00

Recent analyses carried out on spacecraft total solar irradiance measurements
have shown quite convincingly the importance of faculae in active regions and
network for irradiance variation over the solar cycle. Also, infrared photometry
of faculae places new constraints on the mechanisms responsible for heating in
these magnetic structures. One element of the program funded here consists of
accurate photometric observations in the infrared to enable a study of the
deepest layers in the structures in more detail. Comparison of the results with
mhd models of facular and sunspot flux tubes should be a powerful new diagnostic
of the mechanisms that lead to facular excess brightness. A second aim is to
evaluate the contribution of active region and network faculae to total
irradiance over the solar cycle. It is intended to use photospheric distribution
obtained from archival KPNO magnetograms, and an empirical relation between
their magnetic flux and contrast that will be derived through photometry in the
visible and near IR. The results of these studies should considerably advance
understanding of solar luminosity modulation mechanisms and their relation to
photospheric magnetic activity. The overall aim is to understand solar
luminosity variations as they might apply to terrestrial changes (eg. climate).
Proxy data might permit reconstruction of solar history in the recent past.