* 8901695
* Mathematical Sciences: Singularity and Regularity of        Solutions of Scalar Equations and Systems in Connection     with Differential Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 05/15/1989,04/30/1992
* Patricio Aviles, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 04/30/1992
* USD 36,015.00

The source of problems to be analyzed in this project derive from differential
geometry and mathematical physics. These areas of science provide important
prototypes of non-linear equations in which fundamental and difficult analysis
must be done to understand the properties of solutions. Work will concentrate on
the study of problems related to singularity and regularity of solutions of
partial differential equations such as those encountered in the Yamabe equation
in geometry and in the theory of liquid crystals. Other work will consider the
boundary regularity of very degenerate non-linear elliptic systems which arise
in efforts to decide when it is possible to find harmonic maps between two (non
necessarily smooth) domains when the boundary values are prescribed. The work
will focus on several specific goals. Among them will be the study of singular
solutions of nonlinear elliptic equations in an effort to obtain estimates on
the dimension of the singular set as well as to understand the location of such
sets. In cases where the singular set is isolated, its location appears to be
rigid. In studies of liquid crystal models, work will be done examining the
transition between the nematic and smectic states of crystal configurations,
while more geometric work will seek to provide information as to how one can
determine whether or not a compact Riemannian manifold is conformally equivalent
to a sphere.