* 8901056
* Dissertation Research: Mate Choice and Stable Polymorphism  in the White-throated Sparrow
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/1989,05/31/1992
* Elaina Tuttle, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Tarri Joyner
* 05/31/1992
* USD 9,800.00

Most plants and animals reproduce sexually. Therefore, understanding the causes
and consequences of mate choice will increase our general understanding of
nature. White-throated sparrows (Zonotrichia albicollis) offer a rare
opportunity to study the interaction of mate choice, natural selection, and a
population's genetic diversity. White-throated sparrows of both sexes occur in
two distinct forms, white-striped and tan-striped. White-striped birds carry a
normal and an "inverted" second chromosome; tan-striped birds have two copies of
the normal chromosome. tan-striped males are more aggressive than tan- striped,
and so may mate more often. Most individuals pair with the opposite form during
the breeding season; over 90 percent of territorial pairs are composed of one
white and one tan individual. The project asks how natural selection has
influenced these preferences. Matings between two white-striped birds can
produce offspring with two "inverted" second chromosomes; this is probably
lethal to the offspring. Matings between two tan-striped individuals cannot
produce any white-striped offspring, and so lose the potential reproductive
advantage obtained through white-striped sons. Essentially, one copy of the
"inverted" chromosome is apparently beneficial, but two copies is lethal. Given
this hypothesis, selection should favor mating with the opposite form. Hence
genetic, morphological and behavioral diversity in this species my be maintained
as a consequence of selection on mate choice.