* 8901040
* Dissertation Research: The Roles of Endogenous and ExogenousFactors in Settlement Patterns of Juvenile Western          Sandpipers, Calidris mauri
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/1989,06/30/1992
* George Cox, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Althea Ball
* 06/30/1992
* USD 8,000.00

Differential migration in birds creates skewed latitudinal wintering
distributions of sex and age classes. Both endogenous and exogenous factors
influence migration patterns, although the relative effects vary greatly between
species, and among individuals within a species. A strong endogenous component
may control migratory features such as migration distance, direction and timing.
This project intends to examine the roles of endogenous and exogenous factors in
settlement patterns of juvenile female and male Western Sandpipers (Calidris
mauri). The expression of Zugunruhe (migratory restlessness) and orientation in
juveniles of different sex will be measured. The effects of restricted food
resources and social status on the expression of Zugunruhe in juveniles before
and after the termination of migration will be examined. The behavior of short-
stopped, free-living juveniles to compare the ability of the sexes to live in
the northern part of the species winter range, and area where females do not
typically settle will be monitored. This study will contribute to the
understanding of the evolution of differential migration, as it incorporates
analysis of both heritable and ecological factors in explaining the distribution
of sex classes during the nonbreeding season.