* 8901330
* Dissertation Research:  Molecular Phylogenetics of Phlebia  (Basidiomycotina) and Related Genera
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/1989,06/30/1991
* Kenneth Sytsma, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Penelope L. Firth
* 06/30/1991
* USD 7,715.00

The taxonomic study of fungi is difficult because of the simple morphology and
plasticity of these organisms. One method that shows great promise in resolving
questions in fungal taxonomy is DNA analysis. In fungi there are two kinds of
DNA: (1) DNA that occurs in the mitochondria (mtDNA) and encodes genes necessary
for mitochondrial (energy) functions; and (2) DNA in the nucleus encoding all
other genes. Because mtDNA is easy to extract and characterize, it has been
favored in taxonomic studies of fungi. Mapping of restriction sites and
sequencing of conserved genes are the best approaches to study mtDNA in fungi.
Graduate student Karen Nakasone, under the direction of faculty adviser Dr. Ken
Sytsma, will obtain both kinds of data. The data will be analyzed in two basic
ways: (1) to calculate overall genetic similarity between samples and (2) to
determine phylogenetic relationships between taxa. The genus Phlebia consists of
small and inconspicuous but ubiquitous fungi that decay wood. Some species show
great potential in the biomechanical pulping of wood. The objectives of this
study are: (1) to delimit and define the 30-35 species of Phlebia that occur in
North America based on morphology, laboratory cultures, and DNA characteristics
and to assess the reliability of traditional morphological characters in their
taxonomy; (2) to determine the phylogenetic relationships of species within
Phlebia and of Phlebia to other genera in the family; and (3) to study the
inheritance of mtDNA in Phlebia and relate these findings to other fungi. The
study will contribute to establishing a reliable taxonomy of these fungi, one
that reflects evolutionary relationships.