* 8901314
* Committee on the Human Dimensions of Global Change Under    Master Agreement
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/1989,07/31/1991
* Robert Schafrik, National Research Council
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 07/31/1991
* USD 100,000.00

As research on global environmental change has advanced in recent years,
scientists have become increasingly aware that humans (acting as individuals and
through institutions) have significant and complex interactions with natural
systems. Humans alter natural environmental conditions, and they respond to
changes in those conditions. Independent research projects examining the human
dimensions of global environmental change have clarified some of the processes
of anthropogenic change, and a number of conferences and publications have tried
to synthesize information from different disciplines and outline future research
needs. These efforts have not been well coordinated, however, nor have many of
them involved leading scholars with experience in the analysis of human-
environmental interactions. This award will partially fund the operations of a
Committee on the Human Dimensions of Global Change to be sponsored by the
Commission on Behavioral and Social Sciences and Education (CBASSE) of the
National Research Council. Through its meetings and commissioned studies, this
committee will (1) assess previous research on the topic, (2) evaluate extant
data sources, (3) consider how collaborative research would enhance the
generation of knowledge and attract more social and behavioral scientists to
conduct work in this important field, and (4) develop a research agenda that
could be implemented in the near future. The committee will publish a report
with its assessments and recommendations by the summer of 1990. This committee
will play a crucial role in the evaluation of research that already has been
conducted and in the determination of research strategies that will be most
productive in the analysis of the human dimensions of global environmental
change. Because of its stature and its experience in the conduct of studies like
this, the National Research Council will involve more of the nation's leading
scientists in this project and will provide a more effective and wide- spread
means of disseminating the conclusions reached by the committee. As a result,
future research on this topic will be grounded in a more rationale context than
would otherwise evolve.