* 8901211
* US-Federal Republic of Germany Cooperative Research:        Thermodynamics and Short-Range Order in Amorphous Rare      Earth - Transition Metal Alloys
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1989,05/31/1992
* Frances Hellman, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 05/31/1992
* USD 11,440.00

This award supports Professor Frances Hellman, University of California at San
Diego, for collaborative research with Dr. Ruediger Bormann of the Institute of
Metal Physics, University of Goettingen, Federal Republic of Germany. They are
interested in ferri-magnetic amorphous metal alloys derived from rare earth and
transition metal elements. Thin films of these alloys possess a large, poorly-
understood uni- axial magnetic anisotropy, which may be induced in the short-
range order by the growth process. Certain thermodynamic functions control the
stability of the amorphous phase relative to the crystalline phases of these
thin films. These investigators will prepare thin film samples of several
alloys, differing in composition or deposition temperature. They will make
extensive thermodynamic measurements (in Germany), in conjunction with magnetic
and structural characterization (in California), in order to compare the degree
and type of short range order. Dr. Hellman's background is in thin film specific
heat measurement and in preparation and magnetic and structural characterization
of amorphous rare earth-transition metal alloys. Her German collaborators have
unique and extensive experience in calculations of amorphous and crystalline
phase free energies, based on measurements of certain thermodynamic properties
of amorphous materials (including thin films.) They also have an ultra-high
vacuum magnetron sputtering system, dedicated to preparation of high purity
amorphous metallic alloys, especially those containing magnetic elements. The
question of intermediate and short range order in amorphous magnetic materials
and their relationship to the magnetic anisotropy is of basic as well as
technological interest. The difficulty of making thermodynamic measurements in
amorphous thin films has delayed progress in this area of materials science.
This work should contribute to resolving the question of the origin of magnetic
anisotropy in amorphous films. It will also help determine the conditions
leading to phase separation in certain alloys which are promising magnetic
storage materials.