* 8901754
* Collection of Mutant Types of Drosophila melanogaster
* BIO,DBI
* 06/15/1989,11/30/1994
* Thomas Kaufman, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Machi F. Dilworth
* 11/30/1994
* USD 1,091,586.00

The >Drosophila> Stock Center previously housed at the California Institute of
Technology has been transferred to Indiana University at Bloomington, where the
Stock Center's role as a resource to the international research community has
been expanded. The Stock Center currently maintains over 3000 genetically
distinct strains of the fruit fly >Ã•Drosophila> >melanogaster> plus over 100
strains previously maintained. In 1988, 638 requests for stocks an/or
information were processed, resulting in the shipment of 2667 subcultures of
strains from the Indiana collection to researchers in 25 countries. In addition
to expanding the content of the collection, a computerized database has been
established that assists investigators in rapidly determining which strains
available from the Stock Center are likely to be relevant to their individual
research programs. When strains not available from the Stock Center are
requested, information about likely sources of the desired materials is provided
whenever possible. In the tradition of the Caltech Stock Center, >Drosophila>
strains that serve as basic tools in a wide variety of research projects
continue to be constructed at the Indiana Stock Center. Stock Center personnel
also serve the research community as a source of information about successful
husbandry and genetic manipulation of this important research organism. The
national research initiative for the sequencing of the human genome will be
facilitated by pioneering studies using model systems such a >Drosophila>. This
simple eukaryote has a long history of genetic utility and thus much more is
known about its genomic structure than any other metazoan. This fact coupled
with the small genome size makes >Drosophila> an ideal candidate for
establishing aspects of the paradigm to be used in the human genome project. The
Stock Center, in its dual role of culture maintenance and informational clearing
house, will facilitate the use of this organism by researchers new to
>Drosophila> as well as the cognoscenti. This project provides partial support
for the Stock Centers activities for the next five years.