* 8901718
* Molecular Dynamics, Structure, and Phase Transitions in     Liquid-Crystalline Media: Electron-Spin Resonance (ESR)     Studies
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/1989,04/30/1992
* Jack Freed, Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* David Nelson
* 04/30/1992
* USD 293,200.00

Studies on the dynamic molecular structure of liquid crystals utilizing modern
electron-spin resonance (ESR) techniques. Further studies are planned on
molecular reorientational motions including both local and long-range
cooperativity. Studies at a molecular level of the dynamics of the liquid
crystalline phase transitions utilizing observed critical types of divergences
of the spin-relaxation are to be continued. The studies are performed with spin
probes of varying size and shape. New Two- Dimensional Fourier Transform ESR
methods will be used to obtain more accurate and detailed relaxation data from
which to infer both the long-time and short-time molecular motions. Two-
dimensional electron-spin-echoes and new high-field ESR methods will enable the
study of slow-motional behavior of larger probes in lower temperature phases in
terms of their ordering, configuration, and dynamics. The description of
molecular motions in liquid crystals will be enhanced by studies of
translational diffusion of the probes both at the molecular level (by spin-
exchange) and at the macroscopic level (by ESR- imaging). Special emphasis is to
be placed upon interpreting results at nematic-smectic phase transitions and
within smectic phases in terms of coupled rotational and translational molecular
motions, Our powerful computational methods will permit more sophisticated
modeling of the motional dynamics as required to interpret these results. These
studies will include thermotropics, oriented lyotropic nematics, and oriented
polymeric liquid crystals.