* 8901345
* Mathematical Sciences: Theory and Applications of           Multivariate Splines
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1989,06/30/1993
* Joseph Ward, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 06/30/1993
* USD 258,840.00

This project represents the continuation of the investigators' research into
the theory, applications, and computational aspects of multivariate (polynomial)
splines. The theoretical aspects of this project may be considered as applied
analysis and efficiency in computations and implementation is emphasized in the
applications. One of the problems addressed is to determine the approximation
power of a multivariate spline space. Once it is known, the next step is to
identify a much lower dimensional subspace with the same approximation power so
that specific features of this subspace can be used to efficiently construct
approximates with optimal order of approximation. Another problem is to develop
efficient schemes that guarantee the optimal order of approximation. Since
interpolation is sometimes expensive to attain, and in some situations may not
even be desirable, it is also important to study the constrution of quasi-
interpolants. Recently the investigators have characterized all quasi-
interpolants induced by a compactly supported function to gridded data. From
this, one should be able to study quasi-interpolants with "minimum support". For
scattered data, the problem will be approached via vertex splines. One of the
most important applications of multivariate splines is the construction of
approximants that have certain shape preserving characteristics. Part of this
project is to apply the theory developed during the previous project to
investigate the implications of that approach to shape preserving problems.
Finally, the basic problems on dimension and construction of local bases of the
important subspaces will be investigated further.