* 8901356
* Water and Metabolic Relations of Terrestrial Arthropods
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/1989,12/31/1993
* Neil Hadley, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Vincent P. Gutschick
* 12/31/1993
* USD 164,415.00

The proposed research represents a continuation of efforts to learn how insects
and arachnids regulate their water balance and metabolic activities in ways that
enable them to successfully adapt to harsh terrestrial environments. Previous
research has shown that the key structural element in preventing excess water
loss is their cuticle (exoskeleton), especially the waterproofing barrier
provided by lipids (waxes) deposited on the surface and also embedded in the
outermost layer of the cuticle. The correlations established between barrier
effectiveness and the quantity (surface density) or molecular composition of
these lipids are based largely on indirect evidence or on relationships
established for biological membranes which feature both a different class
(phospholipids) and a different arrangement of these lipids. The proposed
research is significant from the standpoint of both basic and applied research.
The measurement technology designed for these experiments can be used by plant
and animal scientists in a variety of disciplines to monitor water flux across
biological or artificial membranes or to measure the moisture content of gases
released during respiration or photosynthesis. In many respects, the
technological developments are as important as the data they produce. The
proposed studies will also provide information on how lipids are organized and
deposited on the cuticle surface, how interactions between various lipids and
nonlipid barrier constituents contribute to reduced permeability, and how and to
what extent changes in the amount and composition of surface lipids occur in
response to increased dehydration and/or increasing desiccation potential. This
information can be used by firms or agencies whose function is to develop better
means of controlling insect pests through the manufacture of more effective
sprays or abrasives, or by suggesting agricultural practices that will create
microenvironmental conditions which are inhospitable for insects and still
permit plant growth.