* 8901031
* In Situ Studies of Tetrahedrally Bonded Thin Film           Nucleation, Surfaces, and Interfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/1989,11/30/1992
* Robert Collins, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 11/30/1992
* USD 149,000.00

The aim of the proposed research program is to obtain a fundamental
understanding of the structure and properties of tetrahedrally coordinated thin
film surfaces and interfaces and their relationship to the physics and chemistry
of deposition. Progress in these aspects of thin film science has been very slow
owing to the complexity of the plasma processes for deposition and the relative
lack of in situ probes for studying nucleation, and reactions at surfaces and
interfaces, particularly in adverse high pressure plasma environments. In situ
spectroscopic ellipsometry (SE) is a monolayer-sensitive, non-perturbative
technique which will be applied to these problems. A unique optical multichannel
analyzer-based ellipsometry system in place now permits collection of dielectric
function spectra from 1.1 eV to 4.5 eV with a minimum time resolution of less
than one second. This allows spectra to be taken at every Angstrom during the
growth of these films. A second instrument will also be developed under this
proposal. The materials to be studied are hydrogenated and hydrogen-free
amorphous carbon and silicon as well as microcrystalline diamond. The
preparation capabilities will include plasma enhanced chemical vapor deposition
(CVD), heated filament enhanced CVD, remote plasma CVD, all from CH4 or SiH4.
Physical vapor deposition techniques include evaporation, with and without ion
assist, dc planar magnetron sputtering, and ion beam sputtering. The studies
will concentrate on the nucleation and interface structure of microcrystalline
diamond thin films and the response of their surfaces to well- characterized
inert and reactive ion beams. Similar experiments will be used to probe the
nucleation, surface reactivity, and bonding for the Si-based films. These
experiments will be used to identify the physical factors which control film
bonding and morphology.