* 8901726
* Mathematical Sciences: Nonlinear Partial Differential       Equations and Nonconvex Variational Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/1989,05/31/1992
* Peter Sternberg, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 05/31/1992
* USD 31,972.00

Much of the work in this project represents continuing investigations into
problems of mathematical analysis, generally related to some particular
application or physical model. There are four categories of study, the first
concerned with singular perturbations of nonconvex variational problems. By this
one means locating functions which minimize an integral of some nonconvex
transformation of a class of functions. Solutions are generally not unique. To
single out more reasonable solutions, singular perturbations are introduced to
penalize the formation of interfaces which occur among piecewise constant
solutions. This adaptation of the problem leads to a form of "preferred"
solutions which have been identified in certain cases. There are many other
important cases which have not been treated; two in particular are the cases
where the unknown functions are gradients and the case where the unknowns are
matrix- valued functions. Additional work will be done on constrained reaction-
diffusion processes, analyzing the front propagation of solutions to nonlinear
parabolic equations. The fronts typically represent phase boundaries and their
velocity often depends on their local mean curvature such as occur in the motion
of grain boundaries in metals. The problem to be analyzed here is a gradient
flow subject to a mass constraint. The fronts will develop rapidly and then
propagate with a curvature-dependent normal velocity. The mass constraint will
be inhibiting so that the actual form of the propagation rule remains to be
established. In a nonconvex problem arising in optimal design, one seeks to
minimize the cost of material while maintaining the necessary strength.
Mathematically, the form of the minimization problems is that of a constrained
least gradient problem. A prescription for the construction of a solution has
been given by Kohn and Strang for the two-dimensional case. This work aims at
developing a rigorous analysis of this method as well as looking for a means to
analyze the question in higher dimensions. Work will also be done on branching
phenomena of solitary waves. In 1954, Friedrichs and Hyers established the
existence of branch solutions of the water wave equation for sufficiently small
speed and amplitude. It has not been established whether or not secondary
bifurcations of the first branches can occur. The object of this study will be
to show that this phenomenon is not possible and to establish conditions which
guarantee the uniqueness of solutions having given amplitude or speed.