* 8902477
* Twelfth International Conference on General Relativity and  Gravitation; Boulder, Colorado; July 2-8, 1989 (Physics)
* MPS,PHY
* 04/01/1989,03/31/1990
* Neil Ashby, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Richard Isaacson
* 03/31/1990
* USD 48,200.00

The Twelfth International Conference on General Relativity and Gravitation is
the next in a series of meetings held once every three years, under the auspices
of the International Society on General Relativity and Gravitation. This
conference, (known as "GR-12"), will be held in Boulder, Colorado from July 2-8,
1989. The subjects of General Relativity and Gravitation have assumed increasing
importance in the past decade or so. Ties to High-Energy Particle Physics arise
from studies of cosmology and of the early moments in the formation of the
universe. New astronomical observations and astrophysical studies make the
existence of extremely massive black holes in active galactic nuclei seem very
likely. Evidence for black holes in other objects and for the importance of
relativistic effects in many astronomical events such as the emission of jets
from radio galaxies also exists. Observation of the binary pulsar and of
distances to the moon and other planets have permitted very accurate tests of
gravitational theory. Development of new techniques for detection of
gravitational waves are proceeding. This award will support travel costs for
invited speakers and travel funds to support conference participants from the
United States.