* 8902974
* Models for the Use of Accident Precursor Data to Estimate   Rare Event Frequencies (Decision, Risk, and Management      Science)
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/1989,12/31/1990
* Vicki Bier, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Lola E. Rogers
* 12/31/1990
* USD 88,841.00

The application of a model for the use of data on accident precursors or "near
misses" will be investigated in estimating the frequencies of rare events. In
particular, this work will focus on the application of the proposed framework in
cases where the available data (i.e., the observed precursors or near misses)
are subject to widely divergent interpretations by the experts, and as a result
expert opinion provides relatively little guidance to decision makers. The
results of this work will: (1) provide a formal procedure for the use of
accident precursor data in estimating event frequencies; and (2) aid decision
makers in evaluating the credibility of expert interpretations of accident
precursors. Interactive activities include giving lectures in several senior
undergraduate and graduate-level courses on risk analysis and reliability
engineering, participating in the weekly seminar series of the Department of
Chemical and Nuclear Engineering, with particular emphasis on inviting other
women engineers and scientists as speakers, and with the faculty advisor for the
student chapter of the American Nuclear Society, which has a large female
membership, and with the local student chapter of the Society of Women
Engineers. This project furthers VPW program objectives which are (1) to provide
opportunities for women to advance their careers in engineering and in the
disciplines of science supported by NSF and (2) to encourage women to pursue
careers in sience and engineering by providing greater visibility for women
scientists and engineers employed in industry, government, and academic
institutions. By encouraging the participation of women in science, it is a
valuable investment in the Nation's future scientific vitality.