* 8902609
* Mathematical Sciences: Analytical Geometry of Families of   Riemann Surfaces
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1989,05/31/1993
* Scott Wolpert, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 05/31/1993
* USD 122,657.00

Four topics in this continuing investigation into the geometry and potential
theory of Riemann surfaces will be covered by this project. The first of these
concerns compact Riemann surfaces, combining Riemannian geometry, conformal
geometry and algebraic geometry. The interplay between these concepts is
strongest when the surface is considered with the Arakelov metric attached. In
terms of this metric a Green's function is determined. One object of this
research is to study the behavior of the Green's function for a degenerating
family of surfaces. Recently, a parametrization mapping of holomorphic quadratic
differentials on a surface with a hyperbolic metric has been constructed with
range in the genus g Teichmuller space. It is known to be real analytic. Work
will now proceed to extend this parametrization to the case where the surface is
replaced by a noded Riemann surface. The object is to examine further the
degeneration of hyperbolic metrics as well as the degeneration of harmonic maps.
Further work on Teichmuller space centers on finding a boundary for the space
and a kernel function (of two variables) which transforms by the diagonal action
of the mapping class group. In addition, it has been noted that the degeneration
of the spectrum for hyperbolic Laplace-Beltrami operators leads to improved
understanding of the degeneration of the hyperbolic metric. Although the
spectrum of the limit is not the limit of the spectrum, the possibility of
obtaining one from the other is to be investigated. Of special interest will be
the formation of continuous spectrum and the analysis of discrete spectrum in
the limit. Some of this work relates to earlier studies on string theory -
further applications will be considered as the research progresses.