* 8902891
* The "Work in Preparation" (PREP) Editor: Support for        Co-Authoring and Commenting
* CSE,IIS
* 06/15/1989,11/30/1992
* Ravinder Chandok, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Su-Shing Chen
* 11/30/1992
* USD 950,000.00

The goal of this project is to develop a "work in preparation" (PREP) editor, a
multi-user environment to support a variety of collaborative and, and in
particular, co-authoring and commenting relationships for scholarly
communication. The editor is designed to facilitate the intensive study of co-
authoring and commenting relationships across local and remote electronic
networks. The PI's focus on scholarly communities because they are already
collaborative work groups. They are not explicitly organized around single,
concrete goals, but members of groups share the common goal of advancing the
state of knowledge. Such work groups are organized in local settings, but they
also interact intensively at a distance, as members of a common "invisible
college." Enhancing the effectiveness of this loosely-coupled collaboration is
an important function for the tools developed under this research. The project
has scientific significance in computer science, psychology, and organizational
communication. In communication and organizational psychology, the project
contributes to the further refinement and test of a collaborative model of how
groups usefully interact when working together as co-authors and commenters. In
computer science, the project provides a proof of concept test for editing
systems that support structured collaboration among authors as well as the
efficient management of large volumes of comments that external commenters can
make of authors; working drafts.