* 8902838
* Managers of National Antarctic Programs
* O/D,OPP
* 02/01/1989,07/31/1990
* A. F. Spilhaus, Jr., American Geophysical Union
* Standard Grant
* Guy  G. Guthridge
* 07/31/1990
* USD 88,803.00

For the past three years the need to provide better coordination among operating
agencies in the many countries with Antarctic programs has received increasing
attention. Agencies from fourteen such countries agreed in Boulder, Colorado in
June, 1987 to form an organization called, Managers of National Antarctic
Programs (MNAP). During the XIVth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting in
October 1987, representatives met informally and agreed to associate the MNAP
organization with the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR). The
relationship with SCAR was established and the MNAP organization formally
adopted at the XX SCAR meeting in Hobart, September 1987. The American
Geophysical Union (AGU) embraces all scientific disciplines involved in
Antarctic Research, with the exception of some of the biological sciences. The
AGU has proposed that its administrative offices provide for the newly
established MNAP group the full range of support services, including an
Executive Director. The AGU's extensive administrative services and widespread,
excellent reputation in the scientific community, both nationally and
internationally, make it the appropriate provider of such services. Funding this
award will cover the Executive Director, support staff and services, including
communications, office equipment, supplies, computer services and bookkeeping. I
recommend support at the requested level.