* 8902542
* Partial Differential Equations and Several Complex          Variables (Mathematics)
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/1989,06/30/1990
* Mei-Chi Shaw, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Lola E. Rogers
* 06/30/1990
* USD 115,105.00

In this research, Dr. Shaw will continue her investigation of linear partial
differential equations which arise from problems in several complex variables.
In particular, she will study the solvability, regularity and embeddability of
the tangential Cauchy-Riemann operators. These problems are of fundamental
importance in the function theory of complex analysis. The global problem is an
extension of her results on L2 existence and estimates for b on weakly pseudo-
convex boundaries to Holder and Lp estimates. The local problem is to prove with
kernel method the existence of a local solution for a system of complex vector
fields satisfying the compatibility condition. The embeddability of abstract CR
structures will also be addressed. This problem is closely related to the local
solvability of b and the b - homotopy formula. Related problems on the range of
b and the regularity of the Szego projection will also be studied. The study of
these problems wil benefit from interactions with the Wisconsin group which is
also actively working on related problems. Dr. Shaw will also teach a one-
semester graduate course in Several Complex Variables. Additionally, she will
organize a series of seminars by leading women mathematicians and top
researchers in Several Complex Variables. This project furthers VPW program
objectives which are (1) to provide opportunities for women to advance their
careers in engineering and in the disciplines of science supported by NSF and
(2) to encourage women to pursue careers in science and engineering by providing
greater visibility for women scientists and engineers employed in industry,
government, and academic institutions. By encouraging the participation of women
in science, it is a valuable investment in the Nation's future scientific
vitality.