* 8902958
* Production of Lithologic and Structural Maps from Digital   Landsat Thematic Mapper Data Over the Eastern Desert, in    Egypt
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/1989,02/28/1991
* Mohamed Sultan, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Alice C. Hogan
* 02/28/1991
* USD 20,000.00

ABSTRACT NARRATIVE Description: This proposal supports the collaboration of Drs.
Mohamed Sultan and Raymond Arvidson of Washington University, St. Louis,
Missouri, and Dr. Atef Dardir, Director General of the Geological Survey of
Egypt, Dr. Baher El Kaliouby of Ain Shams University and Dr. Eugene O'Connor of
the British Geological Survey. The project will build on the ongoing NASA
supported research work of Drs. Sultan and Arvidson, where they have determined
that thematic mapper data is very useful in generating systematic geological
maps. A portion of the requested NSF support is planned for the purchase of four
digital Landsat thematic mapper (TM) scenes. These scenes, when joined with the
current set of three TM scenes held by the investigators, will provide thematic
mapper coverage for all Late Proterozic outcrops in the Eastern Desert of Egypt.
From these seven scenes, color and black and white composites prints at scales
of 1:150K and 1:50K will be generated. Those composites will used to generate
interpretative maps depicting the lithology, structures and mineral resources of
the Eastern Desert. These products will be delivered to the Egyptian Geological
Survey, Ain Shams University and British Geological Survey (for supervision of
the mapping program) for checking the validity of TM based intrepretations and
instructions on ways to refine the initial maps. The first TM products will be
refined by the project and used as base maps by the two Egyptian institutions to
generate regional maps on the scale of 1:250K and local maps to the scale of
1:50K. Scope: This proposal is an opportunity for U.S. and Egyptian scientists,
aided by British geologists, to develop a set of complete geological maps of the
Eastern Desert of Egypt. These maps will give scientists valuable additional
information to pursue field studies of the continental growth processes in the
Late Proterozic Era in the Arabian-Nubian Shield existing in the Eastern Desert.
The greater resolution of the smaller scale maps will define the details
necessary for more definitive studies of geological history and economic
potenial of the region. These final maps, while adding to the knowledge and
understanding of the tectonic evolution of the Nubian Shield in the Eastern
Desert of Egypt, may provide significant assistance in mapping less known areas
of arid continents elsewhere in the world. This proposal does meet the
objectives of the Science in Developing Countries Program of advancing the
international exchange of scientific knowledge and does cointribute to the
enhancement of science in a developing country.