* 8902207
* Study of Solar-Variability-QBO-Weather Relations in the     Context of Variations in Cosmic Rays Fluxes and Storm       Intensification
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/1989,08/31/1991
* R. Richard Hodges, University of Texas at Dallas
* Continuing Grant
* Sherry O. Farwell
* 08/31/1991
* USD 123,700.00

An accumulating body of data has provided strong evidence that cyclonic
disturbances together with the jet stream at tropopause altitudes vary in
response to the 11 year solar cycle and to the quasibiennial oscillation of
equatorial stratospheric winds (the QBO). Short term responses to magnetic
storms, solar wind sector boundaries, and solar flares have been found, and
these can be examined as diagnostics on the effectiveness of carriers of solar
variability to the troposphere and lower stratosphere. A new short term response
has been found in the form of changes in tropopause pressure and vertical
temperature profile in the troposphere in the two days following solar-flare-
related high-speed plasma streams (HSPS). This effect is made understandable in
the context of galactic cosmic rays being the main carrier of the solar
variability. This grant will support a data analysis effort relevant to Solar
Variability/QBO/Weather effects in the context of the galactic cosmic rays being
the main carrier of the solar variability. Tests will be made of the adequacy of
the time variations of the cosmic ray flux, particularly for the energy range
0.3 to 3 GeV, to account for the observed short term and long term solar
variability influences on the troposphere and lower stratosphere. An analysis
will be made of variations in stratospheric minor constituent variations in the
context of chemical/aerosol carriers for the tropospheric QBO variation. The
work should provide constraints on several possible mechanisms of
troposphere/stratosphere response, particularly those involving electrical and
chemical effects on cloud microphysics, and on possible links to latent heat
release and storm intensification.