* 8902545
* Collaborative Research on Asymmetric Information Models of  Law Enforcement and Regulatory Compliance
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/1989,06/30/1991
* Louis Wilde, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Lisa Martin
* 06/30/1991
* USD 77,180.00

This is a continuation of a collaborative project by two well known theorists,
Drs. Reinganum and Wilde, who have been working on economic analyses of law
enforcement and regulatory compliance. Three topics will be examined. The first
is an extension of the investigators' work on tax compliance. Corruption will be
introduced into the investigators' prior work by allowing for the possibility of
tax auditors accepting bribes in exchange for not reporting tax evasion revealed
by an audit. Second, a model will be developed which explains when firms will
correctly reveal information about new chemical products they produce, and
optimal auditing ruling by the EPA in light of this. The model will incorporate
how the audit policy of the EPA affects the firm's choice of chemicals to
manufacture and the nature of the information supplied to the EPA. Third, a
theory of optimal nonmonetary sanctions will be developed where crime (e.g.
armed robbery) may increase the likelihood that some other crime (e.g. murder)
will be committed. This component of the research will offer normative and
positive models of law enforcement. Economic considerations have an important
influence on compliance with the law and, thus, on strategies for regulation and
law enforcement. Drs. Reinganum and Wilde's work is among the best in trying to
balance the realities of enforcement with the simplification necessary for
rigorous economic analysis. The research promises to further illuminate the
causes and underlying dynamics of compliance and thus is of substantial
scientific significance.