* 8902882
* Postdoctoral Fellowship in Studies in Science Technology andSociety
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/1989,06/30/1990
* Thomas Ryckman, Fellowships
* Fellowship Award
* Ronald J. Overmann
* 06/30/1990
* USD 28,000.00

The changing relationship of science with philosophy is of great importance for
the discipline of philosophy of science. A change of great significance is
occurring in philosophy which, under logical positivism, sought to prescribe
what "good" science is. Today, philosophers tend to view the role of philosophy
of science not to be so much prescriptive but rather more descriptive. Dr.
Ryckman, a recent Ph.D. in philosophy from Columbia University, will be using
this postdoctoral fellowship to work with Dr. Arthur Fine at Northwestern
University on the history of the relationship of science and philosophy. He will
examine the early writings of F. A. M. Schlick, Hans Reichenbach, and Rudolf
Carnap as well as other logical positivists. Dr. Ryckman will focus his
attention on the perceived impact of developments in science, in particular, the
theory of relativity, on more traditional philosophical concerns and issues. He
will try to establish lines of connection and divergence with other
philosophical trends of the time, especially the older positivism and neo-
Kantianism. He will also consider these early writings as innovative and
exploratory attempts to redefine the terms of interrelation and mutual
dependence of science and philosophy, attempts which were lost sight of in the
later militant period of logical positivism, but which retain much of value and
of interest to philosophers of science and others who reflect on the nature of
science and its role in society, today.