* 8902352
* Mathematical Sciences: Geometric Aspects of Semisimple Lie  Group Representations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1989,12/31/1991
* Roger Zierau, Oklahoma State University
* Continuing Grant
* William Y. Velez
* 12/31/1991
* USD 64,890.00

An important and inspiring viewpoint in the representation theory of semisimple
Lie groups has been the attempt of realizing representations as certain
geometric objects, typically as the space of global sections of certain vector
bundles on various homogeneous spaces of the underlying group. The project of
Professors Zierau and Chang will investigate further this interplay between
geometric operations and the corresponding representation-theoretic
implications. Chang will study discrete series for semisimple symmetric spaces
using D-module techniques, while Zierau will study the space of harmonic forms
on Kahler semisimple symmetric spaces in order to unitarize certain
representations. This project has to do with the representation theory of Lie
groups, which bear the name of the Norwegian mathematician Sophus Lie. These
fundamental mathematical objects arise naturally in several ways. One basic
example of a Lie group is the group of rotations of a sphere, where the group
operation consists of following one motion by another. Detailed information
concerning this group is very helpful in solving mathematical or physical
problems in which spherical symmetry is present. Other groups of motions capture
other kinds of symmetry. A more algebraic (as opposed to geometric) source of
examples of Lie groups comes from the multiplication of matrices. The group of
all invertible real (or complex) matrices of a given size is a Lie group, as is
just about any subgroup thereof that can be described in a natural manner. It is
desirable to be able to go back and forth between the geometric and algebraic
points of view, for instance to consider the numerous ways in which the rotation
group of the sphere can be realized as a group of invertible matrices. This,
roughly, is representation theory. It is useful because facts about the
representations of a given group tend to store a lot of information very
economically. The research of Professors Zierau and Chang will concentrate on
ways to build representations of a group by letting it act on certain kinds of
geometric structures.