* 8902389
* Mathematical Sciences: Representation Theory of Infinite    Dimensional Classical Groups
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1989,06/30/1992
* Robert Boyer, Drexel University
* Continuing Grant
* William Y. Velez
* 06/30/1992
* USD 41,335.00

Professor Boyer will investigate the representation theory of classical groups
associated to operator algebras. The emphasis will be on inductive limits of
compact groups, which are the next order of complexity after finite dimensional
groups. The analysis to be undertaken will use the framework of approximately
finite- dimensional C*-algebras (especially the K-functor and its order
structure), dynamical systems and their ergodic measures, and the combinatorics
of the approximating groups. One specific objective is to classify the
representations of the inductive limit unitary group which generalize the well-
known quasi-free representations of the canonical (anti-) commutation relations.
This project is part of an effort now underway in many quarters to extend
concepts and results long familiar in the study of Lie groups (named after the
eminent Norwegian mathematician Sophus Lie) to objects of a much more exotic
sort. An example of a Lie group in the usual sense is the group of all rotations
of a sphere, where the group operation consists of following one motion by
another. Detailed knowledge of the rotation group is extremely helpful in the
analysis of any mathematical or physical situation where spherical symmetry is
present. It is an important feature of this group that we need only a finite
number of parameters (in this case three) to specify any of its members.
Likewise, we can consider the rotation group in higher dimensions. No truly new
phenomena occur as long as the dimension remains finite, but if we let it
increase without bound and so to speak take the limit, we obtain a kind of
infinite-dimensional Lie group. Many of the same questions make sense for this
inductive limit rotation group as for the ordinary three-dimensional one.
Professor Boyer will work on the new methods that are needed to answer them in
this more difficult setting.