* 8902447
* Mathematical Sciences: Elliptic Boundary Value Problems and Maximum Principles on Nonsmooth Domains
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1989,11/30/1991
* Gregory Verchota, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 11/30/1991
* USD 37,216.00

This work continues mathematical research on boundary value problems for
homogeneous equations of elliptic systems and higher order equations. The work
emphasizes domains whose boundaries lack the smoothness assumptions often
assumed in such studies. It is this lack of smoothness (corners and edges are
allowed, for example) which provides an avenue for direct application of the
results to concrete physical problems where relatively rough boundaries are the
rule rather than the exception. The equations are multi-dimensional, given with
boundary data belonging to various function classes such as the Lebesgue spaces,
Hardy spaces, BMO and Sobolev spaces. Solutions are given in terms of boundary
integral equations. However, because the boundaries lack smoothness, the
resulting integral equations must be solved without recourse to the classical
Fredholm theory. Certain techniques have been developed which have led to
significantly improved maximum principle results of Agmon-Miranda type for
higher order operators such as the bilaplacian and certain systems.
Specifically, one wants to estimate integrals of gradients of solutions in terms
of the gradient along the boundary. The estimates are to be independent of the
boundary function and should only depend on the shape of the domain's boundary.
This leads to singular integrals which require new techniques. For the
bilaplacian, very general results have been obtained in two and three
dimensions. The methods cannot be extended to higher dimensions, and it will be
the primary goal of this project to find the correct estimates for the higher
dimensional cases both for single equations as well as for systems. Typical
sources for such equations are hydrostatics and electrostatics.