* 8902171
* U.S. - Mexico Cooperative Research:  Volcanic Risk          Evaluation of the Colima and Popocatepetl Volcanoes
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1989,10/01/1990
* Michael Sheridan, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 10/01/1990
* USD 7,050.00

This award will support a group of U.S. researchers headed by Prof. Michael F.
Sheridan of the Arizona State University (ASU) to collaborate with a group of
Mexican researchers under Professor Ana Lillian Martin of the Institute of
Geophysics of the National Autonomous University of Mexico (UNAM). The
investigators intend to study volcanic activity in Mexico with special emphasis
on the region where the Colima and Popocatepetl volcanoes are located. In the
process, they plan to produce a volcanic risk map and a report to reduce
potential volcanic disasters. More specifically, the researchers will: (1)
conduct a literature search of all historic records; (2) gather field data on
the stratigraphy and distribution of products; (3) determine radiometric dates
of critical events; (4) formulate a conceptual model of volcanic patterns; (5)
determine the probability of various types of volcanic events in future
eruptions; (6) estimate the distribution of products using computer models of
activity; (7) create volcanic risk maps illustrating the results; and (8)
publish a monograph with all the pertinent information necessary to explain the
risk map. Mexican researchers have designated Colima to be the prime target for
risk mitigation but both volcanoes under study are considered dangerous. The
numerical models proposed for this study are presently being installed at the
Institute of Geophysics of UNAM. ASU will provide Mexican researchers with the
technology used in the creation of hazards maps and in the analysis of landsat
TM images. Ultimately, the proposed exchange will lead to a better understanding
of the complex problem of volcanic activity in Mexico and elsewhere.