* 8902879
* Investigation of Solar Flares with Images of Their          Microwave - Emitting Sources (Atmospheric Science)
* EDU,EES
* 01/01/1990,12/31/1990
* Carol Crannell, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Lola E. Rogers
* 12/31/1990
* USD 11,123.00

The dynamic evolution of microwave-emitting sources in solar flares will be
investigated using spatially, spectrally, and temporally resolved observations
obtained with the Owens Valley frequency-agile interferometer. Measured source
areas and spectral parameters will be used to make quantitative tests of solar-
flare models. The results of this investigation will advance our understanding
of particle acceleration and particle interactions in ways that have not been
possible without imaging on the spectral and temporal scales commensurate with
the impulsive component of solar flames. Interactive activities include helping
to develop connections to the existing network of women in physics and
astronomy, teaching a section of the freshman physics course during the winter
quarter to encourage contacts with undergraduate students, and presenting guest
lectures and seminars in high-energy solar physics. This project furthers VPW
program objectives which are (1) to provide opportunities for women to advance
their careers in engineering and in the disciplines of science supported by NSF
and (2) to encourage women to pursue careers in science and engineering by
providing greater visibility for women scientists and engineers employed in
industry, government, and academic institutions. By encouraging the
participation of women in science, it is a valuable investment in the Nation's
future scientific vitality.