* 8902662
* Mathematical Sciences: Solutions of Equations and Paths of  Equations With Homotopies and Infinitesimals
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1989,12/31/1992
* B. Curtis Eaves, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 12/31/1992
* USD 165,880.00

This research is to be directed along two closely related avenues, namely, the
solution of equations and paths of equations with homotopies, and the solution
of parametric or short paths of equations with infinitesimals. The essence of
the first avenue is path following the preimage of a point,perhaps, in
subdivisions. The essence of the second is doing arithmetric with infinitesimals
and, transferring algorithms, problems and solutions from one ordered field to
another. The parametric problem is lifted to an ordered field containing an
infinitesimal to obtain a single problem, the original algorithm is run in the
new ordered field, and the solution is lowered to the original field to obtain a
short path of solutions to the parametric problems; this sequence is referred to
as a lift, solve, and lower. To see that the two avenues are related we note
that piecewise affine homotopy methods regularly employ infinitesimals and can
be used to solve parametric problems, and the lift, solve, and lower sequence
applies to piecewise affine homotopy methods. Specific tasks and projects to be
studied under these headings include variable dimension algorithms for infinite
dimensional problems, parametric linear programs, average analysis of homotopy
and simplex methods, matrix scaling, design centering, computing dynamic curves,
various aspects of computing in ordered fields and problem characterization,
transfer principles in ordered fields, a compiler for algorithms computing with
an infinitesimal, solution and combinatorial analysis of economic models, and
parametric production problems.