* 8902216
* Mathematical Sciences: Geometric Harmonic Analysis and      Spectral Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1989,06/30/1991
* Robert Strichartz, Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* John V. Ryff
* 06/30/1991
* USD 77,537.00

The basis for this work is the strong connections which exist between geometric
and harmonic analysis. The latter subject concerns the decomposition of
mathematical functions into simpler pieces and the reconstruction (synthesis) of
functions from these pieces. Often the pieces arise naturally as eigenfunctions
of differential operators such as the Laplace operator defined on a surface or
manifold. However, eigenfunctions of operators occur in many contexts where the
ideas of harmonic analysis are just beginning to penetrate. The object of this
research is to foster further development in this direction. A simply-connected
Lie nilpotent group of step 3 or higher has a sub-elliptic Laplacian
representable as the sum of the squares of the generators. Work will be done in
determining the eigenfunctions of this operator. For step 2 groups such as the
Heisenberg group, the eigenfunctions are described in terms of Hermite
functions. The present work should lead to new classes of special functions.
Other work will study sets of fractional Hausdorff dimension. These sets which
have long played a role in harmonic analysis are now coming into prominence in
many areas of mathematics. One goal of this project will be to examine more
closely recently discovered inequalities between the mean-square integral of
Fourier transforms and the same integral of the originating function taken with
respect to alpha-dimensional measure. In particular, work will concentrate on
determining what fractal properties of the support of such a measure can be
obtained by considering the asymptotic behavior of Fourier transforms of
functions multiplied against the measure. A new line of investigation will take
up the now classical theory of almost periodic functions developed early in the
century by Besicovitch. One of the drawbacks to the theory was the fact that
when a norm was defined for the space of such functions, it produced a large
null space. This work will look for new ways of producing metrics on the space,
developing a distributional point of view and deriving a useful theory of
generalized harmonic analysis on the space, with special emphasis placed on the
expansion of the Fourier transform.