* 8902256
* Mathematical Sciences: Harmonic Analysis for Infinite       Dimensional Groups
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1989,11/30/1992
* Doug Pickrell, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* William Y. Velez
* 11/30/1992
* USD 5,000.00

This award provides supplementary travel support to Professor Douglas Pickrell,
who now holds a Mathematical Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowship. His
project is part of an effort now underway in many quarters to extend concepts
and results long familiar in the study of Lie groups to objects of a much more
exotic sort. An example of a Lie group in the usual sense is the group of all
rotations of a sphere, where the group operation consists of following one
motion by another. Detailed knowledge of the rotation group is extremely helpful
in the analysis of any mathematical or physical situation where spherical
symmetry is present. It is an important feature of this group that we need only
a finite number of parameters (in this case three) to specify any of its
members. If now instead of rigid motions we look at all smooth transformations
(diffeomorphisms) of the sphere, the situation becomes infinite-dimensional.
Such groups of diffeomorphisms are typical of the structures that Professor
Pickrell will focus on in his research. Many of the same questions that make
sense in the traditional setting also make sense infinite-dimensionally, but the
intellectual tools that must be used in answering them are radically different.
Recent developments in theoretical physics do much to set the agenda and provide
insight in this new area of mathematical research.