* 8902952
* Mathematical Sciences: Weighted Norm Inequalities and       Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1989,12/31/1991
* Richard Wheeden, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 12/31/1991
* USD 54,881.00

8902952 Wheeden Central to the investigations to be carried out is the
development of integral inequalities known as weighted norm inequalities. The
inequalities, which compare the weighted norm of a given function with that of
its image under some transform (using possibly a different weight) are
fundamental in the analysis of differential equations. Solutions of the
equations are expressed in terms of integral transforms, often involving
singular kernels. If one can establish basic, weighted inequalities relative to
the transforms, it is then possible to show that solutions can be found within
given classes of functions. The analysis involves fractional integrals, Sobolev
and Poincare inequalities, interpolation inequalities, Poisson integrals and
Fourier transforms. Degenerate elliptic and parabolic equations, including
vector fields other than the gradient fields will be studied. In addition, work
will be done seeking conditions for the global existence of positive solutions
for a class of semilinear degenerate elliptic equations. Work is also planned in
determining the extent to which classical inequalities can be carried over to
homogeneous spaces. Emphasis will be placed on the question of whether the
Sobolev and Poincare inequalities for first order vector fields (other than the
ordinary gradient) can be carried over to these spaces.