* 8902794
* Changing Variances of Fundamentals and the Behavior of      Returns (Economics)
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/1990,11/30/1991
* Karen Lewis, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Lola E. Rogers
* 11/30/1991
* USD 113,470.00

The time-varying nature of ex ante predictable movements across different assets
has emerged as an empirical regularity in recent studies of foreign exchange,
the term premium, and stock returns. Dr. Lewis will investigate the potential
effects upon these ex ante returns from changing variances of fundamentals. She
will study these effects by addressing three basic questions: (1) During periods
of significant changes in the variance of fundamentals, do risk premia across
different types of assets move systematically in the direction implied by the
ICAPM? (2) Are the variances of fundamentals sufficiently mean-reverting to help
explain the empirical puzzle found in Lewis (1988), that the constant covariance
("beta") ICAPM is rejected at shorter but not longer horizons? (3) If variances
of fundamental change periodically, do market expectations of these potential
shifts exacerbate the time-varying nature of returns? Dr. Lewis will teach a
Ph.D. level course in international macroeconomics/finance. In addition, she
will conduct faculty seminars based on her research, attend faculty meetings,
counsel women graduate students, and present business and government women
economist guest speakers to undergraduate students. This project furthers VPW
program objectives which are (1) to provide opportunities for women to advance
their careers in engineering and in the disciplines of science supported by NSF
and (2) to encourage women to pursue careers in science and engineering by
providing greater visibility for women scientists and engineers employed in
industry, government, and academic institutions. By encouraging the
participation of women in science, it is a valuable investment in the Nation's
future scientific vitality.