* 8902257
* Bond Forming Reactions at High Coordinate and Polynuclear   Transition Metal Clusters
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/1989,10/31/1992
* Stephen Lippard, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* E. Kent Barefield
* 10/31/1992
* USD 676,188.00

The objective of this project in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic
Chemistry Program is to discover new ways to use transition metals as templates
for the formation of chemical bonds. Such research is important in the design of
catalysts for chemical synthesis and in modelling the action of metalloenzymes.
The focus of the project is on reductive coupling, oxidative coupling and
enantiospecific C-C bond formation (e.g., catalytic conjugate addition) between
closely positioned ligands in transition metal complexes. High coordinate early
transition metal complexes with linear ligands (CO, CNR, -CCR, etc.) provide a
reaction channel for reductive coupling chemistry. Oxidative coupling will be
explored using the polymetallic scaffold provided by fusing two oxo-centered
triangular metal aggregates (M3O, M=Fe, Mn, Cr, Ru) or two di(mu2)dioxomanganese
units, the latter affording a new approach to modelling the tetramanganese
center in the dioxygen evolving complex of photosystem II. New catalytic and
stoichiometric C-C bond forming reactions will be carried out between ligands
bonded to two identical or disparate metal centers held at the poles of
symmetric (containing two pairs of nitrogen donors) or asymmetric (e.g.,
containing a pair of phosphine donors and a set of three nitrogen donors)
binucleating macrocycles. The results of these studies will afford insights into
how high coordinate and polymetallic transition metal centers promote bond
forming reactions in organometallic and bioinorganic chemistry and should lead
to new molecules of fundamental interest as well as synthetic utility.