* 8902349
* Interfacial Transport in Reversed Micellar Extraction       Processes
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/1989,01/31/1993
* T. Alan Hatton, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Jeffrey Foltz
* 01/31/1993
* USD 306,202.00

This project consists of combined theoretical and experimental studies of the
rates and mechanisms of interphase mass transfer in reverse micelle systems in
contact with an aqueous phase. A range of solutes from low molecular weight,
water soluble compounds up to globular, water soluble proteins will be studied.
It is hypothesized that a different mechanism for mass transfer exists for low
molecular weight compounds as opposed to the proteins. For the low molecular
weight compounds it is proposed that reverse micelles form because of random
thermal fluctuations of the interface which periodically result in part of the
interface and the immediate aqueous phase breaking off to form a reverse micelle
with some of the solute trapped in the interior. For the higher molecular weight
proteins, it is hypothesized that the approach of the protein to the interface
results in the spontaneous breaking off of part of the interface to form a
reverse micelle, with the protein trapped in the reverse micelle. Theoretical
models for these two different mechanisms have been outlined. The phenomena
should exhibit very different dependence on factors such as concentration and
temperature, so they should be easily distinguished if the mass transfer rate
can be measured accurately. An innovative technique for measuring the mass
transfer rate has been proposed for these experiments: interfacial
interferometry. The refractive index of a fluid is dependent upon the
concentration of any dissolved species. A beam splitter will be used to pass one
part of a beam of coherent light through a layer of the liquid close to the
interface between the organic and aqueous phases; when joined with the rest of
the beam interference bands will be produced whose separation will be
proportional to the concentration of the layer of solution through which the
beam passed. By carefully controlling the position of the beam parallel to the
interface with an optical bench and equipment to isolate the system from
vibration, the technique should be able to accurately determine concentration as
a function of distance from the interface and as a function of time. This data
then can be translated very accurately into mass transfer rates. Combined with
the theoretical work, this should give a very complete picture of the interphase
mass transfer in the systems studied and should enable the investigator to
determine the mechanisms involved. This system is one of potentially great
importance to the emerging biotechnology industry. Reverse micelle extraction of
proteins from aqueous solution may develop into one of the most versatile and
effective bioseparation technologies. This project should add greatly to its
potential for early commercial applications.