* 8902775
* Historical Factors Affecting Secondary Succession on the    North Carolina Piedmont (Ecology)
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/1989,01/31/1991
* Emily Russell, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Lola E. Rogers
* 01/31/1991
* USD 86,071.00

Research on the mechanisms of secondary plant succession is generally focused on
mechanistic and stochastic processes determined by species characteristics and
chance events. Variation not explained by these processes is often attributed to
undefined historical factors. This research will focus explicitly on these
historical factors as they have affected succession on the North Carolina
Piedmont over the last two centuries. Past vegetation will be reconstructed
using pollen analysis of sediment from old, undisturbed farm ponds and archival
studies. Specific factors from these analyses will be related to succession
through forest simulation models to predict their effects on patterns of
succession. These patterns will then be compared with data from the Duke Forest.
Such a study will improve our ability to understand and predict changes in
forest composition. Dr. Russell will teach a joint botany/history department
seminar on the history of human impact on the environment and a short course on
the roles of women in botany and ecology. She will also present a guest lecture
on recent vegetational history of the northeastern U.S., based on pollen
analysis, and will give guest lectures in botany, history and the women's
studies programs. This project furthers VPW program objectives which are (1) to
provide opportunities for women to advance their careers in engineering and in
the disciplines of science supported by NSF and (2) to encourage women to pursue
careers in science and engineering by providing greater visibility for women
scientists and engineers employed in industry, government, and academic
institutions. By encouraging the participation of women in science, it is a
valuable investment in the Nation's future scientific vitality.