* 8902246
* Mathematical Sciences: Well-Posed Inverse Problems
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1989,06/30/1993
* Gregory Eskin, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* John V. Ryff
* 06/30/1993
* USD 259,544.00

The focus of this project is one of determining the structure of differential
operators from information about the spectrum of the operator. In non-
mathematical terms, this means that one is attempting to reconstruct an object
(such as an obstruction to a flow) or a force field from data obtained by remote
observations. This particular work will concentrate on reconstruction from
quantum backscattering data. Several issues arise. First, there is the question
of whether or not sufficient information is available for the reconstruction,
whether the resulting potential (the object sought) is uniquely determined and
the problem of reconstructing the potential by some practical means. Much of the
work is a continuation of efforts to understand the three-dimensional
Schroedinger equation. This equation has been studied extensively in one
dimension. In three dimensions, the obstacles to progress are much greater, and
it is only recently that mathematical research in the area has shown any
progress. Solutions are given in terms of a pure exponential part plus a term
which is recovered from knowledge of the physical properties of the problem -
the scattering amplitude. The inverse scattering problem consists of recovering
the potential part of the Schroedinger equation from the scattering amplitude.
An immediate problem one encounters is that the inverse problem is over-
determined; one is forced to characterize those scattering amplitudes which can
arise from three- dimensional potentials. One procedure currently under
investigation is to restrict the scattering amplitude (normally defined on five-
dimensional space) to three-dimensional manifolds. One of these is the so-called
backscattering data. This choice has led to reasonably good progress in those
cases where the potential is known to be small. The present work will continue
along the same vein. A primary objective is to define the proper function
classes which will give a controlled, well-defined backscattering map. In
addtion, work will continue on related issues of finding minimal data sets
necessary to solve the inverse problem, specifying the range of the inverse map
and showing that the Frechet derivative of the map is invertible.