* 8902757
* Wavelets and Applications (Mathematics)
* EDU,EES
* 01/01/1990,12/31/1990
* Ingrid Daubechies, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Lola E. Rogers
* 12/31/1990
* USD 55,750.00

Wavelets are families of functions generated from one single function (or, in
higher dimensions, from a finite set of functions) by dilations and
translations. Particularly interesting are discrete families of wavelets that
span all of L2(Rn), and lead to numerically stable decomposition +
reconstruction algorithms. Such families can either be redundant (frames) or not
(bases). For certain frames or bases of wavelets, there exist easily
implementable, elegant tree- algorithms for the numerical computation of
decomposition coefficients. Dr. Daubechies will investigate how these can be
used to solve wave equations numerically. Wavelets seem very promising for this
purpose for both theoretical and practical reasons, since they are inherently a
tool for microlocalization and have been used as such in singular integral
problems, while they also incorporate the idea of different scales and "zoom-in"
on singularities, similar to refining grid techniques in numerical analysis. A
successful use of wavelets for this purpose would lead to better orientation
specificity than is available in presently used numerical techniques. The
interactive activities involve teaching a graduate course and participating in
seminars. This project furthers VPW program objectives which are (1) to provide
opportunities for women to advance their careers in engineering and in the
disciplines of science supported by NSF and (2) to encourage women to pursue
careers in science and engineering by providing greater visibility for women
scientists and engineers employed in industry, government, and academic
institutions. By encouraging the participation of women in science, it is a
valuable investment in the Nation's future scientific vitality.