* 8902859
* Postdoctonal Fellowship in Studies in Science, Technology,  and Society
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/1989,08/31/1990
* David Magnus, Individual Award
* Fellowship Award
* Ronald J. Overmann
* 08/31/1990
* USD 28,000.00

Dr. Magnus is examining the role of natural history in the American development
of ecology, especially as this tradition developed in California. He argues that
the importance of natural history has been misunderstood by both historians and
philosophers of science. The role that a number of natural historians such as D.
S. Jordan, G. H. Gilbert, and J. Grinnell played in the development of
evolutionary ecology has been largely ignored in the literature on the American
development of ecology. Similarly, natural history's significance for
philosophical issues relating to theory structure and evidential support, has
not been fully appreciated. Working with Prof. James Griesemer at the University
of California at Davis, Dr. Magnus is examining a biogeographically oriented
tradition in evolutionary animal ecology. This tradition ran from Jordan's work
(along with his contemporaries) on geographical barriers and the role of
isolation in speciation, through the work of Joseph Grinnell at the Museum of
Vertebrate Zoology in Berkeley on the influence of environmental factors on
distribution. This primarily West Coast tradition advanced many concepts and
insights which were influential in the development of ecology. In addition to
producing a fuller historical understanding of the development of biology,
particularly ecology, a treatment of this research tradition will correct many
philosophical views about the status of natural history. Natural history does
have a theoretical component, and its practitioners often had good evidence for
their theoretical views. In general, natural history was significantly more
sophisticated that historians and philosophers have claimed.