* 8902950
* Synchronization and Other Generalizations of Cointegration
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1989,07/31/1992
* Clive Granger, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/1992
* USD 92,916.00

The main part of this project is concerned with a new idea about the relative
dynamics of co-integrated processes at low frequencies called synchronization.
Synchronization occurs when long-run components of an economy are closely
related and cause important economic variables to move together in phase. The
objectives of the project are (1) to develop a simple macroeconomic theory which
would lead to some form of synchronization; (2) to devise tests of
synchronization for co- integrated series; (3) to develop tests of
synchronization for series that are not co-integrated; (4) to find an
appropriate disequilibrium mechanism that leads to synchronized co- integration
as an equilibrium; (5) to apply the techniques developed to various actual
series, including interest rates of differing maturities, employment rates in
different sectors of a country and GNP per capita for a pair of countries with
strong trade flows such as Canada and the United States; and (6) to survey the
literature on synchronization in engineering and physics to see if this
literature is relevant or applicable to economics. The project also analyzes co-
integration with time- varying parameters. This is very exciting and important
research. Earlier work by the investigator developed a statistical
characterization of time series known as co-integration in which a linear
combination of data series that are independently non-stationary is stationary.
This development is extremely important because most economic time series data
typically include non-stationary processes such as trends. To gain any
meaningful insight into actual movements of the variables in an economy, one
must purge the data of the influence of non-stationary processes. Co-integration
tests and techniques have greatly simplified achieving stationarity especially
for analytical models including several data series each containing similar
growth tendencies. Synchronization, the subject of this project, opens a new
line of research within co- integration. Economic equilibrium can be shown to
imply synchronization of key economic variables. Thus the tests for
synchronization developed by this project will give economists new and more
powerful tests for the existence and characteristics of economic equilibria.