* 8902822
* Vertebrate Paleontology Improvements at the Florida Museum  of Natural History: Plio-Pleistocene and Megafaunal Curation
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1989,12/31/1992
* S.David Webb, University of Florida
* Continuing grant
* David Schindel
* 12/31/1992
* USD 251,321.00

The Vertebrate Paleontology collection and associated research program at the
Florida Museum of Natural History is one of the leading programs of its kind and
ranks in the top ten in North America. This project will provide funds for major
curatorial improvements to this collection to enhance its utility as a research
resource. Throughout the last two decades the Vertebrate Paleontology collection
has grown at a phenomenal pace, on average by about 10% per year. This
collection currently contains about 300,000 potentially catalogable specimens of
which about only 135,000 are entered onto a computerized data base. The
specimens not on the data base, although physically accessible for study, suffer
from the fact that they cannot be retrieved during computer searches and sorts.
With the rapid growth in computerized data bases within the last ten years, it
is imperative that as many specimens as possible be computerized. During this
project period, the PIs will curate and enter the specimens from the
collection's extensive Florida localities. The goal in three years is to add
approximately 55,000 new specimens to the computerized catalog. Another major
problem resulting from the very rapid growth of the collection has been lack of
sufficient space to curate, study, and house these important scientific
specimens. The project will provide funds to install movable storage units
("compactors") that will greatly increase (by about 30%) the net usable space
for storage of smaller specimens. During the same time, the PIs also will
reorganize the collection's large vertebrate specimens (e.g., whales, mastodons
and mammoths, and giant ground sloths)onto specially designed metal shelves that
more efficiently use the available space. These collections improvements are the
optimal means of enhancing the research capabilities of this important
scientific resource and should solve the collection's needs into the beginning
of the 21st century.