* 8902968
* Development of Screening Technique for Aqueous Drag ReducingSurfactants and Its Utilization for Finding More Efficient  Additive Systems (Engineering)
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1989,04/30/1991
* Deborah Stutman-Brickey, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Lola E. Rogers
* 04/30/1991
* USD 110,000.00

In district heating and cooling systems heated or chilled water is recirculated
through a 10 to 20 km loop, exchanging heat with various installations. Much of
the capital investment is concentrated in the pipes, pumps, and fittings needed
for the recirculation. Drag reduction in turbulent flow could result in cost and
energy savings. Several cationic and nonionic surfactant systems which form rod-
shaped micelles have been identified as drag reducing agents. This research
project will establish basic criteria for effective drag reducing systems and
develop a convenient screening technique. Variables affecting micellar size,
shape, and orientation will be studied, examining temperature, type and
concentration of counter-ion, electrolyte content, and the effect of
coadditives. Quasielastic light scattering will be used to study the micellar
behavior of the additive systems. Interactive activities include teaching a
course in the fundamentals of colloid science, participating in a university
course which focuses on the unique problems of women and minorities in
engineering and science, and contributing to a workshop for women in the College
of Engineering. This project furthers VPW program objectives which are (1) to
provide opportunities for women to advance their careers in engineering and in
the disciplines of science supported by NSF and (2) to encourage women to pursue
careers in science and engineering by providing greater visibility for women
scientists and engineers employed in industry, government, and academic
institutions. By encouraging the participation of women in science, it is a
valuable investment in the Nation's future scientific vitality.