* 8902499
* Development of Predictive Modeling for Immuno-Affinity      Chromatography Using Distributed Parameter System:  For     Purification of Therapeutic Blood Protein
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/1989,10/31/1992
* Dewey Ryu, University of California-Davis
* Continuing grant
* Fred G. Heineken
* 10/31/1992
* USD 391,947.00

A comprehensive fundamental biochemical engineering study is being undertaken
to develop a distributed parameter system working model, which takes into
consideration distributed equilibrium coefficients as a function of system's and
operational variables, for immuno-affinity purification. The biochemical and
immuno-chemical reaction system as well as the purification process will be
studied systematically to develop a practical systems model. For the development
of this model the systems to be used are: (1) immuno-affinity purification of
human plasma Protein C, and (2) purification of monoclonal antibodies using
Protein A affinity chromatography. The benefits and impact of the anticipated
research results will be: (1) The knowledge base for the development of large-
scale immuno-affinity process design and optimization for the purification of
blood proteins will be broadened and advanced, (2) A rational strategy will
evolve by which large-scale immuno-affinity purification processes can be
designed and optimized based on predictive modeling and the simulation of system
performance. This study should provide a greater insight into the microscopic
phenomena and also a better understanding of macroscopic phenomena related to
the optimal design and operational strategy for large scale immuno-affinity
purification systems. Both experimental and theoretical studies will be carried
out to establish a knowledge base and to develope an optimal design and
operational strategy through mathematical modeling and experimental
verification. Protein C is a protein whose functions in blood include both
blocking the blood coagulation pathways and dissolution of clots in animal, thus
maintaining hemostasis in the human body. Lack of this protein causes
complicated blood clotting related symptoms, such as thromboembolism, stroke, or
even sudden death.