* 8902993
* Mathematical Sciences: Topics in Analysis on Real and p-adicLie Groups
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/1989,05/31/1992
* Lawrence Corwin, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* William Y. Velez
* 05/31/1992
* USD 127,277.00

Professors Corwin and Goodman will pursue a wide-ranging program of research in
the representation theory of Lie groups and related objects. Part of Corwin's
work will deal with invariant differential operators on homogeneous spaces of
nilpotent groups. He will also study supercuspidal representations of p-adic
groups. Goodman will continue investigating the representations of current
algebras and loop groups. The algebraic properties of higher-order Sugawara
operators will be studied using the theory of tensor invariants for the
classical groups. Analytic aspects of the geometric models for positive-energy
representations of loop groups will be examined. Goodman will also seek new
types of Whittaker models for representations of real reductive groups. This
project has to do with the representation theory of Lie groups (and of their
cousins, Lie algebras), which bear the name of the Norwegian mathematician
Sophus Lie. One basic example of a Lie group is the group of rotations of a
sphere, where the group operation consists of following one motion by another.
Detailed information concerning this group is very helpful in solving
mathematical or physical problems in which spherical symmetry is present. Other
groups of motions capture other kinds of symmetry. A more algebraic (as opposed
to geometric) source of examples of Lie groups comes from the multiplication of
matrices. The group of all invertible real (or complex) matrices of a given size
is a Lie group, as is just about any subgroup thereof that can be described in a
natural manner. It is desirable to be able to go back and forth between the
geometric and algebraic points of view, for instance to consider the numerous
ways in which the rotation group of the sphere can be realized as a group of
invertible matrices. This, roughly, is representation theory. Facts about the
representations of a given group tend to store a lot of information very
economically. Depending on where the group in question comes from, this
information can impinge on almost any subject from number theory to mathematical
physics. The project of Professors Corwin and Goodman spans a fair portion of
the applications and emphases of contemporary representation theory