* 8902172
* US-Venezuela Cooperative Research:  Life History Studies of Plant Path Pathogenic Ascomycetes in Venezuela
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/1989,05/31/1992
* Richard Hanlin, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 05/31/1992
* USD 17,000.00

This award will support the continuation of collaborative research between
Professor Richard T. Hanlin of the University of Georgia and Prof. Omar
Tortolero of the Universidad Centro Occidental in Barquisimeto, Venezuela. The
investigators intend to continue to collect, identify, and characterize
taxonomically plant pathogenic ascomycetes occurring on crops plants in
Venezuela, and to study the life histories of selected species. An illustrated
key to genera of plant pathogenic ascomycetes in Venezuela will be prepared in
Spanish. The results of these studies will be jointly prepared for publication
and specimens of the collected fungi will be deposited in herbaria in Venezuela
with duplicates deposited in herbaria in the United States. Ascomycetes and
their conidial states constitute a major portion of the fungi that cause serious
diseases of economic crops in Venezuela and other tropical countries. Although
the causal agents of the most common crop diseases induced by ascomycetes have
been well characterized taxonomically, there are numerous lesser-known diseases
for which the pathogen has not been accurately identified. Information is also
needed on the life histories of these fungi, such as the time of the host
infection, the development of the pathogen in the host, and the nature of spore
states produced. This collaboration will bring together experienced researchers
in a project of mutual benefit that should improve our understanding of tropical
diseases and their causal fungi.