* 8902194
* Regulation of Ecdysterone Activated Genes
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1989,07/31/1992
* Iain Cartwright, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Continuing grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 07/31/1992
* USD 298,000.00

There is much current interest in isolating nuclear proteins that bind to
specific DNA sequences in and around eukaryotic genes. The rationale behind this
often derives from data that show the sequence elements bound are important in
mediating expression or regulation of the gene in question. However, it is
increasingly clear that the question of whether the particular DNA-protein
interaction under investigation actually occurs in vivo in a given tissue should
be addressed. Often specific factors are unable to bind to their recognition
sequences because a precise pathway of chromatin assembly has excluded them from
the nucleoprotein complex. Moreover, distinct protein species may recognize
identical sequence elements, but in a given cell type only one of them may be
utilized for gene regulation. In this light we plan to use rapid and sensitive
genomic footprinting techniques recently developed in this laboratory to study,
at single base resolution, the in vivo nucleoprotein organization and specific
binding patterns characteristic of Drosophila locus 67B1. In this manner it is
expected that important regulatory sequences and details of their binding
interaction will uncovered. Consisting of at least seven closely-linked genes
that are hormonally regulated in differing tissue-and developmental-specific
patterns (in addition to thermal induciblity in virtually all tissues) locus
67B1 is obviously highly complex in regulatory terms. Organization at hsp22 and
hsp27 is of particular interest since their expression patterns show elements of
both coordinate and independent modes of developmental regulation. With a
precise developmental and tissue-specific description of the effects of hormone
on the in vivo nucleoprotein organization, together with the results of DNA
sequence-related effects obtained via P-element mediated transformation, it is
expected that this project will provide the detailed baseline to which in vitro
binding and transcription assays must be referred for relevance. We plan to
initiate such in vitro work with extracts prepared from both hormonally naive
and exposed cells and tissues, with a long term goal of recapitulating aspects
of the hormonal regulation imposed upon these genes. Understanding what actually
happens in the cell as contrasted to what can happen in a test tube is often
difficult. The results of this in vivo study of a gene family with a complex
regulatory pattern should give insight into some of the those potential
differences and, with luck, the reasons for those differences.