* 8902397
* Mathematical Sciences: Problems in Operator Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/1989,11/30/1991
* Kevin Clancey, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* William Y. Velez
* 11/30/1991
* USD 45,250.00

Professor Clancey will investigate problems in operator theory and function
theory related to representations of the algebra of rational functions on
finitely connected planar domains. Part of this research involves determining
the explicit connections between various finite-dimensional operator algebra
models for such representations. Function theory on the model spaces will also
be studied. In particular, explicit descriptions involving Riemann theta
functions will be sought for the reproducing kernels associated with the model
spaces. Applications of this information to the the study of Toeplitz operators
on the Hardy spaces of multiply connected domains will be pursued. The research
envisioned here is about analytic functions, a central preoccupation of
mathematics for well over a century. These are functions of a complex (as
opposed to real) variable, so they live in the plane rather than on the line.
They can be defined variously as solutions of a certain simple system of partial
differential equations, as maps which take planar regions to other planar
regions in a way that preserves angles except at isolated singularities, or
(locally) as limits of polynomials in a suitably precise sense. Analytic
functions have the following remarkable property: given an arc in a connected
open set on which the function is defined, the values of the function everywhere
in that set are completely determined by the values just on the arc. Professor
Clancey's project is to track down as explicitly as possible some particular
consequences and ramifications of this intriguing state of affairs.