* 8902071
* Mathematical Sciences: Geometric Topology and the           Fundamental Group
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1989,11/30/1992
* James Cannon, Brigham Young University
* Continuing Grant
* Ralph M. Krause
* 11/30/1992
* USD 106,254.00

A geometric group is a group acting properly discontinuously and cocompactly on
a standard geometry. This principal investigator is attempting to understand the
combinatorics of geometric groups: What are the implications of the geometry for
the combinatorics? What combinatorial properties characterize a geometric group?
The investigator has just established a combinatorial characterization of
cocompact and finite-volume hyperbolic groups in dimension 3. He is also in the
midst of the creation of computer programs to aid in studying the recursive
computational structures associated with hyperbolic and Euclidean groups. The
next steps in the investigator's plan are the following: (1) apply his
characterization in as many different ways as possible (Does it imply that
negatively curved groups in dimensions 3 can be realized as conformal groups?
Can Thurston's hyperbolization theorem be deduced from the characterization? Can
space-filling curves be so studied?); (2) use the computer programs to study
interesting infinite classes of groups given by generators and relators (e.g.,
Coxeter's groups G(3,7,n) and Conway's Fibonacci groups). The work of this
project uses the subtle interplay between geometry and group theory to advance
the state of each field.