* 8902458
* Mathematical Sciences: Index Invariants for Operator Range  and Commuting Tuples of Operators on Hilbert Space
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1989,11/30/1991
* Richard Carey, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* William Y. Velez
* 11/30/1991
* USD 43,256.00

Professor Carey will continue his investigation of index invariants for
operator ranges, a far-reaching extension of the classical index theory for
Fredholm operators. He will also pursue a project in multivariable spectral
theory having to do with the coherent sheaf associated with the Koszul complex
of a commuting n-tuple of operators. This sheaf, after it has been filtered
through the algebraic topology of the complement of the essential spectrum of
the n-tuple, yields an invariant whose properties Professor Carey will study.
This is mathematical research in the theory of operators on Hilbert space.
Operators may be thought of as enriched numbers, obeying the same laws of
arithmetic as ordinary numbers with two notable exceptions: multiplication of
operators depends upon the order in which the factors are taken, and not every
non-zero operator has an inverse. For finite-dimensional operators, i.e. square
matrices of numbers, these phenomena account for the richness of the subject of
linear algebra. In the infinite- dimensional setting of Hilbert space, there is
furthermore the phenomenon of non-zero index, of operators obeying the laws of
arithmetic for numbers except for error terms that are small in an appropriate
sense and that contain important information about whatever situation gave rise
to the operators. Index theory in this sense is the underlying theme of
Professor Carey's project.