* 8902850
* VPW:  Molecular Dynamic of Charged Covalent Clusters        (Condensed Matter Theory)
* EHR,HRD
* 01/01/1990,12/31/1991
* Estela Blaisten-Barojas, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
*   name not available
* 12/31/1991
* USD 66,107.00

This research project involves a series of computer simulations using molecular
dynamics to study the properties of charged covalent clusters containing up to
several tens of atoms. Dr. Blaisten-Barojas will add the best pair potential for
the charged dimers Si +2, Ge +2 to the Stillinger-Weber potential, to
incorporate polarization effects, and to study the equilibrium geometries,
fragmentation pattern, equation of state, and coordination number as a function
of temperature. The results should provide insight into the evolution of cluster
properties towards bulk properties. Parallel to the study of semiconductor
clusters, she will undertake a study of doubly charged negative clusters and
provide a model that could account for the experimentally observed enhancement
of the magnetic coercivity and conductivity of iron particles implanted in
insulators. Interactive activities include organizing a symposium on the Physics
and Chemistry of Clusters, and a mini-symposium between the graduate students of
the Physics and Chemistry Departments. In addition, Dr. Blaisten-Barojas will
teach a graduate course during the spring and fall semesters. She will also
coordinate a series of talks to be given by the female graduate students in the
local high schools. This project furthers VPW program objectives which are (1)
to provide opportunities for women to advance their careers in engineering and
in the disciplines of science supported by NSF and (2) to encourage women to
pursue careers in science and engineering by providing greater visibility for
women scientists and engineers employed in industry, government, and academic
institutions. By encouraging the participation of women in science, it is a
valuable investment in the Nation's future scientific vitality.