* 8902803
* U.S.-Brazil Cooperative Research on Seven-Membered Rings ViaNitrenium Ions
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/1989,03/31/1993
* Rudolph Abramovitch, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 03/31/1993
* USD 15,375.00

This award supports cooperative research in the chemistry of carbon-bond seven-
membered ring formation to be carried out by Rudolph Abramovitch of Clemson
University and J.A.R. Rodriguez of the University of Campinas in Brazil. A new
method of formation of seven-membered rings, previously discovered by the
collaborators, will be extended to the production of homo- and hetero-cyclic
rings to determine the structural and geometrical factors which favor ring
formation. Then, convenient routes to molecules related to naturally-occurring
anticancer agents will be examined. This will lead to the preparation of a
variety of derivatives which retain useful biological activity but with reduced
toxicity. The objective is to develop mild, useful routes to desirable
biologically active compounds. This work is a continuation of a productive
cooperation between the group at Campinas, a former member of which is now at
Sao Paulo establishing a graduate program with eighteen research students, and
Dr. Abramovitch's group at Clemson. The Brazilian P.I. and a student have both
spent time at Clemson which has helped in the establishment of a small research
group at Campinas now working on arylnitrenium ion chemistry. This study will
increase the knowledge of the formation, structure and reactivity of
arylnitrenium and -oxenium ions and bond formation in seven-membered rings which
occur widely in nature and have been the target of much scientific and medicinal
attention.