* 8902558
* Making the Specification Driven Design of Custom Hardware   Practical
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/1989,07/31/1993
* Ganesh Gopalakrishnan, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Robert B Grafton
* 07/31/1993
* USD 265,726.00

This research is on specification driven design of custom hardware. The P.I. is
working with three consultants: Richard Fujimoto of Georgia Tech, Graham
Birtwistle at Calgary, and Paliath Narendran of GE Corporate Research. The group
is developing a uniform theory for describing mixed synchronous and asynchronous
IC systems, as well as a theory for deriving implementations from specification
written in a purely asynchronous style. The research is based on the "HOP"
family of hardware description languages. The language being investigated is
HOP-COP, which is a semantically simple, well characterized language. It
specifically addresses description of mixed synchronous and asynchronous
designs. Research topics include: identifying a minimal primitive basis for HOP-
COP; developing verification techniques based on the language; finding
algorithms for IC design tools; developing proof of correctness algorithms and
tools; and exploring implementations of the research ideas. The research is on
specification driven design of custom hardware, an aspect of high level design,
which is a high priority in the DTT program. The P.I. proposes a group effort
with himself and three consultants: Richard Fujimoto of Georgia Tech, Graham
Birtwistle at Calgary, and Paliath Narendran of GE Corporate Research. The
latter two are wise choices for the theoretical development, and Fujimoto is the
"engineer" who can develop implementations of the theoretical ideas and
experimentation with them. Professor Gopalakrishnan, who was an EIA awardee in
FY87, has made very good progress in his research in a difficult subject, and
shows potential for worthwhile contributions to the field.