* 8902095
* Mathematical Sciences: Applications of Nonstandard Analysis to Measure Theory, Potential Theory, and Related Topics
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1989,11/30/1991
* Peter Loeb, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* William Y. Velez
* 11/30/1991
* USD 48,800.00

Professor Loeb's project involves the use of nonstandard models in real
analysis and related areas. Fundamental in his approach is the use of standard
measure spaces defined on nonstandard point sets. These spaces make finite
combinatorial methods available in research on infinite probability spaces.
Another facet of his work deals with nonstandard hulls (standard, infinite-
dimensional vector spaces formed from nonstandard ones) of vector lattices and
their role in measure theory and integration. He will also continue research on
an ideal boundary, analogous to the Martin boundary, that he has developed for
general potential theories. All of mathematical analysis is built upon the
structure of the system of real numbers, which are identified as points on a
two-way infinite line. It is commonsensical and fundamental in this system that
every non-zero real number lies at a finite positive distance away from zero,
but sometimes there is a powerful intellectual temptation to consider numbers
infinites- imally close to zero or infinitely far away. Yielding to this
temptation, one can construct a coherent system, called the nonstandard reals,
that includes infinitesimals and infinities, and thence proceed to do
nonstandard analysis. Professor Loeb's research involves starting with problems
in standard analysis, such as appear for instance in probability theory and
mathematical physics, using nonstandard methods to gain some elbow room, and
then getting back to a solution of the original problem in standard terms.