* 8902897
* Oncogene Effects on Glucocorticoid Regulation of Gene       Expression
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1989,02/28/1993
* Donald Benedict DeFranco, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 02/28/1993
* USD 327,900.00

The effects of a v-mos oncoprotein on glucocorticoid-induction of
metallothionein-1 (Mt-1) gene expression have been evaluated using the rat 6m2
cell line, in which expression of the p85gag- mos oncogene, and consequently
transformation, are temperature- sensitive (ts). The p85gag-mos oncogene, and
consequently transformation, are temperature-sensitive (ts). The temperature-
dependent expression of p85gag-mos in 6m2 cells resulted in only a transient
dexamethasone induction of Mt-1 levels, that rapidly declined to uninduced
levels despite the continued presence of hormone. Nuclear run-on assays will be
performed to determine to what extent transient induction of Mt-1 mRNA levels
reflect v-mos effects on transcription. The examination of the kinetics and
reversibility of desensitized Mt- 1 expression, using both temperature-shift
experiments and hormone withdrawal and restimulation, will reveal whether v-mos
accelerates a "normal" deinduction process or affects an independent
desensitization pathway. Glucocorticoid regulated expression, both positive and
negative of endogenous and transfected genes will be analyzed in various ts
v-mos- transformed cell types. These analyses will determine whether oncoprotein
effects can be distinguished for hormonal responses that may be cell type
specific and subject to multi-hormonal control. They will also allow
corrorlations, if any exist, between v-mos mediated alterations in hormone
regulated gene expression and glucocorticoid receptor function.