* 8902438
* Regulation of Smooth Muscle Contraction
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/1989,01/31/1993
* Chi-Ming Hai, Brown University
* Continuing grant
* Vincent P. Gutschick
* 01/31/1993
* USD 213,120.00

Smooth muscle cell is the contractile component of many body organs such as
blood vessels, lung airways, intestines, and uterus. Therefore normal functions
of smooth muscle cells are intimately related to the normal function of body
systems such as regulation of blood pressure, lung ventilation, digestion and
reproduction. Smooth muscle cells are similar to muscles involved in locomotion
(skeletal muscle) in using ionized calcium (Ca2+) as the regulator of
contraction. However, unlike skeletal muscle, smooth muscle does not contain the
Ca2+-binding protein called troponin involved in the regulation of contraction
in skeletal muscle. Therefore, the mechanism(s) by which Ca2+ regulates smooth
muscle contraction is still not fully understood. The broad objective of the
proposed research is to understand the Ca2+-dependent regulation of smooth
muscle contraction by combining methods of muscle mechanics, protein
biochemistry, and mathematical modeling. Based on biochemical studies, it is
understood that smooth muscle contraction is a result of cyclic interactions
between two proteins - actin and myosin. In a smooth muscle cell, actin
molecules combine to form a filament-like structure (thin filament). Myosin
molecules also combine to form a filament-like structure (thick filament), but
in addition, the thick filament contains projections from individual myosin
molecules called crossbridges which can interact cyclically with the thin
filament. Force production or muscle shortening are results of the sliding of
the two filaments passing each other due to cyclic interactions of the myosin
crossbridges with the actin filament. The regulation of the acto-myosin
interaction in smooth muscle is not fully understood, but phosphorylation of a
protein subunit on the myosin crossbridge appears to be involved. Some of the
model assumptions and predictions have been verified experimentally, but several
aspects of the model remain untested. The specific aims are: (1) to test the
remaining model assumptions experimentally at tissue and cellular levels, (2) to
test the model predictions under controlled experimental conditions, and (3) to
determine the utility of this model in generating testable predictions on other
aspects of smooth muscle contraction. The dual emphases on careful
experimentation combined with in-depth integration of information assisted by
mathematical modeling should provide useful insights into the understanding of
contractile function of smooth muscle cells.