* 8902183
* US-Brazil Cooperative Research on A Modeling Environment forPerformance/Reliability Analysis of Distributed Systems
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/1989,07/31/1992
* Richard Muntz, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 07/31/1992
* USD 19,070.00

This award supports cooperative research in computer systems to be conducted by
Richard Muntz and Mario Gerla of the University of California at Los Angeles
(UCLA) together with Prof. Edmundo de Souza e Silva at the Federal University in
Rio de Janeiro, Brazil and Prof. Roberto Boisson de Marca of the Catholic
University, also in Rio. They will develop an environment for modeling and
performance/reliability analysis of distributed computer communication systems.
The goal is to give the analyst the ability to test new ideas, incoporate new
techniques and build interfaces tailored to particular application areas. New
solution methods will be developed to be incorporated into the environment.
State-of-the-art solution techniques will be implemented as well. Analytic
studies of distributed system problems will be performed using the new
environment which will help guide its design in addition to having their own
independent interest. The two universities in Rio are currently building a
Laboratory for the Study of Distributed Systems. It will incorporate powerful
work stations linked by a local area network. At UCLA a large project is
underway to develop modeling environments. Theoretical modeling developed in the
U.S. will show directions to be followed in Brazil in building tools to perform
modeling and analysis so that this cooperative effort will combine the
complementary work of two active and productive groups and be beneficial to
both. Software development efforts will be carried out in both countries,
libraries of objects and analytical solvers will be be built up and there are
plans to advise Ph.D. students from both Brazil and the U.S.