* 8902405
* Engineering Research Equipment Grant: A Corrosion-Resistant Electron-Impact Fragment Spectrometer
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/1989,05/31/1991
* Kurt Becker, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 05/31/1991
* USD 50,823.00

Plasma based processes are used in technologies such as the fabrication of very-
large-scale-integrated (VLSI) micro-electronic devices. A plasma reactor
consists of a wafer placed between two electrodes (one powered and one
grounded). The plasma flows through the annulus and etching and deposition of
films is accomplished by ions that are accelerated towards the wafer in
conjunction with neutrals that diffuse to the wafer. Volatile reaction products
diffuse back into the bulk of the plasma where they participate in a complex
chain of collision processes. Two areas about which more information is needed
are the surface of the wafer where the etching and deposition occur and the
plasma where the reactive species are produced. The PI is interested in
elucidating the processes that occur in the plasma and using that information to
increase understanding of the plasma-surface interaction including the flux and
nature of the species that impinge on the surface. Reactive plasma constituent
are produced from inert feed gases by various electron collision processes. This
grant will supply funds to enable the PI to build a versatile corrosion-
resistent electron-impact fragment spectrometer that will allow a comprehensive
study of the electron impact dissociation of those key industrial gases that are
currently employed in low temperature processing plasmas. The instrument will be
equipped with diagnostic tools (eg. optical spectroscopy, time-of-flight (TOF)
and TOF-mass spectroscopy, and laser-induced-flourescence spectroscopy) to
measure absolute cross sections and appearance potentials for the formation of
radiating, metastable and neutral as well as charged ground-state fragments
produced by dissociative electron impact. The experimental results will be used
to predict and optimized the performance characteristics of a discharge device
which will ultimately be used in the design, operation and control of novel
plasma processing reactors.