* 8902025
* Japan (STA) Postdoctoral Program:  Microwave Remote Sensing of the Earth's Environment
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1989,02/28/1991
* David Short, NASA/GODDARD SPACE FLIGHT CENTER
* Interagency Agreement
* Charles Wallace
* 02/28/1991
* USD 28,575.00

This award is in support of a one-year visit by Dr. David A. Short, National
Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA), to the Communications Research
Laboratory (CRL), Tokyo, Japan. Dr. Short will collaborate with Dr. Kenji
Nakamura and other scientists at CRL on studies related to microwave remote
sensing of the earth's environment from satellite-borne instruments. In
particular, Dr. Short will work with CRL researchers in examining fundamental
issues regarding the measurement of surface rainfall from space. Both active
(using radar) and passive (using microwave remote sensing) systems are employed
for this purpose. An airborne meteorological radar developed at CRL (prototype
of a satellite- borne instrument) is currently being flown on a NASA aircraft in
a joint experiment. Dr. Short will cooperate with CRL personnel in developing
and testing procedures that utilize their radar rainrate- measurement techniques
in an effort to improve the accuracy of passive microwave rainrate measurements.
An important goal of this research is to understand better the strengths and
weaknesses of both techniques, so that they may be used in complementary ways in
future space missions. The work can be expected to contribute substantially to
algorithm development and instrument definition of proposed future observing
systems such as the Tropical Rainfall Measuring Mission (a joint U.S.-Japan
project) and the Earth Observing System Advanced Microwave Scanning Radiometer.