* 8902856
* Computer Studies of Wave Pheonomena in Space Plasma         (Atmospheric Sciences)
* EDU,EES
* 01/01/1990,09/30/1991
* Mary Hudson, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Lola E. Rogers
* 09/30/1991
* USD 96,988.00

Dr. Hudson will undertake four research projects. The first involves simulations
of active experiments in space. Particle simulations including beam density
gradients are proposed, using an algorithm which extends a one dimensional
electrostatic particle code to retain density gradient information. The second
topic is whistler noise generation near the earth's plasmapause. A hybrid
electromagnetic code, which includes magnetic field gradient effects, will be
extended to include electron particle dynamics. The objective is to compare
nonlinear and convective amplification of whistlers in the plasmapause region.
The third topic is research into two hardware techniques for extending the size
of simulation systems. The final research project simulates ion acoustic double
layer evolution in an H+ - O+ plasma. These localized potential jumps, which are
thought to contribute to auroral particle acceleration, are a basic feature of
magnetized ion acoustic turbulence. Interactive activities will include teaching
a senor seminar course in Simulations of Space Plasma Experiments and giving
seminars on her research. Additionally, Dr. Hudson will organize a series of
seminars on extraterestrial physics in which professional women scientists will
participate. This project furthers VPW program objectives which are (1) to
provide opportunities for women to advance their careers in engineering and in
the disciplines of science supported by NSF and (2) to encourage women to pursue
careers in science and engineering by providing greater visibility for women
scientists and engineers employed in industry, government, and academic
institutions. By encouraging the participation of women in science, it is a
valuable investment in the Nation's future scientific vitality.