* 8902070
* Mathematical Sciences: Eisenstein Series on the Metaplectic Group, Special Values of Automorphic L-Functions and        Functional Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1989,12/31/1991
* Daniel Bump, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Gary Cornell
* 12/31/1991
* USD 44,600.00

This award supports the research in Automorphic Forms of Professor Daniel Bump
of Stanford University. Much of Dr. Bump's planned research is a continuation of
joint work with S. Fried- berg of the University of California at Santa Cruz and
J. Hoff- stein of Brown University. They exploit the occurrence of quadratic
twists of automorphic L-functions of certain Eisenstein series on the
metaplectic group, by applying to these Eisenstein series an integral
convolution introduced by Novodvorsky. This results in a Dirichlet series with
known poles, leading to nonvanishing theorems of a new type. They have already
obtained a result which, when combined with recent work of Kolyvagin, has
applications to the Birch-Swinnerton-Dyer conjectures on elliptic curves. Non-
Euclidean plane geometry began in the early nineteenth century as a mathematical
curiosity, but by the end of that century, mathematicians had realized that many
objects of fundamental importance are non-Euclidean in their basic nature. The
detailed study of non-Euclidean plane geometries has given rise to several
branches of modern mathematics, of which the study of Modular and Automorphic
Forms is one of the most active. This field is principally concerned with
questions about the whole numbers, but in its use of Geometry and Analysis, it
retains connection to its historical roots.