* 8902540
* Mathematical Sciences: Geometric Function Theory in Several Complex Variables
* MPS,DMS
* 05/15/1989,04/30/1991
* Jean-Pierre Rosay, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 04/30/1991
* USD 46,720.00

The general area of mathematical research encompassed by this project relates
to the theory of several complex variables and partial differential equations.
Some of the work will involve real variable microlocal techniques, other parts
will focus on mappings between domains in spaces of several complex variables of
different dimensions. One question of particular concern is that of unique
continuation in Cauchy-Riemann manifolds. Effectively these studies involve
questions of whether or not a holomorphic function of several variables can be
constant along various submanifolds of a domain, such as along a curve, and not
be constant everywhere. A second thrust of this work will focus on properties of
sets preserved under holomorphic mappings between domains in spaces of possibly
different dimensions. Much of what is intuitive, and not surprising in one
dimension, turns out to be false in higher. Mappings whose Jacobians have
determinant one everywhere may map unbounded domains onto bounded ones. Some
sequences are equivalent under automorphisms of complex space, others are not.
Difficulty in visualizing the true state of affairs makes progress slow in this
area. Fundamental to the analysis of first-order differential operators defined
on domains is the determination of when the inhomogeneous d-bar equation can be
solved for closed one-forms. There is considerable evidence to suggest that the
answer lies in the geometric concept of polynomial convexity of the
complementary set. If this can be shown to be the case, it will provide a major
tool in establishing deep connections between the differential operators and the
shape of domains in complex space.