* 8902136
* Mathematical Sciences: Existence and Regularity of Solutionsto Nonlinear Wave Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1989,05/31/1992
* R. Michael Beals, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 05/31/1992
* USD 49,271.00

8902136 Beals This project will emphasize the analysis of solutions of nonlinear
strictly hyperbolic partial differential equations. Specifically, work will be
done in constructing examples in which precislely described singularities are
shown to exist, and to establish regularity results which show that these are
essentially the worst possible singularities. Natural conditions on the
smmoothness of the solution as it evolves in time are known to curtail the
formation of singularities, at least locally in time. Among the related problems
to be considered in this work are questions concerning interactions of
singularities occurring in cases where caustic surfaces appear. This contrasts
with that of simple interactions of singularities conormal across smooth
characteristic surfaces which are well understood. In addition to this, the
question of triple interactions will be addressed. It is known that piecewise
smoothness of solutions in the past is not preserved after a triple interaction.
A procedure for constructing solutions with given data of conormal or classical
conormal type will be one of the objectives of this research. In four
dimensions, simple initial conditions are expected to give rise to complex sets
of nonlinear singularities. The construction of an example of this type of
behavior will be treated. The wave equation on the exterior of a convex obstacle
will also be considered. It represent the simplest problem involving interaction
near a grazing surface of singularities; it may give rise to single nonlinear
singularity. To accomplish some of these constructions, precise regularity
theorems will be required to show that explicit approximate solutions differ
from actual ones by remainders of strictly greater smoothness and to extend
known regularity results to lower order smoothness.