* 8902204
* Control of Heterocyst Differentiation in Free-Living and    Symbiotic Cyanobacteria
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1989,07/31/1992
* John Meeks, University of California-Davis
* Continuing grant
* Judith Plesset
* 07/31/1992
* USD 253,400.00

The intent of the project is to identify the biochemical mechanisms that
control the differentiation of vegetative cells into heterocysts (sites of
aerobic nitrogen fixation) in Nostoc spp. Dr. Meeks hypothesizes that heterocyst
differentiation is under control of a global nitrogen regulatory system in the
free- living state, that may be superseded by a symbiotic specific system when
Nostoc is in association with the bryophyte anthoceros. He proposes to continue
characterization and complementation - to identify and isolate regulatory genes
involved in heterocyst differentiation. The specific objectives include
isolation of additional mutants with the pleiotropic phenotype of inability to
grow with nitrate and N2 as nitrogen sources, but able to fix N2 in symbiosis.
Such mutants will be characterized by analysis of classes of revertant (single
site suppressor mutations). The mutant phenotypes will be complemented by
conjugational transfer of wild type or "revertant" DNA cloned in E. coli or
packaged in vitro in plasmids and transferred into the Nostoc recipient by
electroporation. complementing fragments will be sequenced and compared to
established data banks. They will also be used in physiological genetic studies
with wild type and mutant strains of Nostoc to define their role in
differentiation. %%% This study has implications for two areas. First it is a
rare example of pattern formation in bacteria and therefore provides an example
to study with the powerful genetic techniques available in bacterial system.
Additionally, the cyanobacteria are important components of the environment and
play a unique role as primary producers of reduced carbon and nitrogen. An
understanding of how these processes are controlled is therefore of general
importance.