* 8902519
* US-Ireland Cooperative Research:  Quantum Stochastic        Processes and Applications
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1989,09/30/1992
* Robert O'Connell, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 09/30/1992
* USD 19,573.00

This award will support U.S.-Irish research in theoretical physics. The
principal investigators are Dr. Robert O'Connell, Louisiana State University,
Dr. G. W. Ford, University of Michigan, Dr. John Lewis, Dublin Institute for
Advanced Studies, and Dr. D. M. Heffernan, National Institute for Higher
Education, Dublin, Ireland. The proposed work focuses on quantum stochastic
processes, with special emphasis on systems in such areas as quantum optics and
laser, atomic and condensed matter physics, which involve the presence of a heat
bath as an integral element of a quantum system. Drs. O'Connell and Lewis have
worked together on this topic since 1983. In the present project, they will
apply results obtained for a general oscillator heat bath to such problems as
non-Markovian effects on time decay, as well as to an investigation of improved
heat bath models for quantum optics. Two major new elements in this study will
be 1) the pursuit of new ideas in relation to the spin boson problem and 2) the
formulation of quantum dissipations in terms of a master equations (the von
Neumann equation of motion for the density matrix). This work will enable the
investigators to study the effect of quantum dissipation on systems exhibiting
the phenomenon of chaos. The participation of Heffernan, since he is a well-
recognized expert in the phenomenon of chaos in semiconductor lasers, will be of
importance.