* 8902534
* Industry-University Cooperative Research Program on a       Comprehensive Approach to Control Structure Synthesis for   Decentralized Control
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/1989,03/31/1992
* Yaman Arkun, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 03/31/1992
* USD 80,000.00

Control system synthesis involves the interplay between the creation and
assessment of alternative control structures and controller designs. It consists
of two tasks: control structure selection and controller design. Control
structure selection entails the selection of measurements, manipulated variables
and their feedback interconnections. Specifications of measured outputs and
manipulated inputs is usually determined from the control objectives which
include economic factors, operational constraints, safety and other practical
considerations. Once this is accomplished, the designer must then decide how the
selected measurements and manipulated variables will be interconnected to effect
feedback control and satisfy the given design requirements. In a fully
centralized control system, all of the manipulated variables receive feedback
information from all of the measured outputs. For large scale systems such as
chemical plants, power systems, etc., some form of decentralization is necessary
otherwise the control system becomes too costly and cumbersome. The underlying
principle in decentralization is the decomposition of the system into subsystems
followed by their independent control. The design of a decentralized control
scheme involves the search for a structure which minimizes the interactions
between variables but which also best approximates that attainable with a fully
centralized system. In this Industry University Cooperative Research project the
focus will be on the design of decentralized control systems as applied to the
chemical process industry. The research will seek to develop interaction
measures appropriate for consistent, comprehensive analysis of generic control
structures. The relationships between such measures and important close-loop
properties will be explored. A synthesis procedure based on these relationships
will be constructed to allow analysis of large industrial control systems and
lead the designer to the preferred structure. An interactive CAD software will
be developed to implement the synthesis. The methodology will be tested on
industrial examples which will be provided by Tennessee Eastman Kodak and
General Companies both of which are the industrial collaborators for this
research program. Design of decentralized control laws will be addressed. This
will include developing design tools that permit assessment of important
feedback properties and may consequently be used for final screening of control
structures.