* 8902669
* Continuing Partial Support of the Federal                   Construction Council's Technical Program
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/15/1989,09/30/1991
* Andrew Lemer, National Research Council
* Standard Grant
* Ken Chong
* 09/30/1991
* USD 77,000.00

This project requests that partial support for the 1989 program of the Federal
Construction Council (FCC) from the National Science Foundation in the amount of
$22,000 through continuation of Grant No. MSM-8803034*. Addition funding is
expected to be provided by other agencies, as indicated in Attachment I. The
1989 FCC program was discussed at a 29 September 1988 meeting of senior
representatives of the sponsoring agencies of the FCC (see attachment III).
Agency funding commitments as shown in Attachment I were made at that meeting.
As indicted in Attachment II, the estimated total cost of carrying out the
program is approximately $652,900, which is approximately $48,000 more than
funding commitments received to date. Additional funding is being sought. If
sufficient funding carry out the program is not received, the program will be
reduced accordingly by the FCC Program Committee in consultation with FCC
sponsors and the Building Research Board staff. Described in the proposal is the
FCC technical program for the period 1 January 1989 to 31 December 1989. The
program was developed through a process involving meetings of FCC consulting
committees to identify current problems and concerns of Federal agencies, a
program planning workshop at which an interdisciplinary group of agency
professionals met with the FCC Program Committee to select the most pressing
agency problems and to prepare plans for projects to address those problems, a
meeting of the FCC Program Committee at which the proposed program for 1989 was
reviewed and refined, and finally, a meeting with senior officials for the
sponsoring agencies to ensure that the proposed program reflected the concerns
of agency managers. Unless otherwise indicted, all projects are expected to be
completed during the 12-month period covered by this proposal. The proposed
technical program is divided into three parts: advisory studies, information
studies, and base activities. The nature of the work expected to be carried out
in each part is summarized in the proposal.//