* 8902695
* Expression and Analysis of Cyanobacterial Genes for the     Cytochrome B6-f Complex
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1989,01/31/1993
* Toivo Kallas, University of Wisconsin-Oshkosh
* Continuing Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 01/31/1993
* USD 280,200.00

Recently isolated genes from the cyanobacterium Nostoc PCC 7906 will be used
together with molecular genetic and biochemical manipulations of cyanobacteria
to investigate aspects of the structure and function of the cytochrome b6-f
complex. This membrane protein complex (the plastoquinol-plastocyanin/cytochrome
c oxidoreductase) is essential for photosynthetic electron transport and energy
transduction in chloroplasts and cyanobacteria. Unresolved problems include the
pathways of electron transfer and proton translocation through these complexes,
the ligands for some of the prosthetic groups, the nature of binding sites for
the quinone substrates, and the molecular basis of functional differences
between the b6-f and the related mitochondrial-type b-cl cytochrome complexes.
An obstacle to genetic analysis of the cytochrome complex is its essential role
in cyanobacteria for both photosynthetic and respiratory electron transport.
Thus one goal of the research is to establish means for the conditional
expression of genes bearing potentially debilitating mutations. The specific
goals are: 1) Expression of the Nostoc gene for the Rieske Fe-S protein of the
complex in Escherichia coli and in vitro reconstitution of a catalytically
active complex from the cloned protein and a Rieske-depleted complex. 2)
Mutagenesis of the Fe-S binding domain of the Rieske protein followed by in
vitro reconstitution to determine the nature of possible S and N ligands for the
Fe-S center. 3) Determination of transcription start sites of the two Nostoc
cytochrome complex operons for possible conditional expression of mutated genes
under anaerobic N2-fixing conditions. 4) Expression of the Nostoc cytochrome
complex genes in the cyanobacterium Synechococcus PCC 7002 for the possible
conditional analysis of mutated genes. 5) Random mutagenesis of a region of the
gene for the subunit-IV protein to determine the identities and roles of amino
acid residues involved in quinol oxidation. Cyanobacteria and chloroplasts share
a fundamentally similar photosynthetic apparatus. Cyanobacterial genes, however,
unlike those of chloroplasts, can be manipulated genetically and replaced with
altered genes. These techniques allow the genetic dissection of protein
structure/function and powerfully complement biochemical and biophysical
approaches. The proposed research would contribute to the elucidation of
structure and function in the cytochrome b6-f complex to which molecular genetic
analyses have not yet been applied. One of the reactions of this complex,
quinol-oxidation, is the rate limiting step in photosynthetic electron
transport. Thus genetic manipulations of protein structure at the quinol-
oxidation site might lead to improvements in the photosynthetic efficiency of
crop plants or to applications for specific herbicides. The project in addition
has significance to the general understanding of electron transfer and energy
transduction processes in biological membranes.