* 8902140
* Radiocarbon Dating Laboratory Core Support for Archaeometry
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1989,01/31/1993
* Austin Long, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* John Yellen
* 01/31/1993
* USD 178,800.00

Within the United States, the University of Arizona has pioneered Tandem
Accelerator Mass Spectrometer (TAMS) radiocarbon dating. This technique is
important to archaeologists and other scientists because it permits extremely
small samples to be measured. Dr. Long's laboratory is responsible for preparing
samples for both the TAMS and conventional beta counting machines. With an
additional three years of support, this laboratory will both continue its own
research and provide a service function to the user community. It will pursue a
series of specialized research projects. The laboratory has developed techniques
for extracting and purifying organic components from bone. Such samples have
been shown to give reliable TAMS dates. This focus on bone work will continue.
Emphasis will also be placed on dating early cultigens from North America to
elucidate the prehistoric development of agriculture. Dating is crucial in
archaeological research, and the development of TAMS technique has provided a
major breakthrough because of relaxed sample size requirements. Many new
questions could be addressed and many have been answered because of the Arizona
work. In the process it has become clear that a major problem lies in sample
preparation; dates can be no better than the samples placed in the machine. Dr.
Long's laboratory has made and continues to make major strides in this area.
This project is important because it provides a basic and necessary service not
only to archaeologists but also to scientists working in a wide range of
disciplines.