* 8902987
* Professional Development Award in Science, Technology, and  Society
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1989,08/31/1991
* Richard Rice, Fellowships
* Fellowship Award
* Michael M. Sokal
* 08/31/1991
* USD 40,000.00

Professor Rice, a physical chemist, is undertaking a two year half-time study
and research program in the history and philosophy of chemistry under Professor
Noretta Koertge of Indiana University. He is undertaking a comparison of
theories and mechanistic explanations for osmosis, both ordinary and anomalous,
proposed by chemists, biologists, and physicists. Osmosis is a topic on which he
has carried out scientific research and study. It represents a case study of
considerable potential value to historians and philosophers of science. Under
this grant, he will participate in graduate surveys and seminars in the history
and philosophy of science and an organized reading program of basic and
essential works in this area. While undertaking regular consultation with the
faculty in history and philosophy of science at Indiana University, Professor
Rice will be examining the history of osmosis with its competing theories. This
history is fairly straightforward up to the time of van't Hoff who carried out a
thermodynamic analysis of osmotic pressure on the basis of the analogy between
dilute solutions and gases. At this point, however, chemists lost interest in
mechanistic descriptions of osmosis, although physiologists have maintained
their interest and a lively discussion of rival interpretations. Some of these
physiologists advocate the tensile solvent theory, which appears to eliminate
the need for the concept of activity in thermodynamics. An interest in so-called
anomalous osmosis, which includes electrostatic interactions between charged
membranes and the ions in solution, developed in the early 1900s and still
occupies the time of both chemists and biologists. Professor Rice's goal is to
investigate approaches, questions, beliefs and acceptable answers, models and
theories of scientists from different disciplines or paradigms studying the same
phenomena by comparing (1) the historical development of the pertinent thematic
content of different paradigms,(2) the semantic or linguistic differences in the
languages developed by different paradigms to discuss the same phenomena, and
(3) the epistemological differences in acceptable answers to similar questions.