* 8902453
* Mathematical Sciences: Abstract Operator Theory and         Transference Methods in Modern Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1989,11/30/1991
* Earl Berkson, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* William Y. Velez
* 11/30/1991
* USD 57,300.00

Professor Berkson will continue his work of recent years on the development,
from the viewpoint of transference methods, of a unified abstract operator
theory designed to treat the diversity of decompositions arising in general
harmonic analysis. Specific objectives include: expansion of transference theory
in regard to weak type and strong type bounds for maximal operators; the
development of transference estimates tailored to specific classes of spaces;
Fourier multiplier extension theorems; investigation of transference by
unbounded representations and its relationship to weighted norm inequalities;
and the decomposition of UMD spaces under the action of a locally compact
abelian group. The mathematical framework for this project is harmonic analysis,
which may be thought of as theoretical signal- processing. The classic strategy,
invented by Fourier for periodic signals, is to decompose into pure tones,
multiples of some unit frequency. This gives a list of numbers which can then be
manipulated and turned back into a modified signal. Sometimes the classic
strategy is not the most apt, and it becomes preferable to use some other
decomposition that is less straightforward mathematically. Professor Berkson's
work is aimed at better understanding of a wide variety of strategies for
performing harmonic analysis.