* 8902755
* A Normative-Descriptive Theory of Coordination in           Distributed Organizations
* CSE,IIS
* 06/15/1989,11/30/1992
* Peter Luh, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Su-Shing Chen
* 11/30/1992
* USD 971,172.00

Human decision making and coordination strategies within a distributed
organization are known to be less than optimal, especially as the workload under
which the team must operate increases. This project will employ a normative-
descriptive approach to systematically investigate team performance in such
contexts. The fundamental tenet of the normative-descriptive theory is that
motivated expert decision makers strive for optimality, but are constrained from
achieving it by their inherent limitations and cognitive biases. The normative-
descriptive theory employs normative solutions as a baseline, and modifies these
solutions by placing psychologically interpretable constraints and structure on
the team's cognitive processes to provide accurate predictions of team
performance. These models, which are experimentally validated, provide a
relevant basis for designing distributed database and communication subsystems
that best support the needs of human decision makers. The working hypothesis put
forward in this project is that human teams adapt their coordination strategies
to workload demands. At low workload teams prefer to coordinate explicitly using
communication channels. Under moderate workload teams rely on implicit
coordination, exercising internal models to anticipate the needs of other team
members. Under high workload off-line pre-planning replaces on-line
coordination. This project will investigate, using the normative-descriptive
approach, explicit and implicit coordination in the areas of team information
processing, resource allocation, and task sequencing. The research on
information coordination characterizes the amount of communication needed among
team members for superior explicit coordination, and the role of feedback as a
means of improving implicit coordination. The research on resource and task
coordination focuses on when a leader is necessary to improve coordination, and
on how coordination strategies change when different mixes of sequential,
parallel, and multiple actions must be taken by the team. The research on
database support addresses the questions of database modeling structures needed
to support the requirements of different forms of coordination in an
organization, and develops algorithms for dynamically (re)locating the data in
the network for effective coordination.