* 8902467
* Mathematical Sciences: Operator Spaces, Operator Algebras   and Completely Bounded Maps
* MPS,DMS
* 05/15/1989,10/31/1991
* Zhong-Jin Ruan, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* William Y. Velez
* 10/31/1991
* USD 32,724.00

Professor Ruan's project will exploit the simple but consequential fact that a
matrix of operators on Hilbert space is again an operator and so, in a canonical
and natural way, has a norm. He and coauthors have recently characterized unital
Banach algebras of operators on Hilbert space in terms of these matricial norms.
One of his objectives in the current project is to obtain a conjugate-space
analogue of this result. He will also investigate cross-norms on tensor products
of operator algebras from a matricial point of view, and will study a
multivariable version of the Fourier algebra of a locally compact group. The
mathematical research to be pursued here is aimed at fundamental questions in
the theory of operator algebras. Operators may be thought of as enriched
numbers, obeying the same laws of arithmetic as ordinary numbers with two
notable exceptions: multiplication of operators depends upon the order in which
the factors are taken, and not every non-zero operator has an inverse. In the
finite-dimensional situation, operators are just square matrices of numbers, the
basic objects of linear algebra, and even at this stage the richer structure
becomes apparent. Infinite-dimensionally, notions of size and distance, as
measured by what is called the norm of an operator, become crucial. The essence
of Professor Ruan's research is to discover, by considering the behavior of
norms, what sorts of mathematical objects can be represented as operators.