* 8903654
* Collaborative Research: Fort Payne Formation Echinoderms:   Systematics, Paleoecology and Regional Synthesis            (L.Mississippian, Midcontinental U.S.)
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1989,06/30/1992
* David Meyer, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Continuing grant
* John A. Maccini
* 06/30/1992
* USD 59,400.00

With the basic sedimentology and taphonomy of limestone buildups known in the
Fort Payne Formation, a detailed systematic study of the crinoid fauna (Phylum
Echinodermata) will be made. The Fort Payne Formation is Lower Mississippian
(late Osagean; appoximately 350 million years old), and this study will be
conducted in rocks from south-central Kentucky. Where these rocks are in the
subsurface, they are oil and gas producers. Because crinoidal remains are the
dominant component in the limestone buildups, it is vital to document fully
their diversity and to understand their paleoecologic distribution. This will
result in a better understanding of the origin and distribution of these
limestones. Specific objectives of the proposed research include 1, species-
level systematics of the Fort Payne crinoid fauna, including documentation of
within-species variations from the large collections available; 2, determination
of the crinoid species composition of Fort Payne paleocommunities; 3, evaluation
of the faunal role in the differential development of limestone buildups; 4,
integration of these data with crinois species distributions throughout the
midcontinental U.S. in order to understand better the regional distributional
controls on late Osagean crinoids. This research will result in the most
thoroughly documented paleontologic study of the enigmatic Lower Mississippian
Walsortian facies. Further the resulting knowledge of late Osagean crinoids will
be one of the most comprehensive data sets available for Paleozoic
macroinvertebrates. The resulting regional synthesis of systematics, facies
distribution, paleogeography and community paleoecology will be a rich source
for future research to which fundamental evolutionary and paleoecologic
questions can be addressed.