* 8903126
* Fractals in Mathematics (Mathematics)
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/1989,02/28/1991
* Jenny Harrison, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Margrete S. Klein
* 02/28/1991
* USD 74,606.00

Research will be carried out on the following: 1) Stokes' theorem will be
extended to topological manifolds. Dr. Harrison has already shown that Green's
theorem is valid for 1-forms on fractal curves in the plane, as long as the
1-form is sufficiently smooth compared to the dimension of the curve. She will
extend her methods into higher dimensions. If Dr. Harrison is able to extend
Stokes' theorem to fractal manifolds, wide-ranging applications in physics,
biology, chemistry, and many other fields are anticipated. 2) Preliminary
estimates show that the dimension of an infinite minimal set of a diffeomorphism
f of the circle is necessarily greater than or equal to the degree of
differentiability of f minus one. Attainment of that result will imply the
classic result of Denjoy - all twice differentiable diffeomorphisms of the
circle with no periodic points can only have the whole circle as a minimal set.
3) The loxodromic mapping problem. A simple dynamical question on the sphere
will lead to significant progress on the Seifert Conjecture. Dr. Harrison hopes
to show that the answer involves deep relations between Hausdorff dimension of
an invariant set and the differentiability class of the homeomorphism.
Interactive activities include giving a formal lecture to the undergraduates on
fractals in mathematics, organizing a weekly seminar on global analysis with
graduate student participation, holding monthly workshops with women
mathematicians lecturing about their work, and arranging discussion sessions on
the problems women face as professional mathematicians and how to deal with
them. In addition, Dr. Harrison will give one or two seminars on her research to
the mathematics department. This project furthers VPW program objectives which
are (1) to provide opportunities for women to advance their careers in
engineering and in the disciplines of science supported by NSF and (2) to
encourage women to pursue careers in science and engineering by providing
greater visibility for women scientists and engineers employed in industry,
government, and academic institutions. By encouraging the participation of women
in science, it is a valuable investment in the Nation's future scientific
vitality.