* 8903509
* Pharmaceutical Production by Immobilized Cells
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/1989,01/31/1991
* Robert Coughlin, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Alice C. Hogan
* 01/31/1991
* USD 20,000.00

ABSTRACT NARRATIVE Description: This proposal supports the collaboration of Dr.
Robert W. Coughlin, University of Connecticut and Drs. A. Halim M.M. El-Sayed
and Wafaa M. Mahmoud of Zagazig University, Zagazig, Egypt. Each Egyptian
scientist is a holder of a Peace Fellowship, which will enable them to spend
about five months at the University of Connecticut working with the Dr.
Coughlin. Project funding will allow (1) an extension of their stay, if
appropriated for the progress of their research, (2) permit them to return to
Egypt to work and then to return to Connecticut a second time to continue
project work and (3) enable the P.I. to visit Zagazig University to work with
them a third period. The collaboration is using immobilized microbial cells for
producing dextran, a blood plasma expander, and ephedrine, a widely used
therapeutic drug. New immobilization method, new immobilization carriers and new
production technologies are being investigated. Dr El-Sayed is working on
production of dextran from sucrose, while Dr. Mahmoud will work on production of
the therapeutic drug, L-ephedrine. The proposed research efforts of the two
Egyptian scientists will introduce technology for the production of two
important drugs into Egypt and could lead to the development of their production
in that country to benefit the Egyptian population that might not otherwise have
access to these efficacious drugs. Scope: This proposal will bring together
scientific research scientists from the universities of two countries working in
the area of microbial transformations and immobilization of enzymes and cells.
The development of scientific skills and research methods will be translated
from the U.S. to Egypt, first to Zagazig University and if successful, then to
local Egyptian production of two important drugs, one a plasma expander and the
second, a therapeutic. This research will require the development of new general
knowledge and procedures for immobilizing cells and designing biocatalysts and
associated bioreactors. This proposal fulfills objectives of the Science in
Developing Countries Program in its exchange and transfer of scientific
knowledge through a international collaboration.