* 8903879
* A Petrologic, Trace Element, and Isotopic Investigation intothe Upper Mantle Xenoliths From Oahu, Hawaii
* NONE,NONE
* 05/15/1989,11/30/1993
* Andrew Macfarlane, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* John L. Snyder
* 11/30/1993
* USD 50,000.00

Current models of Hawaiian magma genesis postulate the involvement of at least
two or more isotopically and chemically distinct end member mantle sources, one
of which is a primitive hot plume and another one is the lithosphere. The
relative roles of the lithosphere and the plume have been a matter of debate in
these models, which are generally based on the composition of the erupted lavas.
Fragments of the lithosphere occur in abundance as xenoliths in the post-
erosional Honolulu lavas of Oahu, which provide a window into the Hawaiian
lithosphere, and a critical examination of these rocks may help resolve some of
these disputes. The present project is concerned with the second phase of an
ongoing study of upper mantle xenoliths from Oahu, which includes a detailed
isotopic and trace element investigation into the mineral phases of several
xenoliths selected on the basis of their mineralogy and petrography (and, in
some cases, trace elements). In the first phase of this research, petrographic
and mineral-chemical characterization was carried out on a large number of
xenoliths from number of vents that cut across the koolau shield volcano. The
proposed isotopic and trace element investigation, in conjunction with the
earlier petrographic- mineralogic study, is expected to offer an insight into
the nature of the lithosphere and the fluids which have crystallized the hydrous
phases. Comparative studies of the compositional the hydrous phases. Comparative
studies of the compositional variations within and between xenoliths and the
erupted Koolau (tholeiitic) and Honolulu (alkalic) lavas will help evaluate
models of Hawaiian magma generation and help evaluate models of Hawaiian magmas
generation and lithosphere-magma interaction processes during hot spot
magmatism. //