* 8903369
* Urea Transport in the Elasmobranch Kidney
* NONE,NONE
* 11/01/1989,04/30/1993
* James Williams, Medical University of South Carolina
* Continuing grant
* Barbara K. Zain
* 04/30/1993
* USD 244,800.00

The human kidney functions to rid the body of waste products, but also to
regulate the salt and water composition of the blood and body fluids. Urea is a
breakdown product of protein metabolism and generally perceived to be a waste
product excreted by the kidney. This is indeed the case, but urea also plays an
important role in normal kidney function. Urea is used in a complex manner by
the kidney to augment concentration of the urine, such that only a small
fraction of the initial urine formed in the kidney is actually excreted. Indeed,
abnormal kidney function is reflected in changes in the amount of urea that is
excreted - a condition called uremia. The mechanisms of cellular dysfunction in
regards to urea are extremely difficult to study in human as well as laboratory
mammals. Dr. Lacy will study shark and skate (elasmobranchs) kidney because of
the following reasons: 1) Surprisingly, the skate kidney is remarkably similar
in structure to that of humans, a finding Dr. Lacy made in 1985. 2) These
animals have extremely high concentrations of urea in their blood and tissues,
but the kidney does not excrete very much of it. 3) Skates are a more suitable
alternative than laboratory rats for the PI's experimental animal. Dr. Lacy's
research is directed to understanding how the skate kidney handles urea in its
normal physiology. The PI's data will be applicable to human kidney function and
disease.