* 8903327
* Segmental Orientation, Rotational Isomerization, Strain-    Induced Crystallization, and Ultimate Properties of         Elastomers-U.S.-Turkey Cooperative Research.
* NONE,NONE
* 04/15/1989,09/30/1990
* James Mark, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Alice C. Hogan
* 09/30/1990
* USD 19,900.00

Abstract Narrative Description: This project supports the collaboration of Dr.
James E. Mark, Director of Polymer Research Center, University of Cincinnati and
Drs. Burak Erman and Ivet Bahar of the Polymer Research Center, Bogazici
University, Istanbul, Turkey. The research is to study polymer chains of short
length arranged in networks under very high levels of deforming forces.
Observations of particular interest will be to determine the segmental
orientation, preferential orientation and the rotational changes of the
polymers, particularly the crystallization of materials under large strain loads
causing rupture. This study is intended to develop a molecular understanding of
the ultimate properties of elastic materials, and the use of such information in
the design of better high-performance materials. Scope: This proposal is a real
opportunity for the two Turkish co-principal investigators to begin to establish
an active research group working in polymers at Bogazici University. Such a
research group is a needed addition to the University, which is experiencing a
growth in the number of highly capable undergraduate students. These students
are selected from the top 1% of the 500,000 high school students examined
annually in nationwide central examination. Bogazici University is modeled on
the U.S. university system and conducts its courses in English, which makes is
popular with those students hoping to take higher degrees outside of Turkey.
There is a growing interest in polymers in Turkey spurred by a rapid growth in
Turkish production of polymeric systems. This proposal fulfills an objective of
the Science and Developing Countries Program through the exchange and transfer
of scientific knowledge.