* 8903960
* Paleoecology of Some Exceptional Echinoderm Faunas: Middle  Ordovician of the Mid-Continent
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/1989,12/31/1992
* Susan Cook, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 12/31/1992
* USD 74,200.00

The examination of faunas characterized by unusual preservation and/or
occurrence in unusual environments can provide much paleoecological information.
In this vein, PIs will investigate the paleoecology of three exquisitely
preserved and diverse echinoderm faunas from the Middle Ordovician of Iowa ans
Minnesota. The lithologies and regional stratigraphy indicate that the animals
swelled on a shallow, equatorial epicontinental shelf in waters 40 to 50 m deep.
The communities are dominated by suspension-feeding echinoderms. Catastrophic
burial resulted in the preservation of many complete adult and some juvenile
ecinoderms. Consequently, PIs will determine the elevations relative to the
substrate at which the individuals lived, estimate the sizes of food particles
taken and infer their methods of food capture by extrapolating from Recent
crinoids and other echinoderms and by applying filtration theory. The material
encourages reconstruction of ecological structure, both in the context of adults
and ontogenetic sequences. Preliminary data demonstrate that the tiering levels
and food size selection of Middle Ordovician echinoderms were as complicated as
those of the crinoid dominated faunas of the Mississippian. However, typical
Ordovician forms utilized somewhat different elevations above the substrate than
in the later Mississippian occurrences. Ontogeny, survivorship and distribution
patterns will be examined for the abundant taxa within and between different
living and taphonomic settings. Inasmuch as most taxa are new, the fauna will be
described and its phylogenetic affinities ascertained.