* 8903987
* RUI: Collaborative Research: Magnetic Properties of         Bacterial Magnetite
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/1990,06/30/1992
* Richard Frankel, California Polytechnic State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Michael A. Mayhew
* 06/30/1992
* USD 53,790.00

This project continues and expands previous research by the principal
investigators on the magnetic properties of single- magnetic-domain magnetite
particles produced by bacteria. The effects of time, temperature, and particle
interactions in single-magnetic-domain magnetite particles will be investigated.
The experiments are timely because of the recent availability of new samples of
bacterial magnetite in addition to the material studied in the previous
research. Bacterial magnetite offers important advantages over other synthetic
and natural magnetites; a) uniformity in particle size; and b) reduced effects
of particle interactions. The project involves thermoremanent magnetization,
thermal demagnetization of partial thermoremanent magnetizations, field and
temperature dependence of viscous remanent magnetization, and various
paleointensity methods which use anhysteretic magnetization. The magnetite
particles from the two new strains of magnetite producing anaerobic bacteria
have distinctly different particle sizes and morphologies from each other and
from those of the previously studied microaerophilic bacteria. Their magnetic
properties will be studies because of their potential significance to the stable
remanence of sediments. In particular, this research will provide an
experimental basis for understanding the effects of magnetostatic interactions
and particle-size distributions on the time and temperature dependence of
single-magnetic-domain particles.