* 8903470
* Late Quaternary Crustal Deformation Along the Cascadia      Subduction Zone in Southern and Central Coastal Oregon
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/1989,10/31/1992
* Harvey Kelsey, Western Washington University
* Continuing grant
* John A. Maccini
* 10/31/1992
* USD 119,545.00

Research objectives are the following: (1) to map marine terraces in four field
areas where at least four flights of marine terraces are present; (2) to
establish numerical ages of terraces through collection of datable material form
terrace deposits; (3) to study soil development on marine terraces for
identifying soil chronosequences and soil chronofunctions, correlating terraces
based on soil development, and investigating capabilities of a computer-
simulation model for assigning numerical ages to marine terraces; (4) to
correlate terraces among study sites; and (5) to analyze late Quaternary
deformation. The last objective entails compilation of absolute magnitudes of
deformation at the different sites, compilation of uplift, tilt and fault-slip
rates, and determination of the extent to which deformation is segmented into
structural domains along the coast. We anticipate that we will be successful in
assigning numerical ages to at least the lower one or two terraces at each study
site. If the soil development simulation model is feasible, then numerical ages
of all terraces are a possibility. Mapping to date (described below)
demonstrates that deformation along the southern coast of Oregon is not uniform
in space or in time, but rather the coast is segmented into broad warps. Faults
are associated with these broad warps, and some of these faults appear to be
boundaries of structural segments. Therefore, we also anticipate that we will be
able to identify tectonic segments that have different coastline lengths, areas,
and deformation rates (or ranges of rates). Both the lengths of segments and the
relative ages of deformation within these segments should serve as a basis for
identifying segments of the coast with different characteristic tectonic
responses to subduction.