* 8903713
* WOCE Heavy Weather Drifter Tests
* GEO,OCE
* 05/15/1989,05/31/1991
* Pearn Niiler, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* H. Lawrence Clark
* 05/31/1991
* USD 223,722.00

The World Ocean Circulation Experiment (WOCE) will require measurements of ocean
surface currents over long periods of time and in different ocean conditions.
Several low cost drifters have been developed and successively deployed in the
tropics where their water following characteristics are well understood. However
they have not yet been used or tested in high latitudes where wind and weather
conditions are more severe. Four drifters will be modified to have different
drag area ratios and outfitted with current meters. They will be deployed for
two-week periods in late 1989 near existing weather buoys in the North Pacific.
After recovery, data from the flow of water past the drifters will be analyzed
as a function of wind speed and drag area. Sixteen other identical drifters will
be deployed in October 1989 and groups will be recovered in three-month
intervals through rough winter weather to assess wear and survivability. The
data on water-mass tracking, when taken with data from existing tropical
calibration studies will provide an assessment of the drifters' performance
across the range of wind and current variables anticipated in WOCE field
programs. The survivability and wear observations will allow improvements in
design of mechanical components to withstand prolonged exposure to upper ocean
environments in the mid- and high latitudes. A large number of drifters will be
built and deployed during WOCE field programs. This study is essential to the
selection of effective drifters. It is a joint project between the Scripps
Institution of Oceanography and the Institute of Ocean Sciences in Canada.