* 8903816
* RUI: Sphingolipid Metabolism in Plants
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/1990,12/31/1993
* Daniel Lynch, Williams College
* Continuing Grant
* Machi F. Dilworth
* 12/31/1993
* USD 225,000.00

This project examines aspects of sphingolipid synthesis in plants. The
objectives are to characterize sphingolipid synthesis and its regulation at the
point of long chain base formation; to characterize the enzymatic steps involved
in modifying long chain base and fatty acid components of sphingolipids and
investigate the metabolic interrelationships of species involved in the
formation of glucosylceramide, the predominant plant sphingolipid; and to assess
degradation and turnover of glucosylceramide. Plant cell suspension cultures and
rye seedlings are used as experimental systems. These two plant systems have
diverse glucosylceramide molecular species compositions. The use of plant cell
suspension cultures facilitates detailed in vivo studies of the regulation of
sphingolipid synthesis and complements studies aimed at characterizing selected
enzymatic steps in cell-free systems. Radiolabeled precursors are supplied in
vitro or in vivo and the incorporation into sphingolipid products determined
following separation by TLC and HPLC. Aspects of regulation are investigated
under conditions in which sphingolipid metabolism is altered as a consequence of
development or in response to environmental factors or biochemical regulators.
It is anticipated that these studies, the first of their kind in plant cells,
will provide information on the cellular regulation of sphingolipid metabolism.
Current dogma holds that plant and animal cells respond to temperature stress by
altering the lipid composition of their membranes. Very little experimental
evidence has been generated to test this hypothesis. This project provides new
information on a newly discovered class of lipids and how they change in type
and amount when plants are exposed to low temperature. Fundamental new
information on plant lipids will result.