* 8903072
* Mathematical Sciences: The Spectral Behavior of Large       Dimensional Random Matrices Applied to Signal Processing
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/1989,05/31/1993
* Jack Silverstein, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Peter Arzberger
* 05/31/1993
* USD 72,485.00

A general class of problems in signal processing is to be studied by the
application of results on the limiting behavior of the eigenvalues of random
matrices as the dimension increases. The problems consist of determining
information on the nature of signals emitted in a noise-filled environment from
an unknown number of sources from data gathered from a collection of sensors.
Methods for solving the problem, such as MUSIC, rely on the spectral properties
of the covariance matrix associated with the vector of sensor values. This
matrix is approximated by the sample covariance matrix formed from samples of
the vector data across time. The sample size usually needs to be quite large in
order to effectively approximate the covariance matrix, especially when the
number of sources is sizable. To aid in the latter situation theorems will be
brought into play on the limiting empirical distribution function of the
eigenvalues of a class of large dimensional random matrices. Applied to the
signal processing problem when there are many sources, the theorems can be used
to determine the number of sources and the variance of the noise, with a sample
size considerably smaller than needed to approximate the covariance matrix.
Moreover, they can, in certain situations, provide additional information on the
nature of the signals. Computer simultations indicate that useful information
can be obtained with as little as 20 sources. Research is also planned to solve
some important mathematical questions concerning the limit theorems, in order to
completely understand the applicability of the theorems to signal processing.
Computer simulations will be performed to facilitate the analysis.