* 8903788
* Collaborative Research:  Strontium Isotope Stratigraphy and Paleohydrology of Miocene Evaporite Sequences
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/1989,12/31/1990
* Michael Arthur, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 12/31/1990
* USD 30,358.00

Marine evaporite sequences constitute a somewhat discontinuous record of
seawater chemical compositions through time. The sequence and relative amounts
of precipitation of different evaporite minerals in each deposit constrain
hypothesized excursions of seawater composition. Mass inventories of ancient
evaporites suggest that some major episodes of evaporite deposition decreased
mean oceanic salinity and perhaps changed major ion ratios of seawater. In
addition, marine evaporite sulfate minerals contain a record of the sulfur and
oxygen (in sulfate ion) isotopic composition of seawater through time. The major
disadvantage in evaporite geochemical records is the lack of stratigraphic age
control within sequences. Sequence ages are usually interpolated from those of
underlying and overlying marine strata, but biota in these and in interbedded
units are commonly restricted or endemic and have little stratigraphic utility.
This problem may be alleviated by measuring strontium isotopic ratios of the
gypsum/anhydrite mineral fractions of the evaporites. The dominant source of Sr
in most marine evaporitic brines is seawater and, as for marine carbonates, no
significant Sr isotopic fractionation takes place during incorporation of Sr
into the precipitating sulfate minerals. Sr isotope redistribution due to
diagenesis, excluding dewatering of gypsum upon deeper burial, is probably not
as much of a problem as it is in carbonate sequences because sulfate mineral
alteration is easily recognized and avoided. Sr-isotopic stratigraphy for middle
to upper Miocene evaporite sequences in the Gulf of Suez-northern Red Sea, a
deposit that provides a relatively long potential geochemical record will be
constructed. Determination of Sr-isotopic ratios for the evaporite sequences and
comparison to established Sr- isotopic secular curves for late Cenozoic
seawater, based on pelagic carbonate sequences, gives reasonable age estimates
for presumed Langhian (ca. 15.5 Ma) and Messinian (ca. 6 Ma) anhydrites from
industry wells in the Gulf of Suez. The improved stratigraphy will have
important applications for higher resolution dating of secular isotopic curves,
for chemical mass balance considerations, for a better understanding of timing
and nature of tectonic processes in a developing rift basin, and for hydrocarbon
exploration. The technique, if successful, may also be applied to other
evaporite sequences. The possibility of an Sr-isotopic signal derived from
continental runoff will also be considered and, if present, will provide
important information on the paleohydrology of "marine" evaporite basins. Such
considerations are crucial if we are to regard ancient evaporites as marine
paleochemical monitors.