* 8903580
* Mathematical Sciences: Isometries and Small Bound           Isomorphisms of Banach Spaces and Algebras
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1989,06/30/1992
* Krzysztof Jarosz, Southern Illinois University at Edwardsville
* Continuing Grant
* William Y. Velez
* 06/30/1992
* USD 31,251.00

Professor Jarosz will investigate a number of open problems concerning maps
between various function spaces and algebras that preserve or only slightly
distort metric structure. The common thread is to discover algebraic, geometric,
lattice, or other properties shared by two such spaces when there is an isometry
or small bound isomorphism from one onto the other. These problems are closely
related to small perturbations of Banach algebras, generalizations of the
Banach-Stone theorem, geometry of Banach spaces, and quasiconformal mappings.
The theory of Banach spaces is about analysis in infinitely many dimensions. For
each finite dimension n, there is only one n-dimensional space, in most respects
as well understood in general as in the familiar cases when n is 1, 2, or 3.
These are used to keep track of situations in which there are only finitely many
degrees of freedom. When the number of degrees of freedom becomes infinite, as
would for instance be necessary to describe the configuration of a piece of
string, there are many possible reasonable choices for the ambient space in
which to perform analysis. A key element of structure that distinguishes these
spaces one from another is the way in which distance is measured. Professor
Jarosz's project is concerned with the relationship of distance measurement to
algebraic and geometric properties in such spaces, in particular the persistence
of these properties under small distortions of distance.