* 8903841
* Prehistoric Metallurgy of the Mantaro Valley, Peru
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/1989,12/31/1990
* Ellen Howe, Metropolitan Museum of Art
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 12/31/1990
* USD 22,632.00

Beginning ca. 1,000 A.D. the Yanamarca Valley, located in the central Peruvian
highlands, saw the rise of a complex civilization which was eventually conquered
and incorporated into the Inca Empire. Years of excavation by a team of American
archaeologists has resulted in a detailed reconstruction of this process and
recovery of cultural materials from a series of sites which span this interval.
Included among these are objects fashioned from silver and lead together with
ores, slag, and manufacturing debris. These provide an unprecedented opportunity
to gain insight into prehistoric Andean metallurgical practices. Working
together Ms. Ellen Howe and Dr. Anne LeHuray will conduct a metallographic,
chemical, and lead-isotope study of the silver and lead metal objects and a
lead-isotope study of nearby potential sources of ore. This will allow them to
describe the types of ores exploited, the manufacturing processes used, and
patterns of exchange. These can be followed over time and the effects of
incorporation into the Inca empire can be determined. Many archaeologists have
speculated on the mechanisms used by empires to incorporate subjugated
populations. Some argue that the Inca allowed local groups a high degree of
autonomy while others believe that basic changes in economic and social
organization took place. However, it has been extremely difficult to collect
information to test these alternatives. The metallurgical study by Howe and
LeHuray will help to fill the gap, because it will be possible to see whether
new fabrication techniques are introduced and new sources of ore used. Thus,
examination of metallurgical technology will provide insight into social
context. This research is important because it will increase our understanding
of how empires develop and maintain their control. It will also shed new light
on the history of metallurgy and the role of technology in relatively simple
societies.