* 8903313
* Mathematical Sciences: Local Harmonic Analysis With         Applications to Automorphic Representations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1989,12/31/1992
* Diana Shelstad, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Kevin Clancey
* 12/31/1992
* USD 92,282.00

Professor Shelstad will continue her study of the transfer of orbital integrals
in endoscopy and twisted endoscopy, along with applications in local harmonic
analysis and to distributions associated with comparisons of Arthur - Selberg
trace formulas. This has to do with the representation theory of Lie groups.
These fundamental mathematical objects arise naturally in several ways. One
basic example of a Lie group is the group of rotations of a sphere, where the
group operation consists of following one motion by another. Detailed
information concerning this group is very helpful in solving mathematical or
physical problems in which spherical symmetry is present. Other groups of
motions capture other kinds of symmetry. A more algebraic (as opposed to
geometric) source of examples of Lie groups comes from the multiplication of
matrices. The group of all invertible real (or complex) matrices of a given size
is a Lie group, as is just about any subgroup thereof that can be described in a
natural manner. It is desirable to be able to go back and forth between the
geometric and algebraic points of view, for instance to consider the numerous
ways in which the rotation group of the sphere can be realized as a group of
invertible matrices. This, roughly, is representation theory. Facts about the
representations of a given group tend to store a lot of information very
economically. Transfer of this information (between two different ways of
keeping track of the representations of a single group, or between two different
but mathematically related groups) is the underlying theme of Professor
Shelstad's research project.