* 8903201
* Postdoctoral Fellowship on Information Technology, and CivilLiberties:  Public Policy Considerations
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/1989,05/31/1990
* Ronni Rosenberg, Individual Award
* Fellowship Award
* Ronald J. Overmann
* 05/31/1990
* USD 28,000.00

This one year, full.time postdoctoral fellowship enables a new PhD in Science,
Technology and Society, with a masters degree in computer science, to develop
her capabilities for policy analysis of the implications of new developments in
information technology for civil liberties. Her research will examine five
areas: technologies for unique identification, regulation of records held by
private organizations, FBI National Crime Information Center 2000, effects of
network security regulations on privacy and usability, and mechanisms for using
information technology to strengthen individual privacy and enhance citizen
access to electronic information. The project's objectives are to combine
technical and legal perspectives about the impacts of information technology on
civil liberties, and to articulate the options for and implications of policy
decisions in this area. To gain formal training in legal and public policy
analysis, this investigator will work with a legal scholar who specializes in
civil liberties, including the implications of computer technology for the
protection or infringement of personal privacy. Lectures, seminars, tutorials
and coursework will provide the necessary exposure to theories, methods, and
tools to identify and assess policy options in this area. This project addresses
a central issue in technology and public policy: ethical and value implications
of new developments in information technology. The proposed training will
augment this researcher's ability to undertake research in this area; the
investigator, host specialist and host institution are very well qualified to
undertake and support the effort; collaborative work is likely to continue after
the award period. Results are likely to be appropriately disseminated and
useful. An award in the amount of $28,000 is therefore recommended.