* 8903135
* The Preparation, Characterization, and Surface Reactivity   of New Amorphous Metals Prepared by Co-Condensation
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/1989,07/31/1993
* David Cocke, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* David Nelson
* 07/31/1993
* USD 254,200.00

Amorphous metals represent a novel class of materials which exhibit new bulk and
surface properties. Many amorphous metals show higher catalytic activity and
selectivity than their crystalline counterparts. The freedom from thermodynamic
constraints permits use of the amorphous phase as precursor to other unique
metastable phases. Co-condensation is a very versatile method for preparing new
amorphous metals and other metastable alloys with unusual properties. The direct
combination of this method with modern surface characterization and catalytic
testing produces a powerful approach to attack the fundamental questions
associated with the unique surface properties of amorphous metals. A unique
facility which permits preparation, characterization, study of surface
reactivity and catalytic testing of amorphous alloys without removing the sample
from the pristine environment of the UHV chamber has been developed with State
of Texas support. In this proposal they are requesting funds to use this
approach to study the surface structure and chemistry of amorphous refractory
alloys to provide an understanding of their surface reactivity and basic
information needed to ultimately explain unusual catalytic and corrosion
properties. This proposal brings together the unique experience of D. L. Cocke
in studying alloy surface reactivity with that of D. G. Naugle in the study and
preparation of bulk and thin film amorphous metals to attack fundamentally the
technologically important surface properties of amorphous materials. They
emphasize that the major facilities for this innovative proposal are already in
place; consequently, the principal need is for longer term operational funds.