* 8903999
* Modification of Poly (2,6-dimethylphenylene Oxide) as       Membrane Materials for Gas-Separation
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/1989,02/28/1993
* Benny Freeman, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jeffrey Foltz
* 02/28/1993
* USD 94,480.00

Experimental research is proposed to investigate an overlooked issue in the
pursuit of high-permeability, high- permselectivity membrane materials for
carbon dioxide/hydrocarbon separations. Modified poly(1,6-dimethyl phenylene
oxide) (PPO) is a promising material for the separation of carbon dioxide from
hydrocarbons. More recently this research group discovered that substitution at
the 3 and 5 positions in the repeat unit of PPO with bromine atoms increases the
polymer's permeability to carbon dioxide while retaining the carbon
dioxide/methane permselectivity. It was further found that the diffusivity-
related selectivity of the modified polymer remains surprisingly high when
compared with other glassy polymers, in sharp contrast to conventional wisdom
that lowering interchain packing will bring about a loss in size-sieving power
of the polymer. It is proposed that the relatively low carbon dioxide/methane
permselectivity of the aryl-brominated PPOs is actually caused by their very low
solubility-related selectivity. It is hypothesized that introduction of basic
groups into the polymer repeat unit will enhance the solubility of carbon
dioxide relative to methane in the polymer. Concurrently, if the packing density
and torsional mobility of the polymer chain segments are also lowered (e.g. by
bromine), the resulting polymer will exhibit both high carbon dioxide
permeability and high permselectivity for carbon dioxide over methane. This
project consists of a systematic experimental investigation of the above
hypothesis. PPO polymers with different degrees of aryl-bromination, aryl-
amination and aryl-phthalimidomethylation will be studied such that a wide range
of packing densities and concentrations of basic groups is covered. Membrane gas
separation technology will be one of the most important developing technologies
of the next decade. Technological leadership in the area will also translate
into increased manufacturing efficiency in all of the chemical process industry.
This project, if the hypothesis described above is demonstrated to be correct,
will constitute a major advance in membrane science which should translate into
significant technical advances in membrane separations of gas mixtures.