* 8903410
* Chemical Interactions Between Gabbros and Their Host Rocks: Field and Laboratory Studies of the Tertiary Macrodikes of the Kangerdlugssuaq Area, East Greenland
* NONE,NONE
* 06/15/1989,01/01/1992
* Charles Lesher, Columbia University Lamont Doherty Earth Observatory
* Continuing grant
* John L. Snyder
* 01/01/1992
* USD 112,100.00

The macrodykes of the Kangerdlugssuaq area, East Greenland are among a large
number of tholeiitic intrusions emplaced into Archean crust and Tertiary
volcanic rocks along the East Greenland margin during the initial stages of
Tertiary rifting of the North Atlantic basin. These intrusions are spectacularly
exposed in the glaciated terrain along the Blosseville Coast and preserve
evidence of complex interaction with their volcanic, sedimentary and gneissic
host rocks. The available chemical data on these intrusions indicate that these
magmas were selectively contaminated by components of the lower crust and
hydrothermally altered mafic volcanics and that magmatic processes led to
chemical stratification within these intrusions. Various scales and modes of
crustal contamination are revealed along the intrusive contacts. These exposures
permit detailed structural and chemical study of the hybridization process.
Field and geochemical studies of these intrusions are proposed to assess the
roles of fractionation and assimilation in the chemical evolution of these
magmas and appropriate models will be developed to describe these relations as
constrained by experimental phase equilibria and kinetic data obtained using
natural materials of the macrodykes. The results from this "case study" will be
used to evaluate the role of crustal contamination during chemical evolution of
associated gabbroic complexes and contemporaneous East Greenland basalts and
place constraints on the source regions for these magmas.