* 8903336
* Cytoplasmic Gelation and Cell Movement in Dictyostelium
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1989,02/29/1992
* Marcus Fechheimer, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Maryanna P. Henkart
* 02/29/1992
* USD 176,300.00

Actin cross-linking proteins interact with actin filaments to form either
randomly associated networks, or filament bundles. A 30,000 dalton protein
present in the filopodia of Dictyostelium organizes actin filaments into bundles
in vitro, and this bundling activity is inhibited by elevation of the
concentrations of free calcium or magnesium. The primary amino acid sequences of
this protein will be deduced by isolation and sequencing of the cDNA encoding
the protein. The results will be used to identify regions of the primary
sequence of the protein that may potentially interact with actin and with
calcium and magnesium ions. Functionally significant regions of the molecular
will be identified directly by studies of the activity of proteolytic fragments
of the 30,000 dalton protein, and by studies of the regions of the 30,000 dalton
protein and actin that are trapped in direct association by chemical cross-
linking reagents. A quantitative assay for the orientation of actin filaments in
cross-linked actin networks will be developed. Careful studies of the structures
formed in mixtures of actin with different cross-linking proteins may help to
reveal differences in the activities of the multiple actin cross-linking
proteins present in cells. Actin monomer binding proteins are believed to
regulate the self- assembly of actin. A novel actin monomer binding protein will
be purified from Dictyostelium discoideum, and its structure and interaction
with actin will be dissected. Antisera specific for the protein will be elicited
in rabbits, and used to determine the quantity and distribution of this protein
in Dictyostelium amoebae, and to determine the presence of related proteins in
other species. Knowledge of the novel actin monomer binding protein and the
30,000 dalton protein provide a foundation for future use of biochemical and
genetic approached to determine the contributions of these proteins to control
of actin filaments in cells, and the molecular mechanisms of essential cellular
processes such as locomotion, phagocytosis, and cytokinesis. Cell movements such
as phagocytosis, locomotion, and cytokinesis are essential to the life of
eucaryotic cells. Actin filaments contribute to the control of cell shape and
generation of force for cell movements. The properties of actin in cells must be
explained from a knowledge of the structure and chemistry of purified actin, and
of the properties of actin binding proteins. The presence of similar actin
binding proteins in invertebrate and vertebrate cells provides strong evidence
for the significance of these proteins as regulators of the behavior of actin in
the cytosol, and motivates detailed inquiry.