* 8903281
* Measuring Precise Relative Sea Level from a Buoy using the  Global Positioning System
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/1989,05/31/1991
* Christian Rocken, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* H. Lawrence Clark
* 05/31/1991
* USD 130,550.00

This ocean sciences instrumentation development project will study the
feasibility of applying the Global Positioning System (GPS) for centimeter
accuracy sea level determina- tions. The project will augment an experiment
being conducted off the California Coast by Scripps Institution of Oceanography,
and Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL). The purpose of the project is to use GPS
satellites and the Research Platform FLIP to examine the feasibility of
positioning and orienting a floating platform with centimeter accuracy with
reference to the seafloor. The add-on feasibility experiment will be conducted
simultaneously with the Scripps-JPL work, but will focus on the determination of
sea level. GPS will be used to position FLIP relative to a continental fiducial
site and seafloor pressure transducers to measure sea level relative to a
reference mark on FLIP. A tie between the transducers and the GPS antenna
configuration will provide sea level relative to the fiducial site. The
objective is to demonstrate and document the feasibility of obtaining centimeter
accuracy sea level determinations using buoy mounted GPS receivers. High
accuracy sea level determinations with GPS will be useful for the calibration of
satellite altimeters, tide gauges, and ocean bottom pressure gauges. Low-cost
"GPS-floaters" may provide an accurate sea surface monitoring network to
supplement the global tide-gauge network.