* 8903027
* Inflationary Cosmology, Cosmic String Models, and the       Vilkovisky-DeWitt Formalism (Physics)
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/1989,02/29/1992
* Bruce Allen, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Isaacson
* 02/29/1992
* USD 59,755.00

Professor Allen will initiate a new program of researching in gravitation and
cosmology. This will explore two different models of the early universe, to see
what they predict about the universe today. The "inflationary" model
convincingly accounts for the great size and uniformity of our present-day
universe. He will study the production of primordial gravity-waves in this
model. To do so, he will resolve some difficulties that have arisen in the
treatment of gravitons (the quanta that transmit gravitational forces) in de
Sitter space, and understand how quantum effects can influence the physical
stability of this model. The "cosmic string" model can account for the
temperature fluctuations expected to occur in the microwave background
radiation. He is constructing a computer simulation of the motion of loops of
"cosmic string" which are supposed to cause galaxies to form in the model. He
will study the distribution of these model galaxies in space and compare it with
what astronomers observe in the sky. Finally, he will use a new mathematical
formalism invented by Vilkovisky and DeWitt for calculating quantum effects. The
goal is to understand how the results of this method differ from standard
techniques currently in use, and to see if they change the predictions about
gravity-wave production in the inflationary model.