* 8903890
* Research in Linear and Finite Amplitude Baroclinic Waves
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/1989,10/31/1993
* Joseph Pedlosky, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Pamela L. Stephens
* 10/31/1993
* USD 483,878.00

Under his previous award, Dr. Pedlosky and his colleagues have made important
theoretical advances in research related to two general themes. The first is a
continuing effort to better understand the dynamics of baroclinic instability in
both linear and nonlinear theories, with special emphasis on the phenomena of
vacillation and chaotic behavior. The research involves the use of idealized
two-layer models to illuminate fundamental wave processes and the results are
applicable to both atmospheric and oceanic dynamics. The second broad area
involves the development of a basic theory for the general oceanic circulation,
in particular, the thermocline and its extension of the equatorial regions.
Under this award, Dr. Pedlosky will extend his previous results, using both
analytical and numerical techniques. Five topics will be investigated: (1) the
behavior of localized instabilities in zonally inhomogeneous flows, (2) wave-
wave interaction under strongly nonlinear conditions, (3) the role of the
dissipation mechanism in the wave evolution, (4) the relationship of the
Equatorial Undercurrent to other circulations at the western boundary of ocean
basins, and (5) the effect of steeply sloping topography on the dynamics and
structure of oceanic western boundary currents. Support for this research is
provided jointly by the Large-scale Dynamic Meteorology and Physical
Oceanography Programs.