* 8903296
* Magma Supply Dynamics at Slow Spreading Rates:  South       Atlantic at 26 Degrees South
* GEO,OCE
* 01/15/1989,12/31/1990
* Rodey Batiza, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Bilal U. Haq
* 12/31/1990
* USD 90,000.00

This is a project to test whether central or multiple supply is dominant (e.g.,
as a function of spreading rate, or regionally at the same spreading rate), by
carrying out a laboratory petrologic and geochemical study of closely-spaced (7
km) samples from a well-mapped 100 km-long segment of the slow spreading (35-40
mm/yr) Mid-Atlantic Ridge (MAR) at 26 degrees S. The 26 degrees S segment is
ideal for such a test because of its simple along-axis morphology (typical of
many MAR segments), the absence of hot spot influence, the existence of dense
Seabeam, gravity, and magnetic data, and the availability of closely-spaced
axial basalt samples an samples from nearby seamounts, Preliminary chemical data
for the samples show remarkably regular and systematic patterns of along-axis
chemical variations, indication that continued, more detailed petrologic and
chemical studies are justified. %%% Process that supply basalt melt to active
mid-ocean ridges are of current interest because melt supply dynamics play a key
role in the formation of oceanic crust. Dr. Batiza possesses an important set of
closely spaced samples at a slow spreading ridge axis. The results will improve
our understanding of magma supply dynamics at a slow spreading ridge, and the
data will be useful for comparison with similar data sets for fast- spreading
ridges.