* 8903302
* Mathematical Sciences: Research in Low Dimensional          Manifolds, Transformation Groups, and Cohomology of Finite  and Discrete Groups
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1989,12/31/1992
* Ronnie Lee, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Ralph M. Krause
* 12/31/1992
* USD 158,400.00

This project covers research on a variety of topics in low dimensional
manifolds, Donaldson and Casson invariants, theory of transformation groups on
algebraic surfaces, and cohomology of finite and discrete groups. Jointly D.
Wilczynski and R. Lee plan to investigate the problem of representing homology
classes of simply connected 4-manifolds by 2-spheres, in both the topological
and the smooth category. With S. Weintraub, R. Lee plans to continue their work
on Siegel modular varieties of genus 2. Using Casson's invariant and Floer
homology, R. Lee, S. Cappell and E. Miller plan to study the theory of surgery
on 3- dimensional manifolds. With I. Hambleton and F. Raymond, R. Lee plans to
investigate algebraic group actions on algebraic surfaces with special emphasis
on the applications to 4- dimensional manifold theory. Finally with J. Milgram,
J. Maginnis and J. Martino, he plans to study the cohomology of sporadic groups.
These are all topics in the mainstream of current topological research. The
hallmark of R. Lee's approach is to choose very concrete problems and bring to
bear techniques from an impressively large and high-powered arsenal. Some
problems yield to algebraic geometry, some to complex analysis, some to group
theory , and so forth. The result is another clear demonstration of the unity of
mathematics.