* 8903206
* Posdoctonal Fellowship, in Studies in Science, Technology,  and Society
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/1989,06/30/1990
* Gail Fleischaker, Individual Award
* Fellowship Award
* Ronald J. Overmann
* 06/30/1990
* USD 28,000.00

Dr. Fleischaker is undertaking an 18 month research and training postdoctoral
program with Dr. Richard Lewontin of Harvard University. The center of her study
and research is a program to define living systems operationally. What may seem
to be something obvious, i.e. whether something is "alive" or not, becomes very
problematic in areas of science like virology or in attempts to determine
whether life exists on other planets. Investigators who are trying to determine
how life arose on this planet also need to have a clear definition of what it
means to be "alive." By working with Professor Lewontin, one of the leading
geneticists in the world, Dr. Fleischaker will attempt to show the necessity for
defining life in origins-of-life research, extraterrestrial investigations,
virology, and cybernetics, making a broad case for system-operational criteria
of what constitutes being "alive." She will then attempt to make explicit the
assumptions underlying contemporary origins-of-life research, pointing to the
strengths of the minimal-system approach emerging as a recent branch from the
traditional lines of research in this area. Finally, she will treat the active
interchange across the boundary of any living system as necessary from its
embeddedness in the immediate surroundings. She questions the notion of autonomy
of living systems in the light of ecological nestedness, and hopes to provide an
operational definition of "the individual" (as opposed to the traditional
morphological definition of "organism") in the context of symbiotic
relationships, extending their different degrees of spatial intimacy to local
and global communities.