* 8903835
* Genetic and Immunological Analysis of E. coli recA Protein
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1989,03/31/1993
* Alvin Clark, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 03/31/1993
* USD 255,000.00

The protein encoded by the recA gene of E. coli, Eco RecAp, is of paramount
importance in several processes of DNA metabolism: (1) general genetic
recombination (2) repair of chemical and irradiation damage to DNA, (3) UV
mutagenesis and (4) coordinating repair, replication, and cell division after
DNA has been damaged. Analogues of recA with similar activity have been found in
five bacterial species closely related to E. coli and nine distantly related
species. Proteins with activities of EcoRecAp have now been isolated from
fungal, insect, plant and mammalian cells. Of all these EcoRecAp has been most
thoroughly studied genetically and enzymatically. Still, however, we have only
limited insight into the structure of EcoRecAp and how that structure relates to
enzymatic activity. The standard technique of x-ray crystallography has been
applied to EcoRecAp but has so far been unsuccessful in revealing its structure
because of the flexibility of the protein. Computer analysis has detected
similarities of the central part of EcoRecAp with a homogeneous group of
proteins, called parallel aB proteins. Half of this proposal consists of genetic
tests of the three-dimensional model of this central part, which has been called
the core. The tests consist in part of averaging predictions for RecAps from
several species, a method used successfully to predict the three-dimensional
structure of another parallel aB protein. The test also consist in part of
examining the predicted results of altering specific amino acids. These tests
will help refine the model, whether the predictions are confirmed or
contradicted, by a process akin to successive approximations. The other half of
the proposal concerns the structural and functional roles of the amino and
carboxy terminal regions of EcoRecAp. These are the regions whose structure was
not predicted in the model of the core. Two monoclonal antibodies will be
studied for their effects on EcoRecAp. One, MAb4B4, binds to amino terminal
amino acids; the other, MAb156, binds to carboxy terminal amino acids. Binding
competition of the two antibodies may reveal how closely these regions are
situated in the structure of EcoRecAp. Effects of each antibody on six in vitro
activities of EcoRecAp may reveal how these regions participate in the functions
of the protein.