* 8903492
* Constraints on the Duration of Water-Rock Interaction in the Rico Paleothermal Anomaly
* NONE,NONE
* 06/15/1989,12/31/1991
* Peter Larson, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Jane M. Ernst
* 12/31/1991
* USD 59,243.00

"Yardsticks" that measure the extent of reaction progress in hydrothermally
altered rocks have been documented in a suite of intrusive rocks from Rico,
Colorado. The degree of fission track partial annealing increases and the whole
rock oxygen isotope ratios decrease systematically as a function of proximity to
the system's heat source. The quantity of alteration products in the rocks
decrease going away from the heat source in the peripheral portions of the
district. Closer to the center of the system, reactant minerals are completely
reacted, but the mineralogy of the products varies spatially as a function of
position in the hydrothermal system. Compositions of product chlorite and
plagioclase are variable but not functionally with respect to distance from the
heat source. However, the degree of Al, Si order in the plagioclase varies with
the An value of the exchanged plagioclase. The research proposed here will use
the degree of partial annealing of the fission tracks in apatite and zircon to
set constraints on the duration of the hydrothermal system. Kinetic models of
mineral-mineral reactions and oxygen isotope exchange can be tested using the
different reaction progress yardsticks and the fission track chronology in the
Rico rocks. These data will provide a unique indication of applica- bility of
kinetic constraints to hydrothermal water-rock inter- action: one that provides
a real measure of time.