* 8903732
* Temporal and Spatial Geochemical Variations in Patagonian   Plateau Basalts: Implications for the Evolution of the      Continental Lithosphere
* NONE,NONE
* 06/15/1989,11/30/1991
* Robert Kay, Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* John L. Snyder
* 11/30/1991
* USD 148,500.00

Continental back-arcs and within-plate basaltic volcanic provinces provide a
view into the evolution of the mantle and lower crust beneath continents and the
mass flux of materials that are subducted, but not extracted by arc volcanism.
One of the largest of these continental basaltic provinces is the Patagonian
basalt field in southern South America which extends discontinuously for 1800
km. east of the Andes and in places almost reaches the Atlantic coast. Basaltic
volcanism ranges continuously in age from late Paleocene to Recent with activity
concentrated in different places at different times. The geographical
distribution of the basalts, their spectrum of ages, and their variable basement
make the Patagonian plateau an excellent place to examine the cause and effect
of varying tectonic conditions on the evolution of the basalts and more
indirectly, the crust and mantle. An understanding of the source region of both
arc and back-arc rocks is dependant on understanding which components change due
to variable tectonic conditions and which are the result of long term mantle and
crustal heterogeneities. This project is to examine temporal geochemical
variation (using major and trace element chemistry; Nd, Sr and Pb isotopes; and
some mineral chemistry) in two regions of the plateau. It complements the
detailed studies being done in the Andean arc and the more limited studies of
the late-Pliocene to Recent evolution of the plateau. ***//