* 8903125
* Studies on the Role of Zinc and Lipids in Sperm Longevity   (Biological Sciences)
* EDU,EES
* 01/01/1990,06/30/1993
* Elizabeth Crichton, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Lola E. Rogers
* 06/30/1993
* USD 190,150.00

This research will initiate studies on sperm plasma membrane lipids and continue
previous studies on the possible role of zinc in bat sperm longevity by pursuing
the effect on sperm of the removal of these substances. Dr. Crichton has
documented the presence of zinc in large quantities in sperm filled storage
organs and she hypothesizes that long lived bat sperm may be rendered
particularly resistant to prefertilization changes by inherent components that
perhaps are altered at ovulation as a function of either the environmental
milieu at the time, or as a programmed, time dependent result of their long stay
in the female tract. In separate experiments, she will remove cholesterol and
zinc from these cells in vitro, and test their viability and fertilizability by
examining the status of the acrosome and by recording their metabolism and their
ability to decondense within the ooplasm. The results of these studies should
yield information on the role of sperm-bound lipids and zinc in sperm longevity
in bats which, in turn, might answer questions on the regulatory mechanism of
sperm storage. The elucidation of the mechanisms underlying sperm storage in
bats holds a key to the answers of many questions in mammalian sperm biology.
The possibility of controlling sperm longevity would have significant
application to fertility and sterility problems in man and his agricultural
animals. Interactive activities include forming a Reproductive Biology journal
club, teaching a graduate course on the corpus luteum and participate in
teaching an Electron Microscopy course, a course in Gamete Biology and one in
Histology. In addition, Dr. Crichton will attend faculty meetings and present a
seminar. This project furthers VPW program objectives which are (1) to provide
opportunities for women to advance their careers in engineering and in the
disciplines of science supported by NSF and (2) to encourage women to pursue
careers in science and engineering by providing greater visibility for women
scientists and engineers employed in industry, government, and academic
institutions. By encouraging the participation of women in science, it is a
valuable investment in the Nation's future scientific vitality.