* 8903002
* Bacteriophage T4 DNA Polymerase Structure - Function Studies(Biological Sciences)
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/1989,12/31/1990
* Linda Reha-Krantz, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Lola E. Rogers
* 12/31/1990
* USD 119,527.00

The main goal of this research is to characterize DNA polymerase structure and
function in order to understand the molecular basis of DNA replication. The
bacteriophage T4 DNA polymerase is the model system for these studies.
Biochemical and genetic techniques are being used. Dr. Reha-Krantz will study
two regions of the phage T4 DNA polymerase that are critical for DNA polymerase
function; one region may be part of the nucleotide-binding site and the second
region may interact with nucleotides, DNA and/or this region may be part of the
DNA polymerase active site for phosphodiester bond formation. Enzyme
purification and characterization, protein chemistry and genetic engineering
techniques will be applied to these projects. This research will further our
understanding of how a DNA polymerase works and will, thus, be a significant
contribution to the field of DNA replication. The interactive activities include
teaching in the introductory Biochemistry course and lecturing at seminars in
the Department of Molecular Biophysics and Biochemistry. In addition, Dr. Reha-
Krantz will be an active participant in the lecture series and support groups
sponsored by the Yale Office for Women in Medicine. These meetings will provide
opportunities for interacting with graduate students, medical students,
postdoctoral fellows and faculty. She will also supervise a high school student
as part of the Minority High School Student Research Apprentice Program. This
project furthers VPW program objectives which are (1) to provide opportunities
for women to advance their careers in engineering and in the disciplines of
science supported by NSF and (2) to encourage women to pursue careers in science
and engineering by providing greater visibility for women scientists and
engineers employed in industry, government, and academic institutions. By
encouraging the participation of women in science, it is a valuable investment
in the Nation's future scientific vitality.