* 8903969
* Molecular Genetic Analysis of Substrate Partitioning by     Acetohydroxy Acid Synthases
* BIO,MCB
* 12/15/1989,05/31/1995
* Julius Jackson, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 05/31/1995
* USD 285,000.00

Fundamental questions addressed by this proposal relate to determining the basis
for the presence of multiple genetic loci which encode acetohydroxy acid
synthase (AHAS) activity in Escherichia coli. The AHAS reaction condenses two
moles of pyruvate to one mole of form 2-acetolactate (AL), and one mole of
pyruvate with one mole of 2-ketobutyrate to form one mole of 2-
aceto-2-hydroxybutyrate (AHB). AL and AHB are biosynthetic precursors to
L-valine and L-isoleucine. Isozymes of AHAS partition, or channel, pyruvate
carbons to AL or AHB according to a specific partitioning bias, in response to
2-ketobutyrate levels. The Distinct partitioning bias, measured by a constant R,
is a distinct property of an AHAS isozyme, and appears to be an important
determinant of survival under different conditions of nutrient supply. AHAS II
from two different alleles of ilvG, ilvG468 and ilvG474, differently partition
pyruvate carbons such that the R-values are significantly different. We propose
to determine the molecular basis for the difference in R-values, and to test
hypotheses about the mechanism(s) of pyruvate partitioning. By a molecular
genetic study of mutant alleles of ilvG, and steady state kinetic measurement,
of pyruvate partitioning by resultant allozymes of AHAS II, we propose to
identify structural domains which harbor amino acid residues that constitute the
active site(s) of AHAS II. By use of a computer program (PARCOR) developed for
this study, we have identified conserved structural domains common to AHAS
isozymes I, II and III. Spontaneous mutations in ilvG468 will be selected to
change the partitioning R-value to that of ilvG474, and alleles screened to
identify mutations that alter R-values without perturbation of local secondary
structure of resultant allozymes. Screens for structural changes will be
accomplished by use of the PARCOR program. Saturation mutagenesis of coding
regions for conserved structural domains will be done to seek all possible amino
acid changes that alter partitioning with out perturbing local protein
structure. Every ilvG allele will be tested for its ability singularly to
support growth of E. coli on a rich and poor carbon source. By these approaches
we expect to identify AHAS active site residues that are involved in
differential partitioning of pyruvate carbons.