* 8903643
* Genetics of Antigenic Variation of M Protein in Group A     Streptococci
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1989,02/28/1993
* Susan Hollingshead, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Continuing Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 02/28/1993
* USD 238,400.00

The emm gene of group A streptococci exhibits a unique type of molecular
evolution. One half of the gene is genetically diverse and the other half is
strictly conserved when different alleles of the gene are compared. The
divergent amino-terminal half of the gene is characterized by a series of tandem
repeats of 21 to 105 base pairs. The sequence and number of the repeat units are
sites of observed diversity. These sequence differences are translated into
antigenic differences in the M protein. To discover the molecular mechanisms of
emm genetic diversity, isogenic, antigenic variants will be isolated on the
basis of their immunological diversity. A simultaneous positive and negative
selection using two monoclonal antibodies that recognize different antigenic
determinants on the same M molecule will be used. The genetic changes will be
determined by sequence analysis. These findings will provide a measure of the
type(s) of gene changes that result in antigenic diversity. Protein fusions
which fuse the variable repeats into an easily selectable marker gene will be
constructed. The fusions will be used to measure recombination frequencies among
tandem repeats in both E. coli and group A streptococci, and to begin to
identify the enzymatic pathway leading to variation.