* 8903098
* Japan (STA) Postdoctoral Program:  Snowpack Structure       Data Set in Japan for Remote Sensing Snow Hydrology
* O/D,OISE
* 11/01/1989,04/30/1991
* Rand Decker, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 04/30/1991
* USD 4,050.00

This award will provide supplementary support to enable Dr. Rand Decker of the
University of Colorado to conduct collaborative research for six months with Dr.
Tsutomu Nakamura of the National Research Center for Disaster Prevention,
Institute of Snow and Ice Studies, Niigata, Japan. They will survey the state of
the art in ground based snow structure data collection techniques in Japan, and
examine methods and algorithms for microwave remote sensing of the water-
equivalent of snow. The considerable snowpack structure data that is available
in Japan will be incorporated into a data base for the snow hydrology research
community. Experiments on the interaction of microwave signals with snowpack
structures characteristic of various periods during the winter season will be
performed and correlated with the known properties of the snowpack. Remote
sensing of snowpack liquid content is not yet an independent experimental
technique since sensing data must be correlated with the grain size within the
snowpack in order to obtain usable information on liquid content. In addition,
both grain size and grain morphology of snowpack change over the course of a
winter. Dr. Decker's experience in the area of snow avalanche hazard forecasting
--which depends on snowpack structure--will complement the experience of the
collaborating laboratory in the development of techniques for determining liquid
content of the snowpack, from space.