* 8903143
* Inert-Transition Metal-Phosphate Complexes:  Synthesis,     Structure and Reactivity (Chemistry)
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/1989,08/31/1991
* Lourdes Torres, Emory University
* Continuing Grant
*   name not available
* 08/31/1991
* USD 91,497.00

A large part of the energy currency of living systems is stored in
phosphodiester bonds and released through metal-catalyzed phosphate hydrolysis.
Thus, it is of fundamental importance to understand the nature of metal-
phosphate bonding and the mechanism of metal-promoted phosphate hydrolysis.
Substitution inert transition metals such as Co and Rh are extremely valuable as
model systems of the biologically active metals which are too labile for
structural and mechanistic studies. Two key advantages of Rh(III) over Co(III)
are the following: Rh(III) complexes are extremely inert and should allow us to
isolate and characterize analogs of reaction intermediates which have been
proposed for the Co(III) systems. Second, Rh will provide important structural
and mechanistic information in NMR studies both by direct observation of the
103Rh nucleus and by coupling to other nuclei in the system. Dr. Torres will
synthesize, isolate and characterize Rh(III) complexes of the type Ä±RhLnPx!
where L=ligand P=phosphate with mono-, di-, and triphosphate ligands and with
nucleotides (ANP, GNP, CNP and UNP). She will elucidate the phosphate-metal
coordination and isolate and characterize key intermediates in the phosphate
hydrolysis reaction. Dr. Torres will lecture in the advanced inorganic and
bioinorganic chemistry courses and organize a symposium through the Chemistry
Department and the Women's Studies program of the Graduate Institute. Female
chemists from industry, government and academia will be invited to present their
research work to undergraduate students, and to discuss career opportunities and
choices for women in science. In addition, she will collaborate with the Women's
Section of the American Chemical Society in Atlanta in their youth (junior and
senior high school) activities program. This project furthers VPW program
objectives which are (1) to provide opportunities for women to advance their
careers in engineering and in the disciplines of science supported by NSF and
(2) to encourage women to pursue careers in science and engineering by providing
greater visibility for women scientists and engineers employed in industry,
government, and academic institutions. By encouraging the participation of women
in science, it is a valuable investment in the Nation's future scientific
vitality.