* 8903340
* Studies in Large-Scale Circulation and Wave Dynamics
* GEO,AGS
* 06/15/1989,11/30/1992
* Ka-Kit Tung, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 11/30/1992
* USD 232,960.00

Large-scale planetary waves and circulations in the extra- tropical atmosphere
are known to have important low-frequency variability, which affects weather and
climate. In this project, the emphasis will be on studying the various
mechanisms that can possibly couple the tropics to the extra-tropics and their
role in affecting the year-to-year changes in the extra-tropical circulation and
wave dynamics. The existence of the phenomenon of extra-tropical Quasi- Biennial
Oscillation provides a focus for this theoretical study. Newly available
observational analyses on this phenomenon also provide critical checks on the
relevance of the proposed mechanisms of tropical-extra-tropical coupling. The
approach will be one of hypothesis testing. Several essentially two- dimensional
and some three-dimensional mechanisms have been proposed so far: through induced
change in the mean meridional circulation (Hadley and Brewer-Dobson
circulations), through transport of tropical perturbations by the preexisting
circulation, and through modulations in the wave guide for planetary waves in
the extra-tropics. The relevance of each will be tested with mechanistic model
studies and by critically comparing the model results with available
observation. This research is an important component of the basic theoretical
studies required as an underpining for the development of prediction models for
low frequency weather and climate phenomena.