* 8903222
* Whole Earth Mantle Conductivity
* GEO,EAR
* 12/15/1989,11/30/1992
* Steven Constable, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Michael A. Mayhew
* 11/30/1992
* USD 89,926.00

A comprehensive study of mantle electrical conductivity will be carried out
using both new and already published response functions. The work will bring
together response functions for a variety of sources for combined
interpretation, thereby obtaining the best possible spatial and frequency
coverage. In the frequency bands where there are few data the PIs will
supplement these response functions with new ones estimated from magnetic
observatory data and from very long period MT data. Various new techniques for
inverting geomagnetic data have been developed over the past few years,
including the D+ existence algorithm, the funnel function approach, and the
finding of smooth models through regularization of non-linear inverse problems.
The PIs will apply these in a systematic way to the global response function
collection to model mantle conductivity for the whole Earth. Extensions to the
regularization approach will allow them to test various hypotheses about mantle
conductivity structure; e.g. Is a jump in conductivity at the 670km seismic
discontinuity consistent with or required by the data? Is there a depth below
which lateral heterogeneity in conductivity is not required by the data? The
answers to such questions may provide valuable insight into the physics of the
Earth's interior.