* 8903522
* Dinoflagellate-Small Acritarch stratigraphy of the Campanian-Danian Interval and Organic Facies Evidence of Sea Level   Change
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/1989,02/29/1992
* Daniel Habib, CUNY Queens College
* Continuing Grant
* Felicia Fauntleroy
* 02/29/1992
* USD 81,973.00

Study of the stratigraphy of dinoflagellate and small acritarch species in
sediments of Campanian, Maestrichtian and early Danian ages is proposed for
sections occurring in outcropin the U.S. Coastal Plain Province and in cored
ocean basinsections available from the Deep Sea Drilling Project/OceanDrilling
Program. The purpose is to stratigraphically date this interval, to prepare
dinoflagellate and acritarch zonations which can be connected to those
previously published for the olderretaceous and to determine the nature of the
dinocyst record at the Cretaceous/Tertiary (K/T) boundary. It will be necessary
to calibrate the dinoflagellate-acritarch stratigraphy byinvestigating sections
on land, e.g. sections at Braggs, Alabama, and in the ocean basins, e.g.
sections at D.S.D.P. Site 577, for which there is established independent and
concordant-multidisciplinary evidence of age provided by polarity
reversalmagnetostratigraphy, chemostratigraphy (iridium, Carbon-13), and the
biostratigraphy of calcareous fossils. Previous study of wells in the Atlantic
Coastal Plain (Late Cretaceous) and in the Utah/Wyoming Overthrust Belt (Middle
Jurassic) suggests that dinoflagellate species abundance andpalynologically-
defined organic facies reflect episodes oftransgression and regression. Evidence
of transgression indifferent lithological settings is indicated by a
multipleoccurrence of biostratigraphic datums (FAD, LAD) which is succeeded by
an interval of amorphous debris and increased number of dinoflagellate species.
Regression is characterized by fewer dinoflagellate species in an organic matrix
of landplantdetritus. Investigation of outcrops and wells of the easternU.S.
Coastal Plain will provide a test of the palynologicalevidence. Study of sites
in the adjacent western North Atlantic will test the palynological evidence of
sea level change in thedeep sea facies.