* 8903792
* Paleoecology and Depositional Setting of a Marine-to- Terrestrial Transition: The Hamilton Lagerstatte (Pennsylvanian:Virgilian), Kansas
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1989,06/30/1992
* Hans-Peter Schultze, University of Kansas Main Campus
* Continuing grant
* John A. Maccini
* 06/30/1992
* USD 98,989.00

The Hamilton fossil deposit is a unique Pennsylvanian locality with a rich
diversity of marine-to-terrestrial vertebrate, invertebrate and plant fossils.
PI's will study (1) composition, phylogenetic implications and taphonomy of
fauna and flora and (2) sedimentology, carbonate petrology and structural
setting of the limestone in order to determine the overall paleoecology and
depositional setting of the deposit. Mapping, coring, genetic microstratigraphy
and sedimentology will give sediment-body geometry and precise
lithostratigraphic correlation. Composition of the biota of different horizons
will be studied to reveal community structure. Because many of the organisms
present in the Hamilton deposit either are primitive stem groups or preserved
embryos, the phylogenetic implications of this study are numerous and important.
Taphonomic investigation will give additional information about the condition of
the depositional environment and transport of biota. Results of the different
studies will be integrated into a reconstruction of the paleoecology and
paleoenvironment of the Hamilton area during deposition of this unique facies.
Ultimately, we will compare the Hamilton deposit to other deposits that bear
well-preserved fossils.