* 8903119
* Numerical Modelling of Complex Flows with Heat Transfer,    Award in Indian Currency
* O/D,OISE
* 01/15/1989,12/31/1992
* K Seetharamu, Indian Institute of Technology Madras
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 12/31/1992
* USD 124,202.00

Description: This project supports participation by ten U.S. scientists in a
symposium on "Mechanistic Aspects of Biological Oxidation Reactions" to be held
at the Indian Institute of Science (IISc), Bangalore, India in October, 1989.
The U.S. team leader is Dr. C. Channa Reddy, Department of Chemistry,
Pennsylvania State University. The Indian co-organizer is Dr. K.M. Madyasth,
Department of Organic Chemistry at IISc. The symposium is planned to exchange
information and results of recent research on the various enzyme catalyzed
reactions of oxygen and those of its reduction products. Enzymes catalyzing
reactions of Oxygen and Hydrogen Peroxide are wide-spread in nature and are
responsible for a variety of reactions and metabolic pathways, and are therefore
important for commercial applications. The meeting will address questions such
as the common structural and mechanistic features that allow enzymes with
different requirements to carry out virtually identical reactions, the exact
structures of important intermediates in various enzyme oxidations, and the
characteristics of individual enzymes that allow the formation and stabilization
of highly active intermediates. The proceedings of the workshop are expected to
be published by Academic Press. Scope: The Indian organizers at the Indian
Institute of Science are highly regarded scientists. They have the backing of
the Indian Government and the State Government as well as support from Industry.
The Indian organizers are covering all the local costs for the U.S. participants
who are leading researchers in the field. It is expected that the symposium will
benefit U.S. and Indian participants and open avenues for future collaboration.