* 8903227
* Dissertation Research:  Early State Expansion in the        Osmore Valley
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/1989,10/31/1990
* NONE NONE, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 10/31/1990
* USD 10,000.00

Mr. Bruce Owen, a graduate student at the University of California, Los
Angeles, will conduct excavations at two archaeological sites located in the
lower Osmore valley in southern Peru. The sites, El Algodonal and Loreto Viejo,
were, on the basis of preliminary work, occupied between 300 and 1200 A.D. and
relate to the expansion of the Tiwanaku empire. The massive site of Tiwanaku is
located in the Bolivian highlands, and its influence extended far to the North
into Peru. Archaeologists wish to understand how expansion occurred and how
outlying colonies, such as those in the lower Osmore valley, wereintegrated with
the core area. Such an examination will shed light on how the empire functioned.
Mr. Owen will conduct surface surveys at both sites. With the information thus
obtained, areas will be selected for careful excavation. Data collected will
allow reconstruction of the social organization of both groups. The extent of
status differential, for example, will be determined. The economic basis of the
communities will also be reconstructed and trade relations with the parent
colony of Tiwanaku examined. Analysis of skeletal material will permit insight
into the relationship between colonists and the local population. Because the
Andes Mountains come close to the sea, this area of South America consists of
narrow ecological zones which differ greatly in resources available. Because
foodstuffs are really limited, early empires were forced to devise complex
strategies to both produce and redistribute goods and these can be discerned in
the archaeological record. Thus, they can provide insight into how these empires
functioned. Mr. Owen's research will contribute to this goal. The research is
important because it will increase understanding of the emergence of complex
societies such as our own. It will also facilitate the training of a highly
competent, young scientist.