* 8903703
* The Interactions of Energetic Particles with the Solar      Wind - A Theoretical Study
* GEO,AGS
* 05/15/1989,10/31/1992
* Martin Lee, University of New Hampshire
* Continuing Grant
* Sherry O. Farwell
* 10/31/1992
* USD 208,514.00

This grant will fund theoretical studies of the interaction of energetic
particles with the solar wind. The studies will be broad-based: they will
emphasize shock-accelerated particles and pickup ions but will include galactic
cosmic rays, solar flare particles and the cosmic comparisons between theory and
observations, and the microprocesses of the interaction including wave
excitation by the energetic particles and the quasilinear and nonlinear
interaction between the waves and particles. Specific topics of research are,
for example: (1) Shock-accelerated ion distributions at energies just above
injection. (2) The mechanism which limits diffuse ion energy spectra at Earth's
bow shock to exponential in energy per charge, and a search for the effects of
curvature and gradient drifts on the spectra. (3) The acceleration of solar
flare ions at coronal shocks including shock evolution and ion wave excitation.
(4) Wave excitation in the solar wind by interstellar pickup hydrogen including
wave coupling between outward and inward propagating waves. (5) Fundamental
studies in the quasilinear evolution of pickup ions upstream of comets. (6)
Galactic cosmic ray modulation in the outer heliosphere. The overall aim is to
use energetic particles as probes of the electromagnetic environment of the
earth and the sun.