* 8903050
* Japan Medium-term Visit: Ionosphere Studies with the Middle and Upper Atmosphere (MU) Radar
* O/D,OISE
* 07/15/1989,09/30/1990
* William Oliver, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Charles Wallace
* 09/30/1990
* USD 11,850.00

This award will support Dr. William L. Oliver of Boston University in a
collaboration for three months with Prof. Susumu Kato and co- workers at the
Radio Atmospheric Science Center of Kyoto University, Japan. They will use the
Middle and Upper Atmosphere (MU) Radar at Shigaraki, Japan, and in particular
its capability for ionospheric incoherent scatter studies, to 1) improve the
statistical accuracy of the electrodynamics model by increasing the available
data base; 2) develop a new model for velocity motion parallel to the magnetic
field to study neutral-wind patterns; 3) use Doppler velocity as well as multi-
beam density measurements to study ionospheric traveling waves; and 4) correlate
current and past MU radar experiments with results of similar experiments
conducted elsewhere. Understanding the behavior of the upper atmosphere in
response to solar and particle inputs is one part of the overall problem of
modeling changes in the total global atmosphere. The incoherent scatter radar
technique provides data on the electrons, ions and neutral densities of the
upper atmosphere and how these quantities change with various types of energy
inputs. This project will permit Dr. Oliver to continue a study of the
incoherent scatter radar data from the MU Radar at Shigaraki. The studies will
take advantage of the increased data base to investigate seasonal and solar-
cycle dependence of the electrodynamics of the ionosphere in relation to current
models; study the vertical ion motions due to neutral winds; look for the
influence of geomagnetic activity on the ionosphere; and compare the data from
this station with other data taken throughout the world over the same time
periods. The previous collaborative program initiated by this principal
investigator has already increased the interaction between the Japanese and the
rest of the world's incoherent scatter radar scientific community and this
current project will strengthen and increase this activity.