* 8903870
* Paleolimnology/Climatology of New York State Finger Lakes:  Phase II - Deep Lake Drilling
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/1989,12/31/1992
* Henry Mullins, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 12/31/1992
* USD 127,937.00

The Finger Lakes of Central New York State have long been considered one of the
world's great testimonies to continental glaciation. During Phase I of this
research project we were able to, for the first time, document the extent of
bedrock erosion beneath the lakes as well as the nature of the sediment fill via
seismic reflection profiling. We discovered that the lake valleys have been
eroded to as much as 304 m below sea level and contain an unusually thick (up to
275 m) and apparently complete sediment record ( &lt; 14 Ka) of Laurentide ice
sheet deglaciation and post-glacial history. The purpose of this proposal is to
request continuing support for a deep-lake drillcore. In addition to calibrating
our seismic stratigraphic framework, the primary scientific objectives include:
(1) establishment of a high-resolution paleoclimatic record for the past 14 Ka;
(2) provide in situ "ground truth" for various models of Laurentide ice sheet
deglaciation; and, (3) test various hypotheses for the origin and evolution of
the Finger Lakes. Our approach to sediment analysis will be both comprehensive
and multidisciplinary involving lithostratigraphy, chronostratigraphy,
biostratigraphy, physical properties and chemostratigraphy. On a global basis,
the scientific value of long drillcores form large lakes has just recently been
realized and the proposed Finger Lake drillcore will add to a growing global
database on lacustrine sequences.