* 8903787
* Genome-Linked Protein Database of Escherichia coli
* BIO,MCB
* 12/01/1989,11/30/1993
* Frederick Neidhardt, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 11/30/1993
* USD 435,000.00

Two-dimensional gel electrophoresis can resolve virtually all of the individual
proteins of a living cell, making construction of a total protein database for a
given cell a realistic goal. Such a database should trace each protein to its
structural gene and account for every structural gene of the cell. We will
continue construction of a two-dimensional map of the proteins encoded by the
bacterium Escherichia coli using gel electrophoresis in two new approaches. In
the first, the novel transcription system of phage T7 will be used to express
the genes on an ordered set of cloned chromosomal DNA segments spanning the E.
coli genome (the Kohara library). The cloned segments will be individually
spliced into an expression vector containing the T7 promoter, and expressed in a
cell containing an IPTG-inducible T7 RNA polymerase gene. The coordinates
marking the location of the expressed radioactive proteins in a standard gel
system will be recorded. The second, complementary approach will utilize the
increasing amount of DNA sequence information for E. coli to identify putative
genes as ORFs (open reading frames) and to predict the location on gels of their
potential polypeptide products, with amino acid composition helping verify the
identification. The data gathered by these new approaches will be combined with
the current E. coli gene-protein index and assembled in electronic form for
integration with the overall database being developed by a consortium of E. coli
laboratories.