* 8903472
* Mathematical Sciences: Equivariant Index Theory on          Non-Compact Manifolds
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1989,12/31/1991
* Jeffrey Fox, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* William Y. Velez
* 12/31/1991
* USD 47,283.00

Professor Fox's project is concerned in about equal measure with index theory
for differential operators and with the representation theory of Lie groups. The
former subject may be thought of as a far-reaching outgrowth of calculus on
manifolds (surfaces and their higher-dimensional analogues). The basic
operations of calculus, differentiation and integration, are in this setting
packaged together in the form of pseudodifferential operators. These operators,
which are defined in terms of the geometry of the manifold (distance, curvature,
and the like on a local scale), turn out to yield information about its topology
(overall shape and conformation). Lie groups, the other area of investigation,
arise in many mathematical situations as groups of symmetries. An example (not
quite apt in the present context because it happens to be compact) is the group
of rotations of a sphere, where the group operation consists of following one
motion by another. Knowledge of this particular group is very helpful whenever
spherical symmetry is present, and the representation theory of Lie groups
generally may be regarded as the systematic study of symmetry. These two main
aspects of Fox's project are closely interwoven in that much of the index theory
to be pursued is equivariant with respect to some (not necessarily compact) Lie
group acting on a manifold. Kasparov's representation ring for non-compact
groups is a focus of interest. Index formulas for Dirac-type geometric operators
invariant under group actions will be sought, as will an extension of the
calculus of asymptotic pseudodifferential operators to non-compact manifolds.
Some of this work bears on a mathematical model of the quantum Hall effect in
physics.