* 8903038
* Infrared-Loud Quasars and Other High-Luminosity Galaxies    (Astronomy)
* EDU,EES
* 07/15/1989,12/31/1990
* Susan Kleinmann, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Lola E. Rogers
* 12/31/1990
* USD 137,774.00

This research will continue examination of the infrared properties of quasars
and other infrared-luminous galaxies. Among the questions to be addressed are
(1) do infrared-bright quasars represent a significant increase in number, or
extension in physical properties, to the quasars found by optical and other
classes of galaxies which rival them in luminosity. The pace of the research at
the Center for Astrophysics will be greatly accelerated due to Dr. Kleinmann's
access to a large body of relevant observational data on the galaxies and
quasars of interest. Interactive activities will include an upper-level seminar
on the career and contributions of Cecilia Payne-Gaposchkin. It will exploit
access to original research materials used by Payne-Gaposchkin at Harvard
College Observatory. Additional interactions with staff and students will
include lectures on other topics of current research by Dr. Kleinmann. This
project furthers VPW program objectives which are (1) to provide opportunities
for women to advance their careers in engineering and in the disciplines of
science supported by NSF and (2) to encourage women to pursue careers in science
and engineering by providing greater visibility for women scientists and
engineers employed in industry, government, and academic institutions. By
encouraging the participation of women in science, it is a valuable investment
in the Nation's future scientific vitality.