* 8903007
* Mathematical Sciences: Overdetermined Systems Defined by    Complex Vector Fields
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1989,06/30/1993
* Francois Treves, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 06/30/1993
* USD 146,725.00

8903007 Treves Several factors contribute to the close connections which have
evolved between the mathematical fields of several complex variables and partial
differential equations. One certainly, was the discovery by Hans Lewy in 1957 of
a simple, linear partial differential equation of first order which had no
solutions whatsoever. The key to the example was the use of complex rather than
real-valued coefficients. Part of the continuing work carried out in this
project belongs to a long-term project to explain and understand this
phenomenon. The context of the research is that of systems of complex vector
fields representing overdetermined systems of partial differential equations.
One says that such a system represents a differential complex. An algebraic
characteristic of complexes is a quantity called the cohomology. Actually there
are levels of cohomology; the one of interest here is the p-th cohomology. It is
of interest because there is strong evidence to suggest that the vanishing of
the p-th cohomology is related to the triviality of the homology, in dimension
p-1, of the level sets of the solutions to the associated partial differential
equations. A systematic study of this relationship is planned. A second line of
investigation will be concerned with obstructions to local solvability of
differential equations through the application of homotopy methods. Recent
advances in this area indicate that homotopy formulas can be used on certain
important differential operators even when the underlying domains do not satisfy
even weak pseudo-convexity conditions on the boundary.