* 8903317
* Mathematical Sciences: Operator Algebras and Operator Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/1989,11/30/1991
* Roger Smith, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* William Y. Velez
* 11/30/1991
* USD 107,814.00

The mathematical research project of Professors Larson and Smith concerns
algebras of operators on Hilbert space and also on more general Banach spaces.
Part of this work will focus on operator algebras that come from lattices of
subspaces or projections, in particular on the question of when two such are
conjugate by an invertible transformation. The property of relexivity for such
algebras will also be studied. The latter consideration makes contact with
single operator theory. Structural properties of operator algebras and of maps
between them will be investigated. Of especial interest here are notions like
complete boundedness that relate to tensoring with matrix algebras of
arbitrarily high dimension. The operators that lie at the heart of this project
may be thought of as a species of enriched numbers. They obey the same laws of
arithmetic as numbers with two notable exceptions, namely that the result of
multiplication depends on the order in which the factors are taken, and not
every nonzero operator has an inverse. Mathematical analysis knows only two
number systems, the real and complex, but there is an immense variety of
operator algebras. Situations unsuitable for numerical representation can often
be represented in some fashion by operator algebras, thanks to the greater
degree of flexibility available with the latter. The price for this is that
understanding the structure and classification of operator algebras requires
considerable effort, as for instance the work to be undertaken in this project.