* 8903615
* Comparative Gastrointestinal and Renal Transport Physiology of Crustaceans
* BIO,IOS
* 10/15/1989,09/30/1992
* Gregory Ahearn, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Sharon Emerson
* 09/30/1992
* USD 260,989.00

This 3-year research program is a continuation of a previous study dealing with
the elucidation of the absorptive and secretory functions of the crustacean
gastrointestinal tract and kidneys. Many crustacean species are undergoing
extensive aquaculture throughout the world. One of the major problems with the
successful rearing of these animals from egg to market is providing a cost-
effective diet that leads to rapid growth. Prior to the initiation of this
research program, little was known about the absorptive functions of the
crustacean gut and therefore few recommendations could be made concerning the
nature of an artificial diet to provide cultured animals. Previous work has used
a variety of in vitro techniques to study the various organs of the
gastrointestinal tract of these animals to obtain an understanding of how
nutrients, minerals, and water are absorbed during normal digestive processes.
The present proposal will extend earlier studies by characterizing nutrient
transport mechanisms in the major absorptive organ of these animals, the
hepatopancreas. Biochemical isolation techniques will be employed to purify gut
transporting membranes that bring about the uptake of dietary components to
study the characteristics of these uptake processes for comparison with more
thoroughly investigated systems in mammals. In addition, cultured cell
preparations of the absorbing organs will be used to quantify rates of
transcellular absorption of sugars, amino acids, and other important dietary
compounds in these animals. The second goal in this research program is to study
the processes of nutrient reabsorption by the crustacean kidneys to establish
their roles in metabolite conservation. In mammals nutrients in the blood are
filtered and selectively reabsorbed back to the blood by the kidneys and in this
way potential toxins can be excreted and important nutrients conserved. Whether
the same processes occur in the invertebrates as well as defining the
characteristics of reabsorptive processes will be examined. Similar membrane
isolation and purification techniques and cell culture studies will be employed
with kidney cells as will be associated with the gut organs discussed above.
This 3-year study will provide a better understanding of how the gut and kidneys
of an economically important group of invertebrates contribute to organismic
growth. Important basic scientific information about cell physiology will be
forthcoming from these studies, as well as potential useful applied results that
may aid in the successful rearing of these animals under controlled conditions.