* 8903076
* Mathematical Sciences: Research in Scattering Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1989,12/31/1991
* Ralph Phillips, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 12/31/1991
* USD 76,161.00

The goal of this mathematical research is to understand a partial differential
operator, the Laplace-Beltrami operator, defined on compact two-dimensional
manifolds. The central role of this operator lies in its geometric significance,
or rather, the geometric significance of the associated Dirichlet boundary
problem. The differential operator is determined not by the manifold alone, but
by the manifold equipped with a specific metric. If the metric is changed, so
will the operator and then (possibly) the spectrum. A collection of metrics all
giving rise to the same spectrum is called an isospectral set. This work is
concerned with the problem of showing that isospectral sets are finite. Progress
on this question has been encouraging. While finiteness is still to be
established (or negated), recent results have determined that the isospectral
sets are compact. In all cases the main tool is a function, the logarithm of the
determinant of the differential operator, which is called the height of the
metric. What is needed at this stage of the investigation is some form of
rigidity theorem for manifolds. There are a number of deep results of this type,
but they all fall short of the type needed for this investigation - suggesting
that the final resolution is going to be difficult. Another direction this work
will take concerns Riemannian manifolds of infinite volume. The Laplacian may
have continuous spectrum. Two immediate goals under consideration are that of
establishing a Hodge theory for k-forms and the appearance of point spectra
embedded in the continuous spectrum. Under fairly general conditions for the two
particle Schroedinger operator, this cannot happen. However, for the helium
atom, there are such occurrences and the extent of the corresponding
eigenfunctions is not well understood.