* 8903912
* Deformation of Continental Lithosphere Subject to           Asthenospheric Drag Forces
* GEO,EAR
* 10/15/1989,09/30/1992
* Richard O'Connell, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Michael A. Mayhew
* 09/30/1992
* USD 118,235.00

The PIs will study the effects of asthenospheric flow on continental
deformation. The models to be used are extensions of thin viscous sheet models
that have been used before to study continental compression and thickening in
Tibet and crustal extension in the Aegean, which now include the effects of
shear tractions on the base of the lithosphere that may arise from flow in the
asthenosphere. The effects of these has been illustrated by some simple
analytical models of subduction under S. America, shere the descending plate
induces flow that exerts tractions on the base of the lithosphere; these results
indicate that the effect may be important, and may provide a mechanism that
could lead to embayments of the coastline (as in Peru) and a broad zone of
crustal thickening (the Altiplano), both associated with a steeper angle of
subduction, as is observed. The work will use a more complete model to
investigate this, utilizing a finite element code similar that used in previous
work. The PIs will also study the deformation of Tibet, and investigate whether
asthenospheric flow associated with large scale plate motions can account for
the asymmetry of the crustal thickening and the extension towards the northeast
that is observed. The work will provide a foundation for understanding the role
of sublithospheric tractions in continental deformation in other environments.