* 8903631
* Geologic Modeling of Spatial Variability in Sedimentary     Environments for Groundwater Transport Simulation
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/1989,11/30/1991
* Steven Gorelick, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 11/30/1991
* USD 118,608.00

Spatial variability of geologic media, and consequently of media properties, is
of key concern in ground-water transport studies, yet important information
about geologic processes governing the creation of aquifer architecture has not
been incorporated into hydrogeologic models. In previous modelling approaches,
spatially variable aquifer properties have been inferred from the statistical
characteristics of a few measured data or an assumed spatial covariance model.
Typically there is a neglect of interpretive geological information, even when
it is readily available. It is unlikely that existing (spatial) statistical
models capture many of the essential elements of actual aquifer systems and may
in fact produce a geologically "impossible" subsurface architecture. Therefore,
we propose to replace the traditional stochastic simulation approach with a
physically-based approach based upon synthesized geology which is generated by a
sedimentary process model. We will explicitly consider the geologic processes
which control aquifer evolution and which result in heterogeneity of aquifer
properties. This approach combines sedimentary processes simulation,
petrophysics, geostatistics, and groundwater modelling. We plan to use
simulation to generate a three-dimensional synthetic aquifer (geometry and
sedimentary geology), transform the geologic information at a very fine scale
(i.e., centimeters) into aquifer hydraulic properties, and simulate three-
dimensional groundwater transport using large scale numerical flow simulation
and particle tracking. We plan to compare the geologic-processes oriented
approach with the traditional stochastic/statistical approach to groundwater
flow simulation. Our approach will be tested on a complex field area (Santa
Clara Valley, CA) as well as applied to hypothetical aquifer systems
representing a variety of sedimentary environments.