* 8903477
* Magma Sources and Petrogenetic Processes in Continental     Arcs:  The Southern Volcanic Zone of the Andes
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/1989,01/31/1993
* Frederick Frey, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* John L. Snyder
* 01/31/1993
* USD 183,660.00

Continental arc magmatism reflects a major process in plate tectonics, the
convergence of oceanic and continental plates. The subduction of an oceanic
plate beneath a continental plate results in creation of new continental crust
and incorporation of crustal material into the convecting mantle. These are
important processes that need to be understood in detail in order to understand
the evolution of the earth. Andean volcanoes reflect the active subduction of
the oceanic Nazca plate beneath the South American plate. In the Southern
Volcanic Zone (SVZ) of the Andes, from 33o-42oS, there are major along-strike
geologic changes; e.g., from north to south there are decreases in the age of
the subducted crust and continental crust thickness. Concurrently, along and
across strike of the Main Cordillera the lavas vary systematically in
composition (major and trace element abundance, radiogenic isotope ratios).
There are several alternative explanations of these geochemical trends. The
P.I.'s previous and proposed studies have the objective of understanding the
origin and evolution of volcanism in this region; specifically, to define the
relative importance of components from the subducted crust, asthenosphere,
lithosphere and continental crust to the arc magmas, and to determine the
importance of variations in degree of melting, subsequent melt- solid
segregation, magma mixing and crustal assimilation. To do this phenocryst phase
compositions plus whole-rock major and trace element abundances and isotopic
ratios (0, Sr, Nd, Pb) will be used. To date emphasis has been on
stratovolcanoes on or near the volcanic front of the SVZ. This project will
focus on recent basaltic lavas erupted 50 to 200 km east of the volcanic front.
Because these back (retro) arc lavas are less evolved than volcanic front lavas,
their geochemical characteristics more directly reflect source compositions
(especially, important is the possibility of determining geochemical
characteristics of continental mantle lithosphere) and mantle processes. In
addition, along the volcanic front near a single stratovolcano (Villarrica),
significant geochemical differences between lavas erupted from the stratovolcano
and several surrounding (satellite), small basaltic cones have been found. These
differences can be interpreted as reflecting much less crustal contamination in
the satellite cone lavas, or the influence of source heterogeneities which are
averaged out in long-lived magma chambers beneath the stratovolcano. These are
important and very different alternative interpretations. To test the generality
of results near the Villarrica stratovolcano and to distinguish between these
interpretations, satellite cone lavas associated with other stratovolcanoes in
the SVZ will be studied. ***//