* 8903950
* Federation of American Societies for Experimental Biology   Summer Research Conference:  Molecular Neurogenetics;       Saxton's River, Vermont; August 13-18, 1989
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1989,07/31/1990
* J. Gregor Sutcliffe, Federation of Amer Societies For Exper Biology
* Standard Grant
* Stacy Springer
* 07/31/1990
* USD 2,000.00

One of the remarkable scientific trends during the 1980's has been the
convergent movements of molecular biologists to pursue questions of neuroscience
and of neuroscientists to pursue questions of gene structure and regulation. The
increased interactions of these two groups of researchers promises to be
particularly important in elucidating the molecular bases of neural function and
the genetic bases of human neurological and neuropsychiatric disorders. The
basis for future therapeutic products will depend upon gene-based molecular
pharmacology to produce molecular assays for neural protein systems, upon gene-
based discovery of new neural systems, and upon engineered (transgenic) animal
genetic models for human diseases. Already we are aware of our increased power
to identify important neural genes in which defects may lead to recognized
deficits in behavior or neuronal fitness. In the last few years, researchers
have made progress in understanding genetic predisposition to Huntington's
disease, muscular dystrophy, retinal degeneration, schizophrenia and manic
depression. Molecular and mechanistic understanding should closely follow.
Molecular genetic technologies have been used to describe the neuronal receptors
that are targets for several important pharmaceutical compounds. These
descriptions are leading to more precise assays for receptor function while
providing explicit structures for molecular modeling. This MOLECULAR
NEUROGENETICS conference will cover these topics by combining presentations
about vertebrates and invertebrates, cell linages and cell interactions, cell
biology, pharmacology, electrophysiology, biochemistry, and descriptions of the
genetics underlying several neuropathologies.