* 8903160
* Nonlinear Adaptive Control Theory Applied for Chemical      Process Control
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1989,01/31/1993
* Erik Ydstie, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing grant
* Maria Burka
* 01/31/1993
* USD 159,479.00

Significant improvements in the performance and the reliability of chemical
process control systems can be achieved by implementing control strategies the
compensate for the interaction between process variables. The objective of this
research is to demonstrate that stability and passive operator theory (passivity
in this sense refers to the preserving of a property--for example, in all such
processes mass is conserved) can be used for motivate and develop nonlinear
adaptive controllers for difficult process control problems like polymer and
heterogeneous azeotropic distillation systems. The PI plans to investigate and
develop an alternative approach to nonlinear process control, an approach that
is motivated by physical considerations and exploits a passivity property of
thermodynamically closed systems. This property is generic since chemical
proceses are modelled by energy and material conservation relationships.
Examples of passsive systems include exothermic reactors, heat exchangers,
distillation columns and plug flow reactors. A continuous stirred task reactor
(CSTR), a plymer reactor and a heterogeneous azeotropic distillation process
will be used to illustrate the applicability of the proposed approach. Two
topics will be addressed. The first is how to use stability theory to select a
feasible combination of measured and manipulated variables. This problem is
referred to as the nonlinear structure problem. The second problem to be
addressed is the design of adaptive controllers for nonlinear processes that
have uncertain and/or completely unknown parameters. This is the transient
robustness problem. The result will be used to define feedfoward signals. Due to
its simplicity and generality this research may also have a significant impact
on the teaching of process control.