* 8903146
* Research on Real-Time Decision Making:  The RALPH Project
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/1989,07/31/1992
* Stuart Russell, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Su-Shing Chen
* 07/31/1992
* USD 302,014.00

The objective of the proposed research is to understand the effect of limited
computational resources on the design of optimal decision making sytems, so as
to be able to build agents that are robust in the face of complexity, and
capable of acting in real time. The theoretical phase involves the completion of
a normative theory for reasoning about computations. The approach is to treat
computations as actions, with outcomes of varying probabilities and utilities
using decision theory to choose between them. The theory will be incorporated in
a multilevel decision theoretic architecture, which extends the idea of explicit
metalevel reasoning to cover recursively all aspects of the decision making
process. The approach has been applied successfully to game playing systems, and
will be modified to apply to single agent problems such as robot motion
planning. However, metalevel reasoning to often expensive, and the cost can only
be amortized over future problem solving if a compilation mechanism is
available. The investigator will therefore study methods for compilation of
reasoning processes occuring anywhere in the hierarchy. He will extend
explanation based learning techniques to cover the case of choosing best
actions, where probabilistic time accuracy tradeoffs play a significant role.