* 8903012
* Mathematical Sciences: Invariant Manifolds and Attracting Sets of Nonlinear Partial Differential Equations
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1989,06/30/1991
* Bjorn Birnir, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing grant
* John V. Ryff
* 06/30/1991
* USD 39,165.00

The central theme of this mathematical research project is the analysis of
nonlinear partial differential equations. Particular emphasis will be placed on
extending methods which describe invariant manifolds and attracting sets of
perturbations of integrable nonlinear equations to the case of higher
dimensional semilinear differential equations. Work will also be done in
developing methods for determining global coordinates that best describe the
finite dimensional attracting sets. Application of these investigations to
problems of physical importance include studies of the damped and driven sine-
Gordon equation describing the Josephson junction and the analysis of a system
of Euler-Raleigh-Plesset equations describing a cloud of gas bubbles in liquid.
Additional work includes studies of perturbations that change the spatial
structure of the perturbed equations; in particular the question of existence of
breather solutions to these equations will be taken up. The bearing these
answers have on the symplectic geometry of the phase space containing the
solutions will also be considered. Long term objectives of this research include
the application of bifurcation techniques developed in the study of perturbed
integrable differential equations to improved understanding of general fluid
equations.***