* 8903506
* ROA: Morphometric and Phylogenetic Investigations of the    Paleozoic Order Cryptostomata (Bryozoa:  Stenolaemata)
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/1989,12/31/1990
* Daniel Blake, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 12/31/1990
* USD 65,510.00

Cryptostome bryozoans were colonial organisms that abounded in the world's
oceans during the Paleozoic Era, and they left a significant fossil record in
limestones of that age. Dr. Daniel Blake proposes to use state-of-the-art
approaches to the analysis of shape and shape change in a study of their
diversity and evolution through time. Microcomputer-based image analysis
equipment will be used to quantify organic shape at the level of individual
organisms and whole colonies, allowing novel insight into patterns of growth. In
addition, Dr. Blake will be the first to use series of two-dimensional images of
bryozoan colonies to reconstruct and manipulate three-dimensional structures,
from which new details of morphology can be drawn. These new classes of
morphometric data will form the basis of systematic revisions, and an analysis
of evolutionary relationships within the Cryptostomata and among the other
Paleozoic orders of bryozoans. The proposed research will clarify our
understanding of an important group of extinct invertebrates, and will produce a
more consistent and objective basis on which more theoretical studies of
evolution and extinction can rest. The proposed methods will break new ground,
and will set a new standard for systematic and evolutionary studies of fossil
bryozoans.