* 8903731
* Molecular Analysis of Terminal Chromosome Deficiencies
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/1989,06/30/1992
* Harald Biessmann, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 06/30/1992
* USD 318,535.00

Telomeres are specialized structures at the ends of eukaryotic chromosomes
essential for the stable maintenance and complete replication of chromosome
ends. Broken chromosomes lacking telomeres are quite unstable, and a broken
chromatid end may fuse after replication to its sister chromatid broken end.
However, under some conditions, broken chromosomes can be "healed" and recover
as terminal deficiencies. We now have the opportunity to study the dynamic
behavior of terminal chromosome deficiencies and the mechanisms of healing
events at the molecular level in Droposhila, because terminal chromosome
deficiencies at the X-chromosome have been recovered at high frequency in
females carrying a homozygous mutation of the mu-2 locus. We have observed that
these terminal deficiencies recede by losing DNA sequences at an apparently
constant rate of 75 bp per fly generation, but that some terminal deficiencies
acquire new DNA sequences at their distal ends. This novel DNA addition
apparently results in a phenotypic "stabilization" because the stock no longer
changes phenotype over time from y2 to the more extreme y1 due to loss of
sequences from the first exon of the yellow gene. We have cloned and analyzed
twelve different terminal fragments from one of the deficiencies (RT94). None of
the DNA fragments contains only typical telomeric sequences. Three of the clones
contain newly added DNA sequences at their distal end that are not present at
the original break, while the other nine do not. We propose to further
investigate the properties of terminal deficiencies at the molecular level. We
will study the extent of heterogeneity of terminal DNA fragment lengths, and
determine the origin, genomic distribution, and sequence of DNA fragments that
occasionally become attached to the broken chromosome ends. Moreover, we will
investigate why and when during development DNA sequences are lost from the
terminal deficiencies which have apparently not been "capped" by a natural
telomere. Since these terminal deficiencies do not behave like broken chromosome
ends, yet apparently do not contain DNA sequences that are normally present in
natural telomeres, they must be protected by some other components, possibly by
proteins. We will therefore search for such proteins that might be associated
with the chromosome ends of terminal deficiencies. These studies will provide
insights into the molecular mechanisms that are responsible for the behavior of
such broken chromosome ends. They will also identify reactions that might occur
at natural telomeres and that are causing the well known dynamic behavior of
telomeres in many eukaryotes.