* 8903837
* Multiple Pathways Regulate Na+-H+ Antiporter in the Sea     Urchin Egg and Early Embryo
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/1989,06/30/1993
* Sheldon Shen, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Ralph Hecht
* 06/30/1993
* USD 271,300.00

The changes of two ions, calcium and proton, are of importance in fertilization
. Increasing calcium activity and decreasing proton activity are
parthenogenetic, while suppression of the normal changes during fertilization
blocks development. Past research has demonstrated a second messenger pathway
initiated with hydrolysis of phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate in the egg
membrane, similar to that suggested during mammalian cell proliferation. Further
analysis of the control of ion fluxes during fertilization suggests another
regulatory pathway, which is independent of inositol lipid hydrolysis. The
proposed research is directed towards the identification of this alternative
regulatory pathway. Attention is focused towards possible calcium-calmodulin
dependent protein kinase regulation. Multiple regulatory pathways on ionic
fluxes during mitogen stimulated mammalian cell proliferation have also been
reported. An important group of mitogen that do not require inositol lipid
hydrolysis have receptors with tyrosine kinase activity. Phosphorylation-
dephosphorylation has been recognized as an important cellular regulatory
mechanism. The steady state of phosphorylation of a protein depends upon the
kinase and phosphatase activities specific for the protein. Tyrosine phosphatase
and phosphatase inhibitor activities have been measured in the sea urchin egg.
Their possible regulatory actions during fertilization will be investigated.
Finally, a novel feature of fertilization is the formation of acid compartments.
A procedure to isolate these organelles is described and is utilized for
characterizing the formation of the acid compartment. %%% Fertilization of the
egg initiates a dramatic series of that lead to the quiescent egg becoming
metabolically very active and its beginning to divide. Among the earliest
changes are changes in the intracellular activities of calcium and hydrogen
ions. This study is to investigate these changes and to relate similar changes
known to be involved in regulating cell division in mammalian cells.