* 8903021
* Modelling and Simulation of Acoustical Impedance of the Respiratory System (Engineering)
* NONE,NONE
* 12/01/1989,01/01/1991
* Janie Fouke, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Lola E. Rogers
* 01/01/1991
* USD 62,325.00

The description of respiratory mechanical behavior is complicated by the
elasticity of the upper airways and trachea. From the principles of conservation
of mass and momentum and the acoustic image of the upper airways and trachea, a
model of these airways will be derived that incorporates the elastic behavior of
the airway walls. With this model, contribution of the large airways to the
overall system impedance will be calculated. The respiratory system is
inherently nonlinear. Its mechanical properties change with operating point and
during the breathing cycle. Changes in the level of respiratory flow and/or
changes in the neural control message to the system may be responsible for this.
Dr. Fouke will estimate these "time-varying" impedances in order to study the
underlying respiratory control mechanisms during the breathing cycle. The
instructional and interactive components contain three elements. Dr. Fouke will
teach a new course in the biomechanics of the pulmonary system for undergraduate
and graduate students, serve as coadvisor for the Society of Women Engineers,
and organize a seminar series featuring prominent women scientists and engineers
from across the nation. The unique feature of this seminar series is that it
will be videotaped and offered as part of the Corporate Classroom teleconference
educational program available to companies in the New Hampshire and Masschusetts
area. This program last year served over 400 students in 40 locations, and will
therefore have significance both to Boston University and the greater corporate
community. This project furthers VPW program objectives which are (1) to provide
opportunities for women to advance their careers in engineering and in the
disciplines of science supported by NSF and (2) to encourage women to pursue
careers in science and engineering by providing greater visibility for women
scientists and engineers employed in industry, government, and academic
institutions. By encouraging the participation of women in science, it is a
valuable investment in the Nation's future scientific vitality.