* 8903067
* Eutrophication Forced Changes in an Adriatic Food Web
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1989,09/01/1992
* Malvern Gilmartin, Rudjer Boskovic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 09/01/1992
* USD 0.00

In this three-year U.S.-Yugoslav cooperative research project in biological
oceanography between Nenad Smodlaka of Rudjer Boskovic's Center for Marine
Research and Malvern Gilmartin of the University of Maine, the investigators
will continue their research on the eutrophication of the Northern Adriatic. In
prior work, the investigators accumulated significant oceanographic data sets on
the effects of organic nutrients, minerals and pollutants discharged by northern
Italian rivers. Specifically, organic and inorganic deposits effectively reduce
the dissolved oxygen needed to promulgate marine life. In this new proposal,
through computer analysis, eutrophication trends in the Adriatic will be
established. Extensive research will be conducted on the the role of
microorganisms (bacteria, protozoans, nanoplankton) under eutrophic conditions.
Consequences of eutrophication on the environment is important worldwide. This
work could serve as the basis of an environmental clean up plan for the Adriatic
by the Italian and Yugoslav governments. Furthermore, this research experience
is a model for addressing coastal eutrophication problems in the United States
and other countries. This project was approved by the U.S.-Yugoslav Joint Board
on Cooperation in Science and Technology and is supported through a joint fund
consisting of matching contributions from the governments of the United States
and Yugoslavia. The U.S. contribution is provided annually by the Department of
State. No NSF funds are involved. Grants are made to the principal scientific
institution in Yugoslavia, but include dollar funds for U.S. scientist travel to
Yugoslavia and for Yugoslav scientists' living expenses in the U.S.