* 8903192
* Mathematical Sciences: Partial Differential Equations &amp;     Harmonic Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1989,12/31/1992
* Kai-Ching Lin, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 12/31/1992
* USD 292,749.00

Four investigators will collaborate on a project directed at mathematical
problems originating in the theories of harmonic analysis and partial
differential equations. Emphasis will be on the study of elliptic and parabolic
boundary value problems on domains with relatively coarse boundaries (Lipschitz
domains), and on the study of elliptic equations with non-smooth coefficients.
Other work will focus on variational problems involving free boundaries,
geometric problems related to curvature and Schrodinger multipliers for the free
Schrodinger equation. Recent advances in elliptic problems have led to sharp
estimates on solutions of elliptic systems arising in hydrostatics (the Stokes
system) and in the Lame systems of elastostatics, defined on Lipschitz domains.
The estimates relate quadratic norms of maximal functions defined on the domain
with the same norm of the solution restricted to the boundary. The immediate
goal of this research is to extend, as far as possible, the estimates to other
power norms. The difficulty one encounters is that the fundamental DeGiorgi-
Nash-Moser theory for second order divergence form equations does not carry over
to systems. Moreover, examples suggest that progress in dimensions greater than
three will be especially difficult to achieve. Work on free boundary problems is
motivated by questions in the theory of liquid crystals: droplets, moving
defects, disclination, phase transition and flow phenomena. The description of
the boundaries between liquid crystals and other materials, line defects in the
liquid and other characteristics of liquid crystals require the analysis of
complex, singular systems of differential equations. A new model is to be
studied in this work which promises to simplify several of the obstacles present
in current models. Studies of nonlinear elliptic equations related to more
geometrical issues will also be undertaken. These fall into three categories,
the Matukuma equation, the scalar curvature equations and nonlinear mean
curvature equations. The first relates to the Eddington model of the dynamics of
globular star clusters - a problem about which there has been renewed interest.
One primary goal of this work is to determine the degree of symmetry one can
expect in solutions. The second concerns the question of determining metrics on
manifolds which produce a given scalar curvature while the third concerns
equations prescribing mean curvature. The latter problems involve questions of
existence and regularity of solutions to problems in capillarity theory.