* 8903924
* Primary Electron Transfer Processes in Photosynthetic       Bacterial Reaction Centers
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1989,02/28/1993
* Dewey Holten, Washington University
* Continuing grant
* Arthur Kowalsky
* 02/28/1993
* USD 349,313.00

Issues which are key to obtaining a fundamental understanding of the charge
separation process in bacterial photosynthetic reaction centers (RCs) will be
investigated using time-resolved absorption spectroscopy of wild-type RCs, RCs
having site- directed mutations and RCs chemically modified to remove or alter a
specific cofactor. Dr. Holten plans to study unresolved issues on the details of
the involvement of the RC prosthetic groups in electron transfer and open up new
frontiers on the role of the protein, both static and dynamic, in the charge
separation process. The reaction center is the photochemical heart of a
photosynthetic organism. The function of this membrane-bound pigment-protein
complex is to transform light energy into chemical energy. Understanding how the
RC carries out its unique role in photosynthesis has been the subject of intense
effort since the RC from the bacterium Rb. sphaeroides was isolated about 20
years ago. Recently the ability to investigate and understand the internal
properties and operation of the bacterial RC took a quantum leap forward as a
result of the solution of the three-dimensional structure of the RC complex from
Rps. viridis. Spectroscopic studies of the RC primary photochemistry have thus
been refocused to a more detailed and fundamental level and at the same time
have taken on a much broader significance than ever before. The studies planned
will yield diverse information that is critical not only for elucidating the
molecular mechanisms by which the RC functions, but, also, will advance
knowledge in the areas of electron transfer, pigment-protein interactions and
protein dynamics.