* 8903003
* Iterative Substructuring Methods for Elliptic               Problems and Related Algorithms
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/1989,02/28/1993
* Olof Widlund, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* S. Kamal Abdali
* 02/28/1993
* USD 265,681.00

This project continues the past research on domain decomposition methods for
elliptic partial differential equations. These are iterative methods for solving
large linear or nonlinear systems of algebraic equations which arise when
elliptic problems are discretized by finite elements or finite differences, and
they offer very considerable promise for efficient parallel solution. The
methods considered in this investigation can be regarded as divide and conquer
algorithms. In each step of an iteration, the original discrete elliptic problem
is solved on the subregions into which the original region has been subdivided.
The interaction between the different parts of the region is handled by
transferring data of a suitable type across the interfaces which are created by
the subdivision. In addition to the local problems, some global, coarse problem
must be incorporated into the preconditioner in order to obtain a fast rate of
convergence in the case of many subregions, the case of primary interest in
parallel computing. Further work will be carried out to develop a general
framework for the study of domain decomposition methods both those which use
overlapping subregions and those which do not. There are two main aims of this
research: (1) To develop new and improved methods and to extend them to the
nonconforming case, mixed finite element models, the finite volume case, etc.
(2) To develop tools and experience which will make it possible to provide
specific recommendations for the solution of important problems of elasticity,
fluid dynamics, problems with widely varying values of the coefficients, etc.