* 8903493
* Application of a New Mathematical Model for Fluid-Rock      Interaction to Contact and Regional Metamorphism
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1989,12/31/1991
* John Ferry, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing grant
* John L. Snyder
* 12/31/1991
* USD 137,466.00

A new mathematical model for fluid-rock interaction has been developed that
overcomes the problematic assumptions in calculations of fluid-rock ratios. The
new model permits determination of time-integrated fluxes (units of volume fluid
per area rock) and direction of flow from petrologic, geochemical, and/or
isotopic data on rock samples. If duration of flow and fluid pressure gradients
can be estimated, Darcy velocities, and in situ permeabilities may be computed.
Proposed research will further develop the model and apply it to several
significant problems in contact and regional metamorphism. Results will provide
the first systematic determination of fluxes, flow directions, and rock
permeabilities in a wide range of metamorphic environments. Specific projects
include: (1) the amount, geometry, and geologic controls of fluid flow on the
scale of an entire regional metamorphic terrane (Waits River Formation, eastern
Vermont); (b) the amounts and direction of fluid flow in a ductile shear zone
and their relation to metasomatism (shear zones at Scourie, northwest Scotland);
(c) the amount, geologic controls, and chemical effects of fluid flow at the top
of a major granitic batholith (roof pendants in the Sierra Nevada); (d) the role
of fluid flow in anatexis (Onawa contact aureole, central Maine); (e) the amount
and petrologic effect of fluid flow during very low-grade regional metamorphism
(Liassic black shales, central Swiss Alps); and (f) the role of fluid flow in
regional metasomatism (Vassalboro Formation, south-central Maine).