* 8903620
* Molecular Genetic Investigations of Fungal Pathogenesis in  Rice Blast Disease
* BIO,MCB
* 10/15/1989,03/31/1993
* John Hamer, Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 03/31/1993
* USD 259,000.00

Rice blast is a devastating plant disease caused by the fungus Magnaporthe
grisa. Genetic analysis with this fungal pathogen has demonstrated that numerous
genetic loci are required for infecting and destroying rice plants. Because of
the genetic and biochemical tractability of this fungus and its cultivated host
plant, we have decided that this disease represents a unique opportunity to
begin a detailed genetic and molecular analysis of fungal pathogenicity on rice
by altering the shape of various fungal cells necessary for rice plant
infection. We have named this genetic locus, SMO because Smo-mutations
dramatically alter the shape of the asexual spores (spore morphology). In this
proposal, we described our approach to cloning and analyzing the function of the
SMO locus. We shall clone the SMO locus by complementation of Smo-mutants with
cloned M.grisea DNA. We will prove by genetic analysis, that DNA fragments that
complement the Smo-phenotype encode the SMO gene. We will sequence the wild type
SMO gene and begin an analysis of the function of the SMO gene product. We will
also use cloned DNA fragments to investigate the origin of Smo-mutations, which
appear to occur at a high frequency. Finally we will investigate the
consequences of Smo-mutations on M.grisea growth inside rice plants. The results
of this research will provide new information on the formation of infection
structures in plant pathogenic fungi, as well as provide insights into the
mechanisms of cell shape determination in fungi.