* 8903966
* Structural and Functional Analysis of Mitotic Spindle Forces
* BIO,MCB
* 10/01/1989,03/31/1994
* Judith Snyder, University of Denver
* Continuing Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 03/31/1994
* USD 253,998.00

The specific goal of this proposal is to understand the role of spindle
microtubules (MTs) in chromosome motion during mitosis. Emphasis will be placed
in two areas: 1) the energy requirements and role of the kinetochore in
attaching chromosomes to the spindle during prometaphase and 2) analysis of
spindle forces using high resolution UV microbeam irradiation of spindle
components. We propose that chromosome movement is controlled by two classes of
spindle MTs, each of which forms a stable continuum between the two spindle
poles by metaphase. The continuum associated between the chromosomes and the
kinetochore fibers (the kMT continuum) is postulated to be: 1) responsible for
moving chromosomes to the metaphase plate, 2) able to reduce spindle length
during the prometaphase-to-metaphase transition, 3) indirectly related to the
creation of the shape of the spindle at metaphase and, 4) directly responsible
for chromosome-to-pole separation during anaphase B. The second continuum is
composed of those MTs not associated with chromosomes (nKMT continuum) and hold
compression which is loaded into it in the form of MT curvature during normal
spindle formation. The experimental focus of this proposal is to determine the
energy requirements necessary to load compression (energy) into the form spindle
during the prometaphase-to-metaphase transition. Functional assays, using the
ATP analog quinacrine will be done to establish the role of the kinetochore and
MT associated proteins in pre-loading this energy into the spindle. The second
emphasis will be a UV microbeam study to determine the role of microtubules and
perhaps a second, elastic component in holding and expressing this energy. These
studies will allow analysis of spindle forces responsible for the congression of
chromosomes to the metaphase plate and the movement of chromosomes during the
events of anaphase. Using light and electron optics analysis of perturbations of
mitosis will be analyzed. Where appropriate, three dimensional reconstruction of
serial section electron micrographs will also be done to determine the effects
of treatments on spindle morphology and function. The significance of the
problem is the significance of nuclear division: there is no eukaryotic life
without it. In spite of over 100 years of research, much intensified during the
past decade, it remains one of the unsolved fundamental problems in cell
biology.