* 8903311
* Self-Directed Spontaneous Mutations in Microorganisms
* BIO,MCB
* 11/01/1989,04/30/1993
* Barry Hall, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 04/30/1993
* USD 270,000.00

Recent studies is Escherichia coli have shown that not all spontaneous mutations
occur randomly, but that instead that some mutations are induced by selection,
i.e. they are "directed" by the environment. The objective of this proposal are
to understand the origins of directed mutations, the relationship between
directed mutations and selection or environmental stress, the molecular and
physiological basis of directed mutations, and ultimately to evauluate the
importance and role of directed mutations in evolution. The achieve those
objectives I shall characterize directed mutations in a variety of gene systems
in Escherichia coli. The first goal will be to describe the empirical "rules"
that appear to govern the appearance of directed mutations. Using that
information, the next goal will be to elucidate the molecular and cellular
mechanisms that are responsible for directed mutations. Directed mutations have
only been detected in rather old colonies under conditions of nutritional and
cellular stress. A major effort will be devoted to physiological studies of aged
colonies in an effort to elucidate the relationship between cellular stress,
environmental conditions, and directed adaptive mutations. These studies will
employ the approaches of classical microbial genetics together with modern
molecular techniques for direct examination of the DNA. The ultimate goal of
these studies is to understand how directed mutations contribute to evolutionary
processes, and to assess their importance in generating evolutionary diversity,
particularly adaptive diversity.