* 8903589
* US-Norway Cooperative Research:  Metabolism of Amphipods in the Landfast Sea-Ice near Spitsbergen
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1989,05/31/1990
* Joseph Torres, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 05/31/1990
* USD 7,566.00

This award supports Dr. Joseph J. Torres of the University of South Florida for
collaborative research in marine biology with Dr. A. V. Aarset of the University
of Trondheim, Norway. They are interested in the metabolic adaptations of
organisms that live under sea-ice in the Polar regions. Such adaptations include
strictly regulating the concentration of bodily fluids, tolerating dilution of
bodily fluids, or some form of compromise between the two. Dr. Torres will
determine metabolic energy costs for individual amphipods at different
experimental salinities using oxygen electrodes and water-jacketed respirometers
in multiple configuration. Dr. Aarset will examine survivorship and hemolymph
concentration of these amphipods in response to changing salinity. He will also
evaluate their tolerance of supercooling. This research will be done at Ny
Aalesund, a field station on Spitsbergen, as part of the Pro Mare Program of
Norway. Polar sea-ice is a conspicuous and important feature of the world's
oceans. A well developed but little studied community of organisms exists within
and beneath this ice. Gammarid amphipods are the most important macrofaunal
grazers there, and they form a potentially important trophic link between the
ice algae and the fishes living in the water column below the pack ice. These
small crustaceans must withstand severe salinity changes caused by seasonal
freezing and thawing of the pack ice. The proposed research will produce an
excellent analysis of the adaptive strategies used by several species of
amphipods.