* 8903919
* Magnetostratigraphy of the Santonian/Campanian Boundary in  Europe and the Western Interior of North America
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1989,07/31/1991
* Kenneth Verosub, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan H. Fink
* 07/31/1991
* USD 40,000.00

One of the most difficult problems in stratigraphy is that of developing a
global biostratigraphic framework based on zonations involving different faunal
groups, different depositional environments, and different geographic regions.
One way to deal with this problem is to find a stratigraphic marker horizon to
link the different zonations. At the present time, the only common, global and
non-time-transgressive phenomena in the geological record are reversals of the
earth's magneticf field. The unique structure of the Magnetic Polarity Tiume
Scale in the vicinity of the Santonian/Campanian boundary makes this boundary a
particularly convenient place to use magnetostratigraphy to establish a global
marker horizon. PI will conduct magnetostratigraphic studies of sedimentary
sequences that cross the Santonian/Campanian boundary in Europe and in the
Western Interior of North America. The sequences in Europe include the
stratotype for the boundary as well as other sections which are believed to be
equivalent to it. Those in North America represent marine, marginal marine, and
terrestrial sequences, all of which are believed to contain the boundary. By
studying these sections, PI will be able to establish a correspondence between
Santonian/Campanian biostratigraphic zonations on two different continents and
involving a variety of different fossil groups. In addition, the sections in the
Western Interior contain bentonite beds that will be used to obtain an absolute
age for the Santonian/Campanian boundary. The proposed project represents a
continuation of work conducted under a prior NSF grant, which looked at the
magnetostratigraphy of sedimentary sequences that crossed the
Santonian/Campanian boundary on the West Coast of North America, and it
represents the next step in a systematic program to study the
magnetostratigraphy of the Santonian/Campanian boundary in sedimentary sequences
throughout the world.