* 8903609
* The Search for Novel High Molecular Weight Biomarkers (&amp;gt;C40)in Geological Samples of All Ages
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/1989,11/30/1991
* Richard Philp, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 11/30/1991
* USD 118,800.00

Biomarkers are compounds in geological samples whose basic carbon skeleton
resembles that of their precursors which occur in source materials such as
algae, bacteria and higher plants. For the most part the biomarkers discovered
to date have been in the C10-C40 range. Limitations in both chromatography and
mass spectrometry have prevented the successful investigation and identification
of biomarkers in the region above C40. It is proposed to take advantage of
developments of high temperature capillary columns and tandem mass spectrometers
to enter into the frontier area of biomarker geochemistry in the range of
C40-C100. Extracts from a variety of well characterized oils and source rocks
will be investigated by tandem mass spectrometry in combination with gas
chromatography or the direct insertion probe. The samples selected will be those
whose lower molecular weight biomarkers have already been extensively
characterized. Initially optimum analytical conditions required for the analyses
of such novel high molecular weight components will be determined by the use of
naturally occurring waxes known to contain long chain n-alkanes. In a parallel
approach, attempts will be made to synthesize high molecular weight hopane
standards by condensation of hopanoic acids and suitable alkanes or isoprenoids.
The resultant products will be characterized by GC- MS/MS and direct insertion
probe MS/MS. In addition it is proposed to use tandem mass spectrometry in
combination with micropyrolysis techniques to investigate the high molecular
weight fragments produced by pyrolytic degradation of kerogens, protokerogens
and other insoluble organic materials. The identification of such compounds will
expand the utility of biomarkers in many aspects of geochemistry. It should
result in a better understanding of paleoclimate and paleoenvironment,
biochemical evolution and processes affecting petroleum composition and
evolution. With the advances in instrumental technology it is anticipated that
there will be an increasing move towards the study of high molecular weight
biomarkers. This proposal presents the first formal and systematic search for
these compounds.//