* 8903049
* Conformal Dynamics and Teichmuller Spaces (Mathematics)
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/1989,02/28/1991
* Linda Keen, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Lola E. Rogers
* 02/28/1991
* USD 82,408.00

Dr. Keen will continue her study of conformal dynamical systems and symbolic
dynamics. In particular, the relationship between the fundamental groups of
certain parameter spaces of rational maps and the automorphism groups of the
one-sided Bernoulli shifts will be explored further. In addition, she will
continue her study of the structure of the Teichmuller space of the punctured
torus. Interactive activities include participating and giving a series of
lectures in a regular mathematics seminar at Princeton, meeting with
undergraduate women to encourage them to study mathematics, and organizing a
special day of lectures devoted to conformal dynamics. Lectures will be
presented by distinguished mathematicians and interested women mathematicians
from the Northeast will be invited. This project furthers VPW program objectives
which are (1) to provide opportunities for women to advance their careers in
engineering and in the disciplines of science supported by NSF and (2) to
encourage women to pursue careers in science and engineering by providing
greater visibility for women scientists and engineers employed in industry,
government, and academic institutions. By encouraging the participation of women
in science, it is a valuable investment in the Nation's future scientific
vitality.