* 8903060
* Structure and Function of the Prochlorothrix Hollandica     Photosynthetic Antenna System
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1989,01/31/1993
* George Bullerjahn, Bowling Green State University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Uffen
* 01/31/1993
* USD 216,100.00

The photosynthetic prokaryote, Prochlorothrix hollandica, is the only free-
living bacterium known which contains the higher plant antenna pigment
chlorophyll b. This feature has initiated many comparative studies examining
whether the P. hollandica antenna is structurally and functionally similar to
that of higher plants. Previous studies from other laboratories have shown that
thylakoid membrane stacking occurs in P. hollandica, a function ascribed to the
LHCII antenna of green plant chloroplasts. Since the P. hollandica Chl a/b
antenna is structurally simpler than chloroplast LHCII, this research studies
the antenna proteins of P. hollandica to probe the structural basis for membrane
stacking. The experimental approach combines molecular biological, biochemical
and biophysical techniques to address the following specific questions: 1) What
are the evolutionary relationships among accessory Chl-proteins?; 2) How do
photosynthetic organisms adapt to changing light conditions?; and 3) What are
the structural requirements for thylakoid membrane stacking?%%% The light
reactions of oxygen evolving photosynthesis involve two kinds of membrane-bound
pigment-binding complexes,those which are involved in the primary photochemistry
and those which serve an accessory antenna function by harvesting light energy
to be transferred to the primary systems. A great deal of information has been
recently obtained about the chlorophyll-proteins. In contrast, the structure of
many antenna complexes is not known to this high level of resolution. The focus
of this research is to examine a class of prokaryotic antenna chlorophyll-
proteins to help understand their synthesis, assembly and relatedness to
chloroplast antennae systems.***