* 8903709
* Plant Genes Expressed Early in Development of Medicago      Truncatula Root Nodules
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/1990,12/31/1993
* James Cooper, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing grant
* Ralph Hecht
* 12/31/1993
* USD 225,000.00

Nitrogen-fixing root nodules result from an endosymbiotic association between
Rhizobium bacteria and specific legume host plants. Dr. Cooper will utilize
cellular and molecular genetic approaches to investigate early events in the
development of root nodules in the Rizobium meliloti-Medicago truncatula
symbiosis. The specific goals of this proposal are: 1) to clone and characterize
the nodulin genes expressed early in nodule development, with particular
attention paid to (hydroxy)proline- rich cell wall glycoprotein genes; 2) to
examine the spatial and temporal patterns of early symbiotic gene expression at
both the protein and nucleic acid levels; and 3) to use reporter gene fusions to
identify the cis-acting regulatory sequences responsible for the observed
patterns of gene expression, and to begin characterizing the signal molecules
used by Rhizobium to regulate plant development. Results of these studies will
provide new tools for the molecular genetic dissection of nodule development and
plant-microbe interactions. %%% The mechanisms regulating the association of
nitrogen fixing bacteria with the roots of compatible plants is a problem of
interest both as a basic science question of how organisms interact and affect
each other and a problem with great agricultural economic and ecological
interest. Plants which are susceptible to this mode of interaction do not
require the same addition of nitrogenous fertilizer for their growth.