* 8904114
* Developmental Regulation of Auxin Transport:  The Uptake    Carrier
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/1989,12/31/1992
* Terri Lomax, Oregon State University
* Continuing grant
* Judith A. Verbeke
* 12/31/1992
* USD 290,400.00

The active, polar transport of the plant growth hormone auxin is essential to
the control of plant development. It has recently been demonstrated that the
primary natural auxin, IAA (indole- 3-acetic acid), is taken up into plant cells
in a manner analogous to amino acid or sugar cotransport, via an electrogenic
2H+/IAA symport protein and exits via a polarly-distributed efflux carrier in
the plasma membrane (PM). This proposal details a simple but powerful approach
to isolating the IAA uptake symport by photoaffinity labeling of the protein in
purified plant PM with tritiated azido-IAA. We have now shown that the azido-IAA
specifically labels two polypeptides of 40 and 42 kD MW in plasma membranes
isolated from Cucurbita pepo hypocotyls with characteristics similar to in vitro
and in vivo auxin transport. These data suggest that the protein doublet may be
an auxin transport carrier. Monoclonal antibodies prepared against the purified
polypeptides will be used for a larger scale purification of the protein(s) by
affinity chromatography. This should yield amounts of pure proteins large enough
for protein microsequencing and for the generation of highly specific polyclonal
antibodies, which will be used both in situ for temporal and spatial
localization of the corresponding protein(s), and to probe a cDNA library for
colonies expressing the transport protein. The specific cDNA clones will be used
1) to determine the nucleic acid and thus amino acid sequence, 2) to select
genomic clones for the study of regulatory regions, and 3) as probes for the
study of the transcriptional control, if any, of the corresponding genes during
development. %%% The results of these studies should provide significant insight
into the structure and function of proteins involved in the transport of auxin.
Auxin itself is an important regulator of growth and development in plants. The
studies will also forge a link between the physiology and molecular biology of
the action of this important plant hormone.