* 8904063
* Petrogenetic and Tectonic Studies in an Exposed Cross-      Section of Young (approx. 100 Ma) Continental Crust -       Southern Sierra Nevada, California
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/1989,10/31/1991
* Jason Saleeby, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas O. Wright
* 10/31/1991
* USD 164,882.00

The southern Sierra Nevada offers an oblique section through young batholith-
generated sialic crust from surface (volcanic) levels to deep (granulitic)
levels. Regional mapping and Pb/U zircon geochronology reveal structural
continuity through this crustal section for igneous-metamorphic assemblages of
~100 Ma, making it one of the youngest exposed continental crustal sections in
the world. Compositional and structural patterns observed in this section in
conjunction with geophysical and volcanic xenolith data pose important problems
on sialic crustal genesis and the nature of lower continental crust. Some
specific aims of the proposed research include (1) isotopic, petrochemical and
petrographic characterization of an apparent major mantle-derived igneous suite
that was added to the crust at ~100 Ma, and consideration of its role in the
formation of a granulitic lower crust; (2) study of crustal melting phenomena
imposed by this mantle igneous suite on a variety of pre-existing crustal
materials that are known to characterize much of the pre- batholithic framework
based on regional map relations; (3) con- struction of mixing models between the
young mantle-derived component and pre-existing crustal materials and the
application of these models to large-scale problems of batholith petrogenesis;
(4) application of appropriate thermobarometers to deep-level exposures as a
refinement of the crustal section model and for placing constraints on the
physical conditions of peak metamorphism and crustal melting; and (5) structural
and geochronological analysis of selected ductile shear zones and fault systems
which appear to be intimately related to batholith emplacement and volcanic
venting. Large-scale goals of this research are to model the major components
and material transport patterns that contributed to the production of the
southern Sierra sialic crustal column and to consider the implications of such
phenomena for broader issues of continent structure and evolution.