* 8904583
* Novel Pathogenicity Genes of Soft-rot Erwinias
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1989,01/31/1991
* Avtar Handa, Purdue Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 01/31/1991
* USD 15,000.00

We have isolated four prototrophic pectolytic avirulent mutants of Erwina
carotovora subsp. carotovora (Ecc) which seem to be defective in overcoming host
resistant. These mutants show initial in plants growth (10 to 17 logarithmic
generations) similar to pathogenic strains of Ecc but fail to reach the
threshold of bacteria (1 x 108 cfu) required to demonstrate the soft-rot disease
phenotype. We have isolated clones which complement these mutations. Two
subclones obtained from one of these complementing loci seem to inhibit
production of pectate lyases, polygalacturonase, cellulase and protease in for
Ecc and E. carotovora subsp. atroseptica and thereby impart an avirulent
phenotype to these phytopathogenic bacteria. The goals of our proposed research
are (1) the molecular characterization of pathogenicity genes of Ecc and their
regulation of expression in cultures and during pathogenesis in planta, and (2)
to determine the molecular basis of inhibition of production of extracellular
enzymes by cloned DNA sequences. The nature and mechanisms of pathogenicity
genes, isolated using avirulent pectolytic mutants, will be demonstrated by
integrated series of experiments including (a) analysis of the structural and
regulatory components of these operons by saturation transposon mutagenesis, S1
mapping and DNA sequencing, (b) localization of gene product and determination
of the timing and regulation of gene activation using antibodies and reporter
gene fusions, and (c) DNA mobility retardation and DNaseI foot-printing analysis
to characterize the trans-acting regulatory factors. Experiments also are
outlined to close any trans-acting factor(s) which may be responsible for the
inhibition of the extracellular enzyme production. This research will provide
insight into the molecular basis of plant-microbe interactions and will add to
our understanding of the regulation of expression of extracellular enzymes in
phytopathogenic bacteria. Experiments will be conducted to determine whether or
not these effects are caused by the cloning vector. Cloned bacterial genes will
be sequenced and experiments which are required to establish the physical
relationships between the gene which complements the AH2552 mutation and the DNA
sequence which inhibits production of plant cell-degrading enzymes will be
carried out. This research will provide insight into the molecular basis of
plant-microbe interactions and will add to our understanding of the regulation
of expression of extracellular enzymes in phytopathogenic bacteria.