* 8904998
* Mechanism of Action of Interferon-gamma
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1989,08/31/1992
* John Lewis, SUNY Health Science Center at Brooklyn
* Standard Grant
* Maryanna P. Henkart
* 08/31/1992
* USD 150,000.00

This laboratory has isolated murine cell lines which express a mutated form of
the human interferon-gamma gene lacking a signal sequence. These cells
synthesize human interferon-gamma but fail to secrete it and accumulate the
protein intracellularly. Although the murine cells used are completely resistant
to the effects of human interferon-gamma added to the culture medium, the cells
expressing this heterologous interferon intracellularly are resistant to
infection with vesicular stomatitis virus and Mengo virus and exhibit elevated
levels of oligo 2,5 A synthetase and eIF-2 kinase, enzymes known to be induced
by treatment with interferons. The cells also show enhanced levels of mRNA
encoding major histocompatibility complex class II antigen. These results
suggest the novel concept that interferon gamma can function intracellularly
across a species barrier to cause specific gene activation. The proposed
research is to analyze this phenomenon in detail to ensure that the observations
are due directly to the intracellular interferon-gamma and not to production by
the cells of a homologous antiviral agent. The generality of these observations
will be tested by determining whether murine interferon-gamma expressed
intracellularly in human cells produces similar effects. Since the results could
be explained by the secretion of interferons or other agents with antiviral
properties, assays for increased levels of mRNA for homologous interferons
alpha, beta and gamma and tumor necrosis factor will be carried out by Northern
blotting and polymerase chain reaction techniques. Specific antibodies will be
used to test for the secretion of agents with antiviral properties in culture
supernatants and by co-culture experiments. If intracellular interferon-gamma is
found to activate expression of specific genes directly, the mechanism
responsible for this effect will be sought. If intracellular interferon-gamma
causes the production of a homologous agent with interferon-like properties it
will be important to identify this substance and determine how interferon gamma
can induce its production and whether such an effect plays a part in the normal
response of cells to interferon-gamma. The biological response modifier,
interferon-gamma has been the subject of much recent interest because of its
antiviral action and its stimulatory effects on cells of the mammalian immune
system. Current research is based on the assumption that this hormone-like
substance acts as do many peptide hormones, by binding to a surface membrane
receptor and, subsequently triggering a cascade of intracellular biochemical
events. Dr. Lewis has preliminary results suggesting a novel, intracellular site
of action for interferon-gamma. If this is the case it could represent a very
important new mechanism of action, but much critical work must be done to
establish unequivocally the basis for the preliminary observations. This grant
will support the critical test of these potentially important observations.