* 8904944
* Molecular Analysis of a Nuclear Mutation Affecting          Chloroplast Development
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/1989,12/31/1992
* Robert Martienssen, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Continuing grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 12/31/1992
* USD 303,000.00

Nuclear genes are likely to be responsible, in large part,for the coordination
of chloroplast biogenesis and leafdevelopment in higher plants. Nuclear
mutations can identifysuch genes even when they do not encode abundant
chloroplastproteins, and have been widely used in the analysis ofchloroplast
development. However, pleiotropic effects,particularly in the case of pigment
deficient mutants, tendto obscure the biochemical lesion responsible for most
mutantphenotypes. Transposon mutagenesis and cloning provide analternative
approach to the analysis of these mutations. Thesubject of this proposal is the
non.photosynthetic maizemutant hcf*106. This mutation has a dramatic effect
onthylakoid membrane organisation a key, morphological processduring chloroplast
development. Hcf*106 membranes are notdeficient in pigment or lipid
biosynthesis, but fail toaccumulate a subset of thylakoid proteins. The mutant
genehas been cloned using the transposon Mul as a molecular"tag" and genetic
arguments are presented demonstrating theidentity of the clone. The experiments
outlined in this proposal are designed todetermine the molecular function of the
hcf*106 gene productin thylakoid membrane elaboration, and should
provideimportant insights into genetic regulation of chloroplastdevelopment.