* 8904677
* Collaborative Research:  Nuclear Studies of Continental     Erosion Processes and Rates
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/1989,06/30/1992
* James Arnold, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 06/30/1992
* USD 151,954.00

This is a continuation of an experimental program to further develop and apply
a nuclear method for studies of earth- surface geologic processes, including
studies of continental erosion. The technique is based on in situ production of
nuclides in rocks by nuclear interaction of cosmic rays. Since the absorption
mean free path of cosmic radiation is - 50 cm in rocks, and since in situ
nuclides, 10Be (half-life, 1.5X106 yrs), 26Al (half-life, 0.7X106 yrs) and 14C
(half-life, 5730 yrs) can easily be studied in most rocks, one can optimally
characterize surficial changes in the bracket 2X10-5-6X10-3 cm.yr-1; higher and
lower rates are accessible using shorter half-life nuclides (39Ar, half-life 269
yrs) and stable nuclides, 3He and 21Ne respectively. We have already
demonstrated the potential of the method based on studies of in situ 10Be and
26Al in quartz extracted from some 50 rock samples. We have studied their
production rates in quartz in natural settings, and also by irradiating quartz
with high energy particles. And we have studied surface erosion rates and
exposure histories of several rocks, and also determined the time of formation
of the Canyon Diablo meteorite crater in Arizona. The measurements carried out
have established the potential of the nuclear method proposed 2 years ago by us
to NSF. We now propose to continue our measurements for another period of 2
years to fully develop and to exploit the potentials of the in situ method.
Briefly: we will include studies of in situ 14C in quartz; we will obtain
further data on isotope production rates; we will continue studies of surficial
erosional rates of selected surfaces. In addition, we proposal a set of new
applications of the nuclear method, e.g. studying faulting and history of global
sands. The use of multiple in situ nuclides has the now realized potential to
revolutionize the understanding of surficial processes by opening up the vast
majority of earth's surface to the numerical age control.