* 8904717
* RUI: Molecular Genetic and Biochemical Analysis of          Lipoxygenase in Arabidopsis
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1989,08/31/1992
* Teresa Peterman, Wellesley College
* Standard Grant
* M.  Paige
* 08/31/1992
* USD 150,000.00

Lipoxygenases dioxygenases which catalyze the hydroperoxidation of unsaturated
fatty acids containing a cis,cis-1,4-pentadiene bond system, are found in all
eukaryotic organisms. In mammals lipoxygenases play a key role in the production
of potent biological regulatory molecules with far-ranging physiological
effects. These include the prostaglandins, leukotrienes, thromboxanes and
lipoxins. The role of lipoxygenases in higher plants, however, is not clear
although there is evidence that lipoxygenases are involved in plant growth and
development, senescence, wounding and pathogen and pest defense. To begin to
define the physiological role of lipoxygenase in higher plants this research
supports a detailed molecular genetic and biochemical analysis of the
lipoxygenase genes and enzymes of Arabidopsis thaliana. Lipoxygenase cDNA and
genomic clones are being isolated and characterized. The resulting clones will
be used to analyze lipoxygenase under a variety of conditions. Lipoxygenase
steady-state mRNAs and enzymatic activity will be analyzed in different plant
organs, during various stages of development and in response to light, wounding
and "elicitors" of pathogen defense mechanisms. These studies will help to
define the physiological role of lipoxygenase in higher plants. These enzymes
are important in the physiological functioning of plants as they respond to
environmental stresses.