* 8904978
* Effects of Controlled Irradiation and Ion Implantation      in Polymeric Carbons
* EDU,EES
* 09/15/1989,02/28/1993
* Richard Evans, Alabama A&M University
* Standard Grant
* None
* 02/28/1993
* USD 293,940.00

This Research Improvement in Minority Institutions (RIMI) project will assess
the structural modifications caused by the implant of alien ions in selected
polymeric carbons. Studies on the relatively simple monolithic, isotropic glassy
carbon serve as precursors to work on the very complex polymeric carbons.
Researchers will subject glassy carbon specimen to controlled radiation by
protons and neutrons and examine the nature of damage using X-ray photoelectron
spectroscopy and Raman Spectrometry. After irradiation, the materials will be
heat treated to measure the energies locked in during irradiation. The
temperature and the energy released will serve to characterize the defects
induced. The Pelletron accelerator will be used to investigate the effect of
silicon ion bombardment using the fact that silicon ions are known to react with
carbon to form a stable oxidation resistant carbide. This investigation of
irradiated polymeric carbon will significantly increase the research capability
of a predominantly minority institution. The principal investigator has an
international reputation in the carbon field and has published widely in the
area. Faculty and students participating in this project will strengthen their
research skills in irradiation and ion bombardment techniques.