* 8904634
* PRF/M:  A Geographical Information System Analysis of Stream Detrital Processing
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1989,08/31/1990
* Alan Covich, Individual Award
* Fellowship Award
* Crystal Blackshear
* 08/31/1990
* USD 57,030.00

Rates of woody debris movement downstream will be compared among four streams
in Coweeta Experimental Forest (a site operated by the U.S. Department of
Agriculture's Forest Service). These will then be compared with analogous
results from a pair of streams in Puerto Rigo's Luquillo Experimental Forest.
The locations of marked (tagged) wood added to headwaters of these tributary
streams are to be mapped after major rainfall events in order to determine how
quantity and sizes of these pieces influence their downstream movement. The
greater amont and diversity of sizes of wood expected in streams meandering
through older forests will more often lead to formation of debris dams, which
decrease water flow rates and increase retention of leaf litter within the
stream, thereby altering physico-chemical conditions of the stream. Such
differences have a profound influence on the species composition and abundances
of benthic community members. A major component of this study is the application
of Geographical Information System (GIS) technology to record sequential changes
in positions of natural and added woody debris. Some of the GIS software being
developed will be used to simulate movement of materials downstream in natural
catchment basins by using digital data on topography, elevation, and slope. This
methodology has been developed to manipulate digitized data available from
remotely sensed (aircraft and satellite) imagery. The capacity to store and
handle large comparative data sets is finding wide use in ecological studies but
has not yet been applied to analysis of detrital materials. Dr. Alan P. Covich,
of the University of Oklahoma, will devote twelve months of Mid- Career
Fellowship in Environmental Biology tenure to this research. The host
institution is the University of Georgia.