* 8904557
* Cooperative Research on Volcanic SO2 Emissions from         Volcanoes in Guatemala, Ecuador, and Chile
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1989,11/30/1990
* William Rose, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 11/30/1990
* USD 9,578.00

This award will support Professor William Rose of Michigan Technological
University in collaboration with Eddy Sanchez and Jorge Giron of the Instituto
Nacional de Sismologia, Vulcanologia, Meteorologia e Hidrologia (INSIVUMEH) of
Guatemala; with Minard Hall of the Escuela Politecnica Nacional of Ecuador; and
with Carlos Ramirez of the Servicio Nacional de Geologia y Mineria in Chile. The
purpose of the project is to measure the sulfur dioxide emissions of several
volcanoes with a correlation spectrometer (COSPEC). All of the volcanoes to be
visited are very active or increasingly active. Many pose a severe threat to
local populations, properties, and economies. However, very little information
is known about the current state of these volcanoes. Because the sulfur dioxide
only significantly exsolves from magmas at shallow depths, it is a reliable
indicator of shallow magmatic processes. Therefore, obtaining information about
current sulfur dioxide emissions will help the local government agencies
coordinate their eruption contingency plans and provide significant information
to the researchers. While the overall objective is to conduct the sulfur dioxide
measurements, there is a significant training component to this grant in that
Professor Rose will be instructing the local scientists in proper use of the
COSPEC. Such training will lead to continued monitoring after the visit is over
and could help to lessen the damage from the eventual destructive eruptions of
these volcanoes. In this context the award fulfills the objectives of the
Science in Developing Countries Program.