* 8904772
* The Molecular Basis of Regulation of Globin Synthesis in an Insect
* BIO,IOS
* 11/01/1989,06/30/1994
* Gerald Bergtrom, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Continuing Grant
* Barbara K. Zain
* 06/30/1994
* USD 251,075.00

One need only recall the progression of caterpillar to butterfly to understand
why metamorphosis in insects has been likened to a second stage of
embryogenesis. Morphological changes between larva and adult are extensive, and
because larvae, pupae and adults are accessible and large (relative to
fertilized eggs and embryos), they are amenable to studies of the molecular
events underlying important aspects of development. The study of insect
physiology and development is significant for another, more specific reason.
Insects can be agricultural pests and disease- carriers. Recent attempts have
been made to find environmentally safe, non-toxic, biodegradable agents to
control the more noxious insects. Among such agents are the very hormones that
insects use to control their own development. The goal of this research is to
understand how two hormones (20-hydroxyecdysone and juvenile hormone), with
central roles in this process, act at the molecular level. Chironomids
(including Chironomus thummi, the fly used in Dr. Bergtrom's research) contain
high concentrations of the protein hemoglobin. In fact, the hemoglobins
represent a large family of related-but-different proteins whose syntheses are
regulated differentially during development. The regulation of specific
hemoglobin synthesis is under the control of both 20-hydroxyecdysone and
juvenile hormone. The molecular level at which each hormone either stimulates or
represses specific globin production will be measured using cloned globin genes.
The effects of the hormones will be analyzed both separately and together on
levels and synthesis not only of the globin proteins themselves, but also the
globin messenger RNAs (mRNAs) that are transcribed from globin genes and from
which globin proteins are ultimately translated in the cell. By focussing on the
dual hormonal regulation of single family related proteins, greater insight may
be gained into how these hormones affect cellular processes in insects. Such
data can contribute greatly to the confidence with which hormones (or their
synthetic analogues) are used in insect control protocols, as well as to a more
general understanding of molecular processes of animal development.