* 8904721
* Doctoral Dissertation in Law and Social Science:  The       Political and Educative Effects of the Jury Experience
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1989,01/31/1991
* Peter Sperlich, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Martin
* 01/31/1991
* USD 4,968.00

It has been suggested by some scholars over the years that the American jury is
a legal, political institution whose benefits to jurors include direct
participation in the system and the educative effects of that experience on
their own behavior. It is assumed that jury service increases both a citizen's
knowledge of and attachment to democratic legal principles and that it can
affect the legal behavior and attitudes of those who serve. However, these ideas
have not been systematically researched in either the jury or the participation
literature. Most jury research has focused on the internal dynamics of the
decisionmaking process itself or the administrative aspects of the system. This
doctoral dissertation study focuses on the question of whether the above
assertions regarding the effects of jury service accurately characterize the
consequences of the contemporary jury experience. A combination of in-depth
interviews and a panel design, pre- and post-jury service, will be used to
measure systematically these effects and to test some of the assumptions of the
attitude change and participation literature. In addition, data from the trials
in which potential respondents are serving will be gathered, coded, and
integrated into the analysis of effects. The extensive use of the jury system in
the United States provides analysts of legal, political participation an
opportunity to explore an arena that they have been missing. It affords analysts
of the jury an opportunity to consider the larger role of the institution they
study. In particular, it provides an opportunity to study how jury service
affects knowledge of and support for (or criticism of) legal norms and
processes. This study helps bridge the gap that exists between jury research,
political participation research, and studies of the relationship between legal
institutions and political attitudes.