* 8904013
* US-Belgium Cooperative Science:  Nuclear Astrophysics with  Radioactive and Isomeric Beams and Targets
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/1989,06/30/1991
* William Rodney, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 06/30/1991
* USD 17,750.00

This award will support joint research in nuclear astrophy- sics between two
groups of U.S. and Belgian physicists. The U.S. group will be under the
direction of Dr. William S. Rodney, Georgetown University. The Belgium
collaborator is Dr. J. Vervier, Institute for Nuclear Physics, Louvain, Belgium.
The objective of this project is to carry out a program of experiments using
radioactive beams to measure cross sections important to understanding
nucleosynthesis. In novae, supernovae, X-ray bursters and possibly in the early
universe, the temperature and density were such that the lifetimes of some
radioactive (and isomeric) nuclides were comparable with the burning times for
their destruction by proton- or alpha-particle-induced nuclear reactions. In
these instances, these reactions must be taken into account in developing models
for stellar evolution and nucleosyn- thesis. Thus, the potential for the use of
radioactive targets and/or beams is receiving increasing attention in the
nuclear physics community. In this project, the series of experiments outlined
represent a major step in the direction of providing the needed cross section
information. The Louvain-la-Neuve coupled cyclotron facility will be able to
produce the required beam intensity to carry out these experiments. There are no
existing U.S. facilities capable of such radioactive beam measurements. The
research will benefit from Dr. Rodney's expertise in nuclear astrophysics and
the background of his research group in active nuclear experimentation. The
results of this research will contribute to our understanding of stellar
evolution and nucleosynthesis in stars.