* 8904484
* An Experimental Attempt to Determine History of 3He, 4He,   and Isotopes of Ne and Ar in the Mantle
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/1989,06/30/1992
* Devendra Lal, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* John L. Snyder
* 06/30/1992
* USD 84,700.00

This project will determine the history of He, Ne and Ar isotopes in the
mantle, based on studies of diamonds and associated mantle samples. When this
study was undertaken, it was believed by some that certain diamonds bore records
of pristine helium isotopic composition. It is how seems unlikely that diamonds
could carry vestigial records of He composition at genesis of the Earth; most
likely diamonds having high 3He/4He ratios acquired their3He during their
residence in the alluvium by cosmic ray interactions, or by interactions of
radiogenic neutrons with lithium if present in the diamond at concentrations
exceeding 1 ppm. Discovery of the cosmogenic 3He component in alluvial diamonds,
observations of very large helium diffusivity in diamonds, with a very strange
release pattern, and other observations urgently warrant extension of helium
studies, including Ne (and Ar) isotopes. The isotopic composition of Ne may
indeed have a bearing on the formation of old diamonds. Also it is planned to
determine cosmic ray exposure histories of alluvial diamonds using 21Ne and 10Be
as tracers. The lab is set up for 3He measurements; low blank systems were built
under the previous NSF grant. Neon isotopic measurements can now be carried out
with the required precision since the Isotope Laboratory will soon be acquiring
a triple collector N2-Ne mass spectrometer under a grant from NSF.