* 8904537
* Controls on Sediment Supply and Stratigraphic Response in   the Mio-Pliocene Bermejo Foreland Basin, Central Andes
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1989,07/31/1992
* Teresa Jordan, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan H. Fink
* 07/31/1992
* USD 120,000.00

Studies of sedimentary basins are beginning to integrate solid-earth phenomena
and surficial processes. In foreland basins, conceptujal and quantitative models
have reached the point at which areful tests are needed of predictions. The PIs
will use the Bermejo basin, in the foreland of the Andes in western Argentina,
as a testing ground. Mio-Pliocene strata of the Bermejo basin are well known on
the basis of several complementary data sets. A central objective is to measure
the volume of sediment preserved in the Bermejo basin in successive 1 to 2
million year intervals. The volume history will be compared to the history of
source areas and to the distribution of facies in the basin. This information
will provide new insight into the constancy of sediment supply to a foreland
basin on a short time scale and to the impact that variable sediment supply
might have on the character of the strata. The PIs will better constrain the
history of deformation by gathering additional chronological data, for strata
which show cross-cutting relations to thrust faults and for strata in a
piggyback basin which is likely to be controlled by thrust activity. Comparison
of the thrust history to the history of volume of sediments through time will
demonstrate the response of erosion and sediment flux to thrust-indiced
topography. This information will be utuilized in the next generation of
conceptual and quantitative models of erosion of mountain belts and stratigraphy
in foreland basins.