* 8904770
* Polarization of Fucus Zygotes and Protoplasts
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1989,01/31/1993
* Darryl Kropf, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Judith A. Verbeke
* 01/31/1993
* USD 237,190.00

Investigation of the earliest events in embryonic polarization in plants have
focused on two genera of closely related brown algae, Fucus and Pelvetia.
Current working hypotheses postulate that during polarization ion channels in
the plasma membrane migrate to one end of the egg. This asymmetry gives rise to
net influx in the region of channel accumulation and net efflux from the other
end. Thus, an ionic current flows through the egg and denotes formation of the
developmental axis. As a consequence of the current, cytoplasmic voltage and
ionic gradients are established and these are thought to regulate regional
differentiation within the egg. One major aspect of this attractive model that
has yet to be scrutinized is whether a physical reorganization of plasma
membrane components (e.g.ion channels) takes place as the axis is established.
Dr. Kropf has recently shown that Fucus protoplasts made from young zygotes can
be polarized with unidirectional light. This provides direct access to the
plasma membrane during axis establishment. He will examine rearrangements of
membrane receptors on the surface of protoplasts undergoing polarization and
investigate ionic currents generated by the membrane asymmetries in Fucus
zygotes and in photopolarized protoplasts. The ultimate goal is to monitor the
spatial distributions of ionic currents, plasma membrane receptors and F-actin
in single cells as they establish an axis. %%% The establishment of the axis
(i.e. which end is which) of an organism early in development is a fundamental
first step in the pattern formation of that organism. This event has been hard
to analyze in plants. Dr. Kropf is studying this process in the brown algae
because of the experimental advantages it presents relative to many other
plants.