* 8904215
* Stable Isotope Geochemistry of Amino Acid Enantiomer        Constituents of Fossil System
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/1989,05/31/1992
* Michael Engel, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 05/31/1992
* USD 126,667.00

Previous investigations have focused on the distribution and stereochemistry of
amino acid constituents of fossils to assess indigeneity. However, the
occurrence of amino acids as components of all past and present organisms makes
it impossible at this time to precisely determine the extent to which an
individual amino acid in a fossil represents original material produced by an
organism versus input from the surrounding environment. The primary objective of
this investigation is to continue the development of a new set of criteria for
evaluating the origin(s) of amino acids in terrestrial and extraterrestrial
geologic materials that is based on an assessment of the stable carbon and
nitrogen isotope compositions of the individual D- and L-enantiomers of amino
acid constituents of these materials. To accomplish this task, a series of
experiments are planned to further our understanding of the effects of
diagenetic reactions on the stable isotope compositions of individual amino acid
enantiomers as follows: 1) simulation experiments to assess the effects of
protein and peptide bond hydrolysis on the stable isotope compositions of D- and
L-enantiomers of amino acids; and 2) determination of the stable nitrogen and
carbon isotope compositions of D- and L-enantiomers of amino acids isolated from
various molecular weight, proteinaceous fractions of fossil mollusks. At
present, the isolation and stable isotope analysis of individual enantiomers of
amino acids from fossil systems is a labor intensive, time consuming process. We
will attempt to circumvent this problem by developing a method for the direct
stable isotope analysis of quantities of amino acid enantiomers via on-line gas
chromatography/stable isotope mass spectrometry (GC/SIMS). If successful, this
approach will revolutionize the ability of scientists to utilize stable isotopes
as probes at the molecular level (e.g., elucidation kinetic isotope effects,
raceminzation processes and biosynthetic pathways for the formation of amino
acids in living systems) and will open new doors with respect to furthering our
understanding of 10 extraterrestrial, prebiotic organic synthesis and 2) the
chemical evolution of living systems on earth.