* 8904503
* International Conference on "Physiological Process Studies  in the Arctic:  Implications for Ecosystem Response to      Climate Change held on August 3-6, 1989 in Toronto, Canada."
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/1989,06/30/1990
* F. Stuart Chapin, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Tarri Joyner
* 06/30/1990
* USD 49,830.00

This conference will examine the ecophysiology of arctic plants and soil
organisms and consider how this information can be used to understand ecosystem
processes in general and the response of arctic ecosystems to impending climate
change in particular. The conference will make a significant contribution to
bridging the gap between physiological ecology and ecosystem ecology;
ecophysiology can provide insight into the controls over ecosystem processes,
and ecosystem ecology provides a context in which to evaluate the importance of
various ecophysiological traits. The meeting will be held in Churchill,
Manitoba, and will last 4 days. It will involve 20-25 presentations by
physiological ecologists who have worked in the Arctic. Also included in the
meeting will be ecosystem ecologists who have not worked in the Arctic. Their
role will be to provide a global context and to ensure that the presentations
and discussion remain focused on the link between physiological ecology and
ecosystem ecology. Additional discussion will address the types of research at
the interface between ecophysiological and ecosystem ecology that will
facilitate predictions of ecosystem response to impending climate change. The
products of the meeting will be an edited volume, a symposium at the Toronto
meeting of the Ecological Society of America, and a summary of research needed
to provide ecophysiological insight into the response of arctic ecosystems to
impending climate change.