* 8904884
* Plant Responses to Virus Replication
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1989,07/31/1992
* Milton Zaitlin, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* LaVerne Paige
* 07/31/1992
* USD 150,000.00

This research investigates the mechanisms of replication and pathogenesis of
plant viruses, particularly the tobacco mosaic virus (TMV). Studies involve the
significance of ubiquitination of the TMV coat protein to the viral infection
process. This includes looking at the appearance of ubiquinated coat protein in
the free pool of cytosolic coat proteins, localizing the site of the ubiquinated
protein both on the TMV viruon and within infected cells, looking at the
ubiquination of coat protein in transgenic plants and characterizing the
response of plant cells to viral infection by monitoring the cell's production
of ubiquitin. A second area of experimentation involves the mechanism whereby
viral nucleic acids and proteins become established in the chloroplast during
the process of viral infection. Specific experiments are designed 1) to
ascertain whether mature viral coat protein enters the chloroplast from the
cytosol or is synthesized within the chloroplast from viral RNA and 2) to
investigate the mechanism by which viral RNA is incorporated into the
chloroplast. The long-term goal of this work is an increased understanding of
the mechanisms by which plant viruses bring about pathogenic responses in
infected plant cells. Emphasis will be placed on the tobacco mosaic virus (TMV).
The first goal involves investigating the significance of the finding that TMV
(and numerous other viruses) contain the protein ubiquitin attached to intact
virus particles. Ubiquitin is a small protein found in the cells of all higher
plants and animals. It is known to form covalent attachments to selected
proteins in numerous cells and plays a role in cell regulation, protein
degradation and stress responses. A second goal of this research addresses the
observation that TMV RNA is able to enter the chloroplast during infection which
is coupled with the fact that the chloroplast is the major site of cellular
disruption during TMV infection. Studies will focus on how the viral RNA gets
into the chloroplast. This problem will be approached initially by developing a
cell-free system for looking at the uptake of viral RNA by isolated
chloroplasts. Once this system is operating, more specific aspects of the RNA
uptake can be addressed experimentally.