* 8904262
* A Developmental Study of Essential Amino Acid Biosynthesis  in Chloroplasts
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1989,08/31/1993
* William Mills, University of Houston - Clear Lake
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 08/31/1993
* USD 210,000.00

This project focuses on the developmental regulation of essential aspartate-
family amino acid metabolism in chloroplasts of higher plants. The hypothesis
being tested is that the following parameters will be tested to determine how
they vary during leaf development: 1) the level and intracellular distributions
of amino acids, 2) the permeability of the chloroplast envelope to amino acids
and 3) the activities of key enzymes of essential amino acid production.
Purified chloroplasts prepared from leaves of barley plants at various stages of
development are used to determine concentrations of amino acids in chloroplasts
and other cellular compartments throughout development, to measure the transport
of aspartic acid and the metabolically related amino acids, lysine, threonine,
methionine and isoleucine, into chloroplasts from leaves of varying ages, and to
isolate the enzymes aspartate kinase, homoserine dehydrogenase and
dihydrodipicolinate synthetase from plastids of different age tissues and
relative catalytic activities. Antibodies also will be raised to the enzymes and
variations in enzyme levels will be confirmed by immunological methods. In the
last decade it has become clear that the chloroplast is the main site, if not
the sole site, for the biosynthesis of the nutritionally essential aspartate-
family amino acids in plant leaves. During the development of plant leaves, the
requirement for the production of these and other amino acids changes. This
research explores whether the capacity of chloroplasts to synthesize the
essential aspartate-derived amino acids varies during leaf development, so that
chloroplast development and its regulation can be better understood. These
studies will further provide information regarding the nature and regulation of
essential amino acid biosynthesis. Given that deficiency of two of the
aspartate-derived amino acids is a main factor contributing to human
malnutrition, new information regarding the regulation of their synthesis is of
particular interest.