* 8904518
* Control of Respiratory Electron Flow: A Molecular Genetic   Basis for the Alternative Oxidase
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/1989,06/30/1993
* Lee McIntosh, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 06/30/1993
* USD 208,600.00

This research utilizes a genetic approach for the alternative oxidase to
elucidate the regulation of the mitochondrial contribution to overall energy and
carbon balance. Initially, the focus centers on the gene(s) identified as
encoding at least part of the alternative oxidase. There is a vast amount of
physiological data concerning the alternative oxidase and so little
molecular/genetic data that the primary sequence of this oxidase should yield
answers that cannot be predicted at this time. The second portion of this
project utilizes alternative oxidase genes from three model systems in order to
understand the regulation of respiratory electron flow between the cytochrome
and alternative pathways.%%% Plants, fungi, cyanobacteria and many other
organisms possess both a normal cytochrome pathway of respiration and another,
"alternative", pathway. The significance of this pathway in relation to total
energy and carbon balance in these organisms is evident, yet, our biochemical
and genetic knowledge concerning its identity is extremely limited. This
research will provide a structural basis for the "alternative oxidase" of the
alternative pathway. It will also elucidate a possible mechanism for the
developmental and environmentally induced alternative oxidase capacity in plant
tissues. A model for the regulation of electron flow between the cytochrome and
alternative pathways of respiration will also be developed, providing a
framework for future hypotheses concerning the regulation of respiratory
electron flow as well as a genetic basis through gene manipulation and
transformation, to test such hypotheses.***//