* 8904798
* The Third International Mouse Genome Meeting, Oxford,       England, August 1989
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/1989,01/31/1990
* Muriel Davisson, Jackson Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 01/31/1990
* USD 10,000.00

An organizing committee has been formed to establish an International Mouse
Genome Organization that would coordinate mouse genetic information databases,
organize regular meetings on the mouse genome, enhance opportunities for genetic
analysis of the laboratory mouse and coordinate the development of maps of mouse
and human genomes. Participants in two international gene mapping meetings held
in Paris in September, 1987, and in the U.S.A. in June, 1988, have agreed there
is a clear need for further meetings. In August, 1989, the Third International
Mouse Genome meeting will be held in Oxford, England. The goals of this meeting
are (1) to provide a forum to continue the exchange of new gene mapping data,
methods for computer analysis of genetic data and genome mapping and sequencing
data; (2) to establish committees to integrate complex high resolution mapping
and sequencing of specific regions of the mouse genome; (3) to stimulate
international collaboration in mouse genome analysis; (4) to coordinate mouse
genetic databases; and (5) to formalize the International Mouse Genome
Organization. The integrated high resolution maps produced by this meeting are
essential not only for studying mouse genome organization and evolution, but
also for identifying mouse mutations. Such mutations not only are model systems
for therapy but also provide important clues about metabolic function, bearing
on development, immunology and cancer. This award will support the travel of
selected young United States scientists to participate in this important
meeting.