* 8904301
* Sixth Conversation: Biomoleculor Stereodynamics, State      University of New York at Albany, June 6-10, 1989, Group    Travel Award in Indian Currency
* O/D,OISE
* 04/15/1989,03/31/1990
* Ramaswamy Sarma, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 03/31/1990
* USD 25,200.00

Description: This project supports travel of 12 Indian scientists to the U.S. to
attend the Sixth Conversation: Biomolecular Stereo- dynamics at State University
of New York, Albany, NY, June 6-10, 1989. Topics to be covered include: Human
Genome Initiatives- physical and Biological Strategies; Recombination and
Resolvase; Structure, Dynamics, Interaction and Expression of DNA, RNA, Proteins
and their complexes; and Molecular Dynamics of Biological Macromolecules-
prospects and problems. Participants are expected from the U.S., Western Europe,
USSR, the Middle East and India. A total of 500 scientists from 14 nations will
be admitted. Significant time will be allowed for talks by graduate students,
postdoctorals and young faculty. The Indian participants will be from the Tata
Institute of Fundamental Research, the Indian Institute of Science, University
of Delhi, University of Delhi, University of Madras, the Center for Cellular and
Molecular Biology, Hyderabad and the Saha Institute of Nuclear Physics. Scope:
This series of meetings started in 1979 and held every two years is a main event
to discuss developing ideas and discoveries in the context of biological
structure, dynamics, interactions and expressions. Past meetings have been quite
successful with participation from over 500 scientists from 14 countries.
Participation of eminent Indian scientists is expected to enrich the debates,
and to lead to future collaboration with U.S. scientists.