* 8904060
* Plutonism Across the Tujunga-North American Terrane         Boundary:  A Middle to Upper Crustal View of Two Juxtaposed Magmatic Arcs
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/1989,06/30/1991
* James Lawford Anderson, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas O. Wright
* 06/30/1991
* USD 128,150.00

Petrological studies in southern California have revealed middle to upper
crustal portions of two juxtaposed Mesozoic magmatic arcs one being a native
terrane of the Cordilleran orogen and the other "exotic" Tujunga or San Gabriel
terrane. Crystallization thermobarometry of successively intruded and dated
plutons and their thermal aureoles have provided "crustal nails" to track the
variable depth history of orogenic crust in both terranes. Deep Mesozoic crust
is now exposed at the surface by virtue of two contrasting tectonic settings -
lower plates of extensional detachment faults in Tertiary metamorphic core
complexes and upper plates of Mesozoic basement-cored thrust faults. The goal of
this proposal is to document the nature of Mesozoic are development as a
function of crustal depth across the terrane boundary and to utilize this
information to constrain the accretionary history of this region of the
Cordillera. This proposal outlines a petrological investigation of the plutons
and host assemblages in both terranes. The approach is field based but includes
petrologic, chemical, isotopic, and mineralogic studies to evaluate evolution of
the plutonic suites from their inception at the source region to the condition
of their ascent and emplacement. Work to suggests that the two terranes were
accreted by mid-Cretaceous, if not by the middle Jurassic. Much of the apparent
"exotic" nature of the Tujunga terrane stems from its partial derivation from
the middle crust. Work to date has identified crustal sections that one resided
at depths to 16 to 30 km. These middle crustal rocks exhibit several distinct
characteristic differences from that at shallower crustal levels including the
occurrence of Proterozoic anorthosite + charnockite and an abundance of Mesozoic
plutons ranging from unusally calcic two-mica granitoids to a variety of
intermediate igneous suites including diorite, quartz diorite, and tonalite.