* 8904106
* Molecular Genetic Analysis of det loci of Arabiodopsis      thaliana
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1989,02/28/1993
* Joanne Chory, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies
* Continuing Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 02/28/1993
* USD 336,775.00

The overall objective of this project is to elucidate the pathway of sensory
perception associated with chloroplast development in plants. The process of
greening, or differentiation of the chloroplast, involves the coordinate
regulation of many nuclear and chloroplast genes. The cues for the initiation of
this developmental program are both extrinsic (light) and intrinsic (cell-type
and plastid signals). Several regulatory photoreceptor are involved in the
perception of light signals, but nothing is known of the transduction elements
that mediate either the external or intracellular signals. The proposed research
program focusses on a novel class of Arabidopsis thaliana mutants previously
isolated by the principal investigator. The mutant plants develop light-grown
characteristics even when grown in darkness, including, leaf development and
anthocyanin accumulation and are therefore designated det, for de-etionlated.
There are at least 2 det complimentation groups. The specific strategic approach
will be to characterize genetically, biochemically, and physiologically the
previously identified det mutant, as well identify new det mutant classes.
Double mutants will be made to begin analysis of gene interaction, which will
eventually lead to construction of the path(s) which lead to greening. The
characterization of these mutants has already suggested that the response to
light may be a repression rather than an induction phenomenon. Further work
promises to elucidate the greening pathways in plants, pathway which must be
understood for practical as well as basic reason.