* 8904203
* Classifier Systems:  Parallel Machine Learning with Higher- Level Building Blocks
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/1989,07/31/1993
* Arthur Burks, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Larry H. Reeker
* 07/31/1993
* USD 273,247.00

Classifier systems learn by means of a market economy of instructions
(classifiers) and data (messages). The system is computationally parallel since
all classifiers may be applied to all messages simultaneously. Classifier
systems discover by means of a genetic algorithm which creates promising new
classifiers from successful ones. This genetic procedure conducts a parallel
search for the building blocks of problem solutions. Classifier systems already
exhibit successful learning and discovery, including the emergence and stability
of both multilevel default hierarchies and chains of classifiers relevant to
means of software packages developed for expressing problematic environments and
for formulating classifier programs. The project will study the different roles
of strength (wealth), the roles of generality and specificity in hierarchies and
classifier reproduction, and the emergence of building blocks. Adaptive systems
which develop their own goals will also be covered. Our computer experiments are
guided by a theory of adaptation. The fundamental theorem characterizes the rate
at which the genetic algorithm samples the building blocks of useful models of
the environment. We will extend this theorem to cover the discovery of
regularities in rapidly changing environments.