* 8904430
* Regulation of Heme Biosynthesis in the Bradyrhizobium       japonicum/Soybean Symbiosis
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/1989,06/30/1993
* Mark O'Brian, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 06/30/1993
* USD 245,400.00

The regulation of heme biosynthesis in nitrogen-fixing soybean root nodules is
being studied as a means of understanding how the bacterial symbiont
Bradyrhizobium japonicum interacts with the plant to regulate metabolic
processes essential for symbiosis. Bacterial heme is believed to be the
prosthetic group of the plant nodule protein leghemoglobin, hence heme and
apoprotein synthesis by the respective orgainism must be coordinated during
leghemoglobin formation. Experiments will elucidate the exact role of the B.
japonicum heme biosynthetic pathway in leghemoglobin formation, and deterine how
heme synthesis genes are regulated during nodule development Specific objectives
are to (i) isolate B. japonicum heme synthesis mutants, (ii) determine the
effects of the bacterial heme synthesis lesions on leghemoglobin synthesis,
(iii) isolate and characterize B. japonicum heme synthesis genes, and (iv) study
the regulation of heme synthesis genes by nodule-associated factors and by
bacterial regulatory protein. Finally, the regulation of bacterial heme
synthesis will be correlated with leghemoglobin formation. Biological nitrogen
fixation is important because it is an inexpensive and environmentally-sound
source of nitrogen fertilizer. Understanding plant-microbe interactions at the
molecular level is important in any attempt to improve the symbiosis or to
extend it to other plants by genetic engineering. The study of the
Bradyrhizobium japonicum/soybean interaction will provide a better understanding
of interkingdom commmunication as well as contribute to the body of knowledge of
heme biosynthesis in general, of which there is surprisingly little genetic
information considering the ubiquity of this pathway in nature.