* 8904252
* Gene Expression in Early Mouse Embryos
* BIO,IOS
* 10/15/1989,03/31/1991
* Rosemary Bachvarova, Joan and Sanford I. Weill Medical College of Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 03/31/1991
* USD 50,000.00

The long term objective of this project is to elucidate mechanisms of
development in early mammalian embryos through the period of gastrulation. TGF-
beta2, a mammalian peptide growth factor having a variety of effects on
different cells, can induce mesoderm in animal pole cells of the amphibian
embryos in a process resembling normal induction. The related factor, TGF-
beta1, may play a subsidiary role in this process. Expression of the mRNAs for
these two factors in peri-implantation mouse embryos (blastocyst to 101/2 day
embryos), placentae, and uterine decidua will be sought by in situ hybridization
and Northern blotting. As a subsidiary goal, expression in ovaries, particularly
in relation to the developing oocyte,, will also be followed. The homologous
probe for TGF-beta1 is currently in use in the laboratory, and if possible, a
mouse cDNA for TGF-beta2 will be obtained using a simian cDNA probe to screen
appropriate cDNA libraries. %%% TGF-beta was a growth factor originally
discovered as a secreted factor that stimulated differentiated cells to a state
where they proliferate in culture. This and related growth factors have recently
been detected in early embryos. The current study is to determine the levels and
subcellular locations of two related factors during early mammalian
embryogenesis.