* 8904462
* Ion-Channels and Pumps in Wild-Type and Mutant Yeast
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/1989,07/31/1994
* Harold Lecar, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Maryanna P. Henkart
* 07/31/1994
* USD 223,500.00

The goal of this project is to study the function of individual ion channels
and pumps involved in membrane transport and bioenergetics. The proposed
research will use patch-clamp methods and lipid-bilayer reconstitution to
investigate ion channels and pumps in the plasma membrane of the yeast
Saccharomyces cerevisiae. The initial goals will be to characterize the behavior
of potassium ion channels and the proton pump working in isolation. To relate
the patch-clamp data to whole-cell physiology, the function of the channels and
pumps in wild type yeast will be compared with that in known transport mutants.
Currently mutants of the PMA1 gene are being studied. This gene codes for the
plasma membrane ATPase, and its mutation gives rise to a variety of phenotypic
changes in cell function, including altered coupling between the pump and
potassium transport. Patch clamp experiments thus far show differences in
function of voltage-gated potassium-ion channels for wild-type and for
transport-deficient mutants. In all cells the major ion transporters work in
concert to accumulate certain ions within the cytoplasm in concentrations much
greater than in the external environment while excluding other ion species. This
highly selective control of the ionic environent, though essential for normal
cell growth and development is still poorly understood. In particular, it is not
really known how voltage-gated ion channels in inexcitable cells interact with
electrogenic ion pumps to control the membrane potential and how membrane
potential, in turn, acts in regulating the function of various membrane channels
and pumps. The results of this research should provide important new insights
into this fundamental problem in cell biology.