* 8904420
* Silicic Volcanism and Crustal Evolution: Petrogenetic       Studies in Central Chihuahua, Mexico, Uniquely Constrained  by Mantle Isotopic Data
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/1989,05/31/1992
* Kenneth Cameron, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* John L. Snyder
* 05/31/1992
* USD 115,000.00

The mid-cenozoic ignimbrites of western Mexico constitute the largest rhyolite
province in the world, and definitive evidence regarding their genesis must be
recorded in the deep crust and upper mantle beneath the region. In previous
petrogenetic studies of voluminous ignimbrites from Mexico and elsewhere, it has
not been possible to quantitatively evaluate the relative contributions of
crustal and mantle components for the following reasons: (1) The deep crust is
heterogeneous, and almost invariable, its age and composition beneath the
volcanic field can only be inferred. (2) The sub-crustal isotopic compositions
of continental arc basaltic magma are rarely known because any magma that passed
through the continental crust may acquire a crustal isotopic signature. The La
Olivina area of chihuahua, Mexico provides an unusual opportunity to elucidate
the origin and evolution of calc-alkalic rocks, including voluminous
ignimbrites, by drawing on data from crustal and mantle xenoliths. The primary
goals of this research are as follows: (1) Determine the igneous and metamorphic
history of the deep crust beneath central chihuahua by dating zircons from
granulite facies xenoliths using the SHRIMP ion microprobe and conventional
techniques. The SHRIMP analyses will be made by Roberta Rudnick at the
Australian National University. (2) Completely characterize the deep crustal
xenoliths and volcanic rocks from the region by major element, isotopic (Sr, Nd,
Pb), and geothermic-geobaric studies. (3) Quantitatively test petrogenetic
models relating the volcanic rocks to specific deep crustal lithologies. These
models are uniquely constrained by data from mantle metapyroxenite xenoliths
that record the isotopic compositions of "uncontaminated" continental arc
basaltic magmas. The final result of this research should be an exceptional
documentation of the impact of voluminous silicic magmatism on the deep crust.