* 8904541
* Metamorphic Evolution of Mid-To-Deep Levels of the          Continental Crust in Northern Idaho
* GEO,EAR
* 12/15/1989,05/31/1992
* Jack Rice, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Thomas O. Wright
* 05/31/1992
* USD 100,000.00

This proposal requests continued support for a research program devoted to
understanding the thermal and tectonic history of the North American Cordillera
as exposed in northern Idaho. Previous studies by the P.I. and graduate students
at the University of Oregon, have demonstrated that three major metamorphic
events are recorded in pelitic and calcareous rocks north of the Idaho
Batholith. Structural, mineralogical and chemical evidence for these events
provide important data hearing on the evolution of the continental crust. The
propose research will be directed toward improving our understanding of the
metamorphic history, and the relationships between metamorphism, deformation and
plutonism. Geothermometry and geobarometry will be carried out using a new
approach which solves all equilibria implied by a mineral paragenesis
simultaneously. Zoned minerals, especially garnet, will be studied in order to
estimate the P-T time path of prograde metamorphism, and the decompression path
associated with uplift. Such calculations will be tested with a new method of
calculating equilibrium mineral assemblages and compositions with a free energy
minimization algorithm. Fluid- rock interactions will also be examined by
careful studies of interlayered calcareous and pelitic compositions. The phase
equilibrium relations in calcareous rocks, which equilibrated with very saline
fluids, will be examined in the light of new data bearing on the thermodynamic
properties of minerals and aqueous species in the system H2O-CO2-NaCl. A new
model describing the compositional relations among the mineral scapolite and
NaCl-rich fluid will be developed and applied to the natural occurrences. Stable
isotopic analyses will be undertaken in order to more fully characterize the
nature, source and amounts of fluid reacting with a variety of rock
compositions. Isotopic age determinations will be made in an attempt to learn
the timing of multiple metamorphism, and the relationship of metamorphism of
intrusion of the Idaho Batholith.