* 8904911
* Multigrid Methods for Nonconforming Finite Elements
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1989,10/01/1989
* Susanne Brenner, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Izenman
* 10/01/1989
* USD 16,100.00

8904911 Brenner The multigrid method for finite elements is an optimal order
algorithm for solving elliptic boundary value problems. The error of the
approximate solution lies within the theoretical bound for the global error, yet
the cost of computation is proportional only to the number of unknowns in the
discretized equations. Until recently, most of the research in this area
concentrated primarily on nested conforming finite element spaces. However,
nonconforming finite elements are often used in applications because they are
easier to program. In previous work, results on full W-cycle multigrid
convergence for nonconforming finite elememts have been obtained by the
principal investigator in the study of P1 nonconforming finite element applied
to the Poisson equation and the Morley finite element applied to the biharmonic
equation on polygonal domains. In this project, these results will be applied to
the stationary Stokes equations and extended to domains with smooth boundary.
Multigrid algorithms will be developed for nonconforming methods in linear
elasticity and plate bending and also for mixed methods that are equivalent to
nonconforming methods. The convergence of V-cycle nonconforming methods will be
investigated. Numerical experiments will be performed for each of these
problems.