* 8904099
* Physiological Substrates and Products of Carbon Monoxide    Dehydrogenase from Methanosarcina barkeri
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1989,06/30/1993
* Joseph Krzycki, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 06/30/1993
* USD 235,500.00

Current evidence indicates that, during methanogenesis from acetate, carbon
monoxide dehydrogenase from Methanosarcina barkeri mediates cleavage of
acetylCoA to methyl and carbonyl intermediates, then oxidizes the carbonyl
moiety to provide electrons for the reduction of methylCoM to methane. However,
isolated carbon monoxide dehydrogenase is known to catalyze only the
methylviologen linked oxidation of carbon monoxide to carbon dioxide. This
research will establish the physiological substrates and products of carbon
monoxide dehydrogenase, and directly test the proposed role of this enzyme in
methanogenesis. An assay has been developed to measure carbon dioxide evolution
from acetate dependent upon the addition of a methyl accepting coenzyme, such as
coenzyme M, to extracts in which methylreductase is inhibited. Using this assay
methylated intermediates of the pathway will be identified by their ability to
replace CoM as well as by radiotracer studies. The methyl intermediate proximal
to the cleavage of acetyl-CoA will then be used to monitor purification of
proteins capable of cleaving acetyl-CoA to that methyl intermediate and carbon
dioxide.%%% Formation of methane and carbon dioxide from acetate is an essential
reaction in the bio-degradation of organic matter in many anaerobic
environments. Acetate is a key intermediate in the breakdown of organic polymers
generated both by the growth of organisms and by human industrial and
agricultural activities. Acetic acid is the direct precursor of the majority of
biologically generated methane in a reaction mediated by microorganisms. Some
microorganisms can synthesize methane in a reaction requiring that the carbon-
carbon bond be broken. The enzyme which carries out this biologically important
step is the subject of this investigation.***