* 8904306
* Functional Group Interactions in DNA-Protein Recognition
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/1989,06/30/1993
* Larry McLaughlin, Boston College
* Continuing Grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 06/30/1993
* USD 298,000.00

The mechanisms involved in macromolecular recognition are central to the
understanding of gene regulation. This project will examine the nature and
relative importance of functional group interactions between proteins and
nucleic acids which are responsible for the formation of high affinity sequence-
specific complexes. A series of modified oligodeoxynucleotides will be prepared
and tested as possible recognition sites for restriction and modification
enzymes as well as a selected repressor protein (the tryptophan repressor). The
modifications will be chosen in order to minimize structural changes in the
B-DNA helix, and will involve the "deletion" or "displacement" of selected
functional groups, or the "reversal" of the relative positions of amino and
carbonyl residues involved in interstrand hydrogen bonding. These DNA fragments
will be prepared by chemical syntheses employing a variety of modified
nucleoside derivatives obtained during the initial period of this project.
Parallel studies, however, will be directed at the examination of the effects of
modified bases upon DNA structure and the implications of such structure
modulation upon recognition process. A specific well- characterized structure
modulation, that of DNA curvature will be induced without altering the
functional group character of the protein biding site and the effects of such
tertiary structure modulation upon recognition will be examined. Similar studies
will begin with a sequence- specific binding protein (the Eco RI endonuclease)
where an amino acid side chain (Arg-200) known to contact the guanine base of
the recognition sequence d(GAATTC) will be altered. A mutant protein (with a
Cys-200) will be modified by a series of thiol-specific reagents which will
introduce the desired functional group character with the correct geometry
(distance from the polypeptide chain) at this site. By studying recognition
phenomena, using site-specifically modified macromolecules, this project should
contribute to the understanding of cellular recognition processes and provide
access to a variety of useful biochemical tools.