* 8904979
* RUI: Tetrahymena: A Model for Eukaryotic Phospholipid       Metabolism
* BIO,MCB
* 05/15/1989,08/31/1993
* Joseph Smith, University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth
* Standard Grant
* M.  Paige
* 08/31/1993
* USD 180,000.00

This research will continue to develop the use of the ciliate protozoan
Tetrahymena thermophila as a model system for the study of eukaryotic
phospholipid metabolism. The research focuses on the interrelationships between
the pathways of phosphatidylethanolamine and phosphatidylcholine biosynthesis,
with particular emphasis on elaborating the newly-discovered cross-regulation
between ethanolamine kinase and choline kinase in which choline phosphate has
been shown to activate ethanolamine kinase. The possible role of this regulation
in vivo will be investigated by examining levels of the intermediates in the
pathways (ethanolamine, ethanolamine phosphate, CDP-ethanolamine, choline,
choline phosphate and CDP- choline) under normal growth conditions and under
conditions in which the levels of these intermediates may be perturbed (by using
analogs of choline and ethanolamine.) The results will elaborate the potential
for metabolic channelling of intermediates in the phospholipid biosynthetic
pathways. Enzymes from bovine liver, such as the ethanolamine kinase and choline
kinase will also be examined in order to elaborate similarities and differences
in phospholipid biosynthesis between Tetrahymena and higher eukaryotes. The role
of lipids in the structure and function of biological membranes has been of
major interest for a considerable period of time. Modifications of the physical
state of lipids and of the types of lipids in a given membrane have led to some
understanding of requirements for membrane fluidity, surface charge and polar
head groups. All of these aspects appear to be important to normal operation of
a given membrane system. The phospholipid composition of eukaryotes varies from
tissue to tissue, from cell type to cell type within a given tissue and even
between membrane types with in a given cell. How these differences in
phospholipid composition in eukaryotes arise has been of considerable interest
and relates to such clinical problems as defects in formation of the surfactant
dipalmitoylphosphatidylcholine in the human lung. This research explores the
first reactions in phospholipid biosynthesis (ethanolamine and choline kinases)
which exhibit great variability in structure and properties between various
tissues and between organisms. These differences suggest possible additional
regulation at this step in the phospholipid biosynthetic pathways in some
tissues. This possiblity will be examined in Tetrahymena (a unicellular
eukaryote) whose pathways for pospholipid biosynthesis are the same as those in
mammals. The research will extensively involve undergraduates and will expose
them to the intensive laboratory experience which they will encournter in their
funther scientific careers.