* 8904041
* A Patch-Clamp Investigation of the Role of the Phosphatidyl-inositol Pathway in Mediating Plant Cell Responses to Blue  Light
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1989,07/31/1993
* Sarah Assmann, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 07/31/1993
* USD 272,440.00

Using electrophysiological (patch clamping) techniques, this investigator has
shown that blue light activates a hyperpolarizing proton pump at the guard cell
membrane. Hyperpolarization creates a gradient for potassium influx, presumed to
occur through potassium-specific ion channels, resulting in water uptake, cell
swelling, and stomatal opening. The goals of the proposed research are to
investigate the possibility that blue-light-activation of the proton pump and/or
regulation of potassium channel opening is mediated by the phosphatidylinositol
(PI) pathway. Preliminary experiments indicate that analogs of diacylglycerol, a
component of the PI pathway, can enhance light-stimulated opening of stomata in
epidermal peels. Patch clamping will be used to determine the effects of these
and other biochemical regulators of the PI pathway on blue-light-stimulated ion
pumping and potassium channel kinetics of guard cell protoplasts. The
electrophysiological response to blue light of guard cells from an Arabidopsis
thaliana mutant (phi 3-4) will also be characterized. This mutant lacks a
phototropic response, and also exhibits reduced stomatal opening under blue
illumination. Blue light mediates a variety of responses in plants, such as
opening of stomatal pores to allow gas and water exchange, bending toward light,
and chloroplast development. The proposed research will focus on the stomatal
response and will contribute to a clearer understanding of the cellular
mechanisms by which plants detect and respond to blue light.