* 8904788
* The Geochemistry of Sulfur During Submarine Hydrothermal    Alteration of the Troodos Ophiolite, Cyprus
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/1989,01/31/1992
* Jeffrey Alt, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Jane M. Ernst
* 01/31/1992
* USD 60,000.00

Seawater-crustal reactions in submarine hydrothermal systems may exert an
important influence on the mass and isotopic composition of sulfur in seawater,
but such effects have been ignored due to a lack of data and understanding of
sulfur in these systems. Subduction of altered oceanic crust has also been
suggested to account for the 34S-enrichments of arc volcanics and to produce
heterogeneities in the sulfur isotopic composition of the mantle, but little is
known about the distribution or isotopic composition of sulfur in altered
oceanic crust. It is proposed to analyze the sulfide mineralogy, sulfur
contents, and sulfur isotopic composition of a section through the Troodos
ophiolite in order to understand the geochemistry of sulfur during seawater-
crustal reactions and to address these problems. The proposed results will
provide a necessary test of recent results from seafloor samples. Moreover, the
ophiolite section will provide essential new data on deep reaction/upflow zones,
which are lacking from the oceanic sample suite. Such zones exert important
controls on hydrothermal fluids which form massive sulfide deposits and vent
onto the seafloor. The proposed study will also permit testing of theoretical
models which predict zones of sulfur and 34S enriched rocks in the deep recharge
areas of hydrothermal systems. Such rocks have not yet been observed from the
seafloor.