* 8904574
* Isolation of a Receptor for a Fungal Wall Derived Elicitor  of Phytoalexins
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/1989,01/31/1993
* Michael Hahn, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 01/31/1993
* USD 251,500.00

The objective of this research is to isolate and characterize the receptor for a
biologically active hepta-B-glucoside. A radiolabeled hepta-B-glucoside
elicitor, for use in ligand- binding studies, will be prepared by conjugation of
the oligosaccharide to tyramine, followed by iodination of the conjugate. It has
been established that a model heptaglucoside, maltoheptaose, can be conjugated
to tyramine and furthermore, that the structural modifications of the hepta-B-
glucoside elicitor required for radiolabeling with iodine are unlikely to affect
its elicitor activity. A photoaffinity labeling reagent for receptor
localization and identification studies will also be prepared. The receptor(s)
for the hepta-B-glucoside elicitor will be identified and localized using
standard cell fractionation techniques, ligand-binding assays, and photo-
affinity labeling. If an elicitor receptor is identified, it will be purified
and characterized. The proposed experiments will lay the groundwork for future
studies to determine the physiological significance of the receptor(s) and to
identify the role the receptor(s) play in the signal pathway that results in
altered gene expression leading, in turn, to phytoalexin accumulation in
affected plant cells.%%% Fungal-derived B-glucans, of the type from which the
active hepta-B-glucoside was isolated, are active as inducers or enhancers of a
variety of defense mechanisms in plants. The only biologically active B-glucan-
derived fragment that has been purified to homogeneity and structurally
characterized is a hepta-B-glucoside elicitor. Induction of phytoalexin
accumulation by the hepta-B-glucoside elicitor is an excellent model system for
the study of the structure and function of oligosaccharide receptors in plants
because the complete structure of the oligosaccharide ligand has been determined
and considerable information is known about the genes whose transcription is
induced in plant cells upon binding of the oligosaccharide. The proposed
studies, if successful, will be particularly important in plants, since plant
receptors for regulatory molecules have not yet been purified and
characterized.***//