* 8904195
* Curation and Revitalization of the Recent Mammal Collection,Los Angeles County Museum of Natural History
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/1990,08/31/1994
* John Heyning, Los Angeles County Museum of Natural History Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 08/31/1994
* USD 331,008.00

The Mammalogy Section of the Los Angeles County Museum of Natural History has
exhibited rapid growth over the past several decades, and now comprises more
than 85,000 catalogued specimens, as well as an uncatalogued backlog of
approximately 9,000 additional specimens. In size, this mammal collection is the
ninth largest in North America and ranks among the 20 largest collections in the
world. The collection includes representatives of tropical species from around
the world, as well as the holdings of the Marine Mammal Laboratory. The Section
has recently established a frozen tissue collection and laboratory facilities
for molecular biology, a tool used in reconstructing the evolutionary
relationships among taxonomic groups. Dr. Sarah George, Associate Curator in the
Section of Mammalogy, proposes completion of all preparation and computer
cataloging of the backlogged specimens. The proposed curatorial activities will
bring important collections into the mainstream of research. Until they are
properly prepared, curated, and entered into the LACM computer database, it is
difficult, if not impossible, for researchers to gain access to and knowledge of
these important specimens. Systematic collections in natural history museums are
the most readable form of the evolution of life on earth. Researchers in
ecology, systematics, biogeography and evolutionary biology are completely
dependent on these research resources, and their continued growth and proper
curation are critically important.