* 8904245
* Anatomy and Evolution of the Intracontinental Reno-MarysvaleMagmatic Zone in the Great Basin of Nevada and Utah
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/1989,02/28/1993
* Myron Best, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* John L. Snyder
* 02/28/1993
* USD 73,600.00

This is the continuation of a two -year, NSF-funded project begun August, 1986
to obtain integrated space-time-composition-volume data on the Reno-Marysvale
magmatic zone, a region that spans across the Great Basin of Nevada and Utah
consisting of voluminous, Oligocene through early Miocene ash-flow tuffs and
minor andesite to rhyolite lavas. The research involves: (a) Field study and
sampling of volcanic sequences and petrographic, whole-rock XRF, and microprobe
analyses of phenocrysts and glass by PI's at BYU. (b) Determination of high-
precision, single- crystal 40Ar/39Ar ages and natural remanent magnetization
directions of regionally-extensive ash-flow sheets by A.L. Deino at the Berkeley
Geochronology Center and C.S. Gromme at the USGS, Menlo Park, CA, respectively.
(c) Correlation of regional ash- flow tuff sheets and compilation of space-time-
volume-composition data on tuffs and lavas by PI's at BYU. (d) Determination of
Sr, Nd, and Pb isotopic data by J. Ruiz and J.L. Wooden at the Univ. of Arizona
and USGS, Menlo Park, CA respectively. These data will provide a detailed
picture of the evolution in time and space of a major intracontinental volcanic
province and will allow conception of interpretive models dealing with: (1)
Time- and space-dependent changes i composition of extruded magma and in type of
eruption--pyroclastic versus lava. (2) Relative contributions of mantle-derived
versus crustal components to the mass and thermal energy budget of the magma
systems. (3) Contributing roles played by subducting oceanic lithosphere and
changing thermal, mechanical, and density state of the crust.***//