* 8904389
* Mathematical Sciences: Spectral and Fractal Geometry for    Variational Elliptic Boundary Value Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/1989,01/31/1991
* Michel Lapidus, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* William Y. Velez
* 01/31/1991
* USD 49,000.00

The relationship between the geometry of a manifold and the invariants of the
elliptic differential operators on it is one of the main unifying themes of
contemporary mathematical research. (For instance, the natural frequencies of a
vibrating membrane constitute the spectrum of a differential operator called the
Laplacian; knowing the spectrum, one can infer a great deal about the shape of
the membrane.) The case of a region with fractal boundary, so irregular that its
dimension is no longer an integer, has been the setting for some recent
breakthroughs relating spectral information to geometry. In particular, thanks
to work of Professor Lapidus and a French colleague of his, it is now known that
one can recover the dimension of the boundary from the spectrum of the Laplacian
in such a region. This work, which has involved both computer experimentation
and sophisticated mathematical technique, has applications to the study of
porous media and the scattering of waves from fractal surfaces. Its continuation
is the main thrust of the project supported by this award. More precisely,
Lapidus will investigate sharpened forms of the asymptotic formula for the
eigenvalue distribution of Laplace operators with various boundary conditions.
The goal is to make yet clearer the role of the Minkowski dimension of the
boundary in this distribution. There are analogous formulas for the trace of the
associated heat semigroup. The case in which not only the boundary of the
domain, but the domain itself, is fractal will be studied.