* 8904684
* The Regulation of a Neurosopora Glucose-repressible Gene
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/1989,06/30/1993
* Stephen Free, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 06/30/1993
* USD 268,200.00

For a variety of Filamentous fungi the level of extracellular glucose has been
found to regulate the production of those extracellular hydrolases which
mobilize alternative carbon and energy sources (proteases and carbohydrases).
These glucose-repressible extracellular hydrolytic enzymes play an important
role in fungal growth. Using Neurospora crassa as a model system we propose to
study the molecular mechanisms responsible for the regulated expression of
glucose-repressible genes in the filamentous fungi. We propose to identify DNA
sequences which are required for the regulated expression of grg-l, a Neurospora
glucose-repressible gene. The regulatory sequences will be defined by creating
deletions and mutations in vitro and following the in vivo expression from these
altered genes in Neurospora transformants. We propose to isolate and study a
number of mutants affected in the ability to regulate the expression of glucose-
repressible genes. Neurospora transformants containing chimeric genes will be
used to generate the mutants. These mutants will be characterized by classical
genetics techniques. A major effort will be made to study those proteins which
specifically bind to the DNA sequences needed for the regulated expression of
grg-l. We will assess the presence or absence of these DNA binding proteins in
mutants affected in the ability to express glucose-repressible genes. By
characterizing the grg-l regulatory region, the proteins which bind to this
region, and the presence or absence of these proteins in mutants unable to
regulate grg-l transcription, we hope to elucidate the molecular mechanisms
responsible for the regulation of glucose-repressible genes in the filamentous
fungi. Given a choice of nutrients many simple organisms (bacteria and fungi)
preferentially utilize glucose when it is available. When growing in the
simultaneous presence of glucose and other nutrients, these organisms make none
of the enzymes necessary to digest the other nutrients until they have exhausted
the supply of glucose. The enzymes for digestion of the other nutrients are said
to be repressed by glucose. The mechanism of glucose repression is very well
understood in some but not all species of bacteria, although some details are
still obscure even in well characterized species. The mechanism is apparently
much more complex in yeast than in bacteria, and hence is only partly
understood. The mechanism in the mold Neurospora crassa is not understood at
all, although there is reason to believe that it is as complex as in yeast,
though differing in detail. This is a proposal to elucidate the mechanism of
glucose repression in N. crassa. Apart from its own considerable intrinsic
interest, this work may lead to information useful for the engineering of
industrially useful strains of Neurospora.