* 8904635
* PRF/M:  Developmental Quantitative Genetic Aspects of       Morphological Evolution
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1989,07/31/1990
* William Atchley, Individual Award
* Fellowship Award
* Penelope L. Firth
* 07/31/1990
* USD 55,048.00

Six (of seven) months of Mid-Career Fellowship in Environmental Biology tenure
will be spent at Dalhousie University (Canada), enabling Dr. William R. Atchley
of North Carolina State University to engage in a collaborative synthesis with
Dr. Brian K. Hall and his group. The effort will be to integrate approaches of
developmental biology with quantitative genetics; mammalian craniomandibular
growth and morphogenesis will serve as the paradigmatic focus of interest. In
particular, first Dr. Atchley will strive to acquire expertise in laboratory
procedures pertinent to skeletal developmental biology, such as isolation and
culture of skeletal tissue condensations, in order to determine cellular
architecture, relative rates of development, and temporal orchestration of
events during ontogeny. Secondly, he will elaborate on a previously developed
covariance matrix model by exploring in greater detail topics such as (1) the
role of various developmental processes (e.g., hyperplasia and hypertrophy) in
generating genetic correlations among dissimilar traits, (2) the developmental
origin of evolutionary constraints, (3) quantitative genetic aspects of
heterochronic events during development, and (4) how epigenetic interactions can
be incorproated into quantitative genetic models. A final month of fellowship
tenure will be spent at the University of Edinburgh's (Scotland) Department of
Genetics in Dr. William G. Hill's laboratory.