* 8904308
* The Production of Mature T Lymphocytes
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1989,07/31/1992
* Rebecca Adkins, University of Miami School of Medicine
* Continuing Grant
* Maryanna P. Henkart
* 07/31/1992
* USD 273,200.00

The goals of this research are to understand the intrathymic events leading to
the production of mature T lymphocytes in the developing and adult stages of
life. It is proposed to analyze extensively the maturation of CD4-8- precursors
from the murine adult and fetal thymus. These studies will be carried out in
vivo utilizing the technique of intrathymic injection to create chimeric mice.
The possibility that phenotypic subsets of adult and 14 day fetal CD4-8-
thymocytes produce different types of progeny will be tested. For this purpose,
differentiation antigens on peripheral progeny produced by adult and fetal
CD4-8- subsets will be examined. To study the differentiation of subsets
independent of phenotype, thymic progeny produced by individual CD4-8-
precursors in clonal repopulations will be analyzed. Moreover, to understand the
dynamics of the intrathymic precursor pool during development, the phenotypes of
peripheral T cells arising from CD4-8- thymocytes of different gestational ages
(fetal days 14-19) will be analyzed. A better understanding of the
differentiation of T lymphocytes in the fetal vs adult stages of life will
provide a major contribution to our knowledge of the development of the immune
system. Dr. Adkins' proposed new appoach should provide a unique perspective on
this important problem.