* 8904549
* Characterization and Localization of Purine Synthesis       Enzymes from Soybean Nodules
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/1989,07/31/1992
* Eric Triplett, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 07/31/1992
* USD 193,700.00

The pathway for purine biosynthesis has been detected in plastids which suggests
that the genes for purine synthesis may be of prokaryotic or eukaryotic origin.
Also, preliminary evidence suggests that there may be isozymes of the purine
synthesis reactions. None of the enzymes of purine synthesis have been purified
to homogeneity from a plant source. Soybean root nodules are an excellent model
system for the study of purine synthesis in plants because these organs
assimilate fixed nitrogen into the ureides, allantoin and allantoic acid, via
purine synthesis. As a result, the purine synthesis pathway is highly expressed
in nodules compared to other plant organs. These experiments address several
important problems of purine synthesis in plants. Two enzymes of purine
synthesis from nodules, glycinamide ribonucleotide transformylase and
aminoimidazole ribonucleotide synthetase, will be purified and characterized.
These enzymes catalyze the third and fifth committed steps, respectively, of
purine synthesis. Using immunochemical and enzymatic assays, the distribution of
these enzymes will be determined at the subcellular, cellular, and whole plant
levels.%%% Little is known about purine synthesis in plants despite its
importance in nitrogen metabolism. The production of ureides which are derived
from purine synthesis is part of the process of supplying leaves and stems with
nitrogen source they require. These studies will characterize two of the enzymes
of the purine biosynthesis pathway as well as examine the expression and
location of the genes responsible for purine synthesis. This research will
provide a better understanding of nitrogen nutrition in plants.***//