* 8904821
* Petrological and Tectonic Investigations of High Pressure   Metamorphism in NE Oman
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/1989,01/31/1992
* Juhn Liou, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas O. Wright
* 01/31/1992
* USD 49,436.00

Blueschists, type-C eclogites and other high pressure metamorphic rocks occur
in the basement and continental platform deposits of the Saih Hatat culmination
in northeastern Oman. The blueschists and eclogites constitute a coherent in
situ terrain structurally overlain by two thrust piles containing lower-grade
high pressure metamorphic assemblages. The entire sequence is overlain by the
Semail ophiolite nappe. The tectonic setting of these high pressure metamorphic
rocks is unique given their occurrence in a passive continental margin that has
not undergone continent-continent collision and their structural relations to
the unmetamorphosed Tethyan Semail ophiolite nappe. The NSF is requested to
provide two-year support to continue a detailed field, petrological, geochemical
and geochronological study of high pressure metamorphism in NE Oman. This study
is aimed at (a) constraining the pressure-temperature conditions of metamorphism
and reconstructing the pressure-temperature-time paths of the different
structural terrains (b) developing petrogenetic grids for the various
lithologies of the high pressure metamorphic rocks; and (c) establishing the
ages of metamorphism and uplift rates of these domains. The results of this
study will constrain the relationship between high pressure metamorphism and
ophiolite emplacement in Oman and will be used to develop a tectonic model that
will have sufficient temporal control on the large-scale tectonic events. The
ultimate goal of this research is to explain why high pressure metamorphism
developed in the absence of continent- continent collision or oceanic crust
subduction beneath the continental margin.