* 8904739
* Cosmic Rays and the Interplanetary Magnetic Field
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/1989,01/31/1991
* William Matthaeus, Bartol Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Sherry O. Farwell
* 01/31/1991
* USD 130,000.00

The long, uninterrupted time series of cosmic ray observations recorded by
neutron monitors is an invaluable resource for the study of secular and periodic
variations of cosmic rays, the sun, and the interplanetary medium. These data,
together with measurements of heliospheric particles and fields acquired in situ
by spacecraft, allow us to perform rigorous observational tests of charged
particle acceleration and transport, thus pointing the way to improved
theoretical descriptions of this fundamental process of Solar Terrestrial
Research. In addition, the cosmic rays can often be regarded as test particles
and, as such, can be treated as remote probes of the interplanetary medium in
regions that are otherwise unsampled. With appropriate analysis, particle
observations can be used to derive information on the interplanetary magnetic
field that would be difficult or impossible to obtain by other methods. This
grant will support a broad-based program of theoretical and observational
research on cosmic rays and their interaction with the magnetic fields of the
sun and solar wind. Included is the continued operation of the Thule and Newark
neutron monitors through the upcoming solar maximum to mid-1992. Specific study
tasks include (1) particle scattering near 90o pitch angle in dissipative,
dynamic turbulence, (2) magnetic helicity effects in solar particle transport,
(3) solar energetic particles and their long term variability, (4) the three-
dimensional structure of interplanetary magnetic turbulence, as revealed in
cosmic ray measurements, (5) dependence of the cosmic ray diurnal anisotropy
upon the sun's magnetic polarity (the "twenty year wave"), and (6) the sunspot
cycle and solar magnetic cycle variation of the cosmic ray gradient. The overall
aim is to use energetic particles to probe the earth's natural electromagnetic
environment.