* 8904593
* Rare Earth Element and Isotopic Studies of Precambrian      Chemical Sediments
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/1989,12/31/1991
* Stein Jacobsen, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 12/31/1991
* USD 108,900.00

This research is on variations in the Nd and Sr isotopic composition and REE
abundance patterns in Proterozoic and Archean chemical sediments. It's purpose
is to trace the major mass fluxes in the exogenic geochemical cycle through the
Proterozoic and to understand the relationship between the evolution of the
sedimentary reservoir, the oceans and the atmosphere during this time period. We
will concentrate on measurements of Nd and Sr isotope variations and REE
abundance patterns on samples of Proterozoic marine sediments. The following
specific projects are proposed: 1) Determine 143Nd/144Nd variations in
Proterozoic carbonates and shales.; 2) Determine REE patterns of banded iron
formations ranging in age from - 0.8 Ga to 3.5 Ga.; 3) Modeling of the Sr and Nd
isotope records of the exogenic geochemical cycle through the past 3.5 Ga,
emphasizing the Proterozoic.; and 4) Extend the record of high precision Sr
isotopic data of carbonates from the mid-Cambrian to - 2.0 Ga ago, using well
dated and documented samples from Victoria Island (N.W.T., Canada), and various
sedimentary basins in Australia. We propose to establish a detailed, precise
record of Sr and Nd isotopic variations of chemical sediments for the time
between 0.5 and 2.0 Ga ago. During the Proterozoic, seawater Nd and Sr budgets
appear to have changed from dominantly hydrothermal inputs (as in the Archean)
to dominantly continental (river) inputs. Data obtained from this research will
be used to constrain the changes in rates of hydrothermal circulation,
continental erosion rates and variations in the mean age of continental erosion
products through the Proterozoic.