* 8904524
* US-PRC Collaborative Research on Aseismic Hybrid Protective Systems for Tall Buildings
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/15/1989,01/01/1991
* Jann Yang, George Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* William A. Anderson
* 01/01/1991
* USD 70,087.00

This project is to carry out a collaborative research on aseismic hybrid
protective systems for tall buildings between The George Washington University
(GWU) and the Harbin Architectural and Civil Engineering Institute (HACEI) of
China under the US-PRC Protocol for Scientific and Technical Cooperation in
Earthquake Studies. Aseismic hybrid protective system consists of a combination
of a base isolation system and small active control devices which is most
suitable for tall buildings. While many studies have been carried out separately
in each area of base isolation system and active control system, there are
serious limitations for each individual applications. A hybrid system can be
used advantageously to ensure the structural integrity of seismic-excited tall
buildings. Theoretical studies will be carried out at GWU for various
combinations and configurations of hybrid systems, including different base
isolation systems and different small active control devices. Experimental tests
will be conducted at HACEI on a scaled model structure mounted on different
types of base isolation systems and implemented by small active control devices.
Various contol algorithms developed for hybrid systems will be used. Results of
experimental tests will be correlated with the corresponding
analytical/numerical solutions. Discrepancies in the correlation as well as
physical and practical limitations in system design and instrumentation will be
investigated. This research has the potential to provide an effective
engineering seismic protection system for tall buildings and large structures.