* 8904075
* Structure and Function of the Oxygen Evolving Complex of    Photosystem II
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/1989,12/31/1992
* Charles Yocum, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 12/31/1992
* USD 223,500.00

Removal of a number of regulatory proteins from photosystem II (PSII) results
in a preparation containing seven protein subunits which is capable of light-
induced oxygen evolution activity. At the same time, these purification routines
alter the properties of oxygen evolution and electron transfer in PSII. These
experiments will determine the origins of the changes in electron transfer
activity. Studies will be conducted to quantify the contents of pigments and
plastoquinone in PSII during purification. Removal of a 28 kDa chlorophyll-
binding protein can be shown to induce alterations to herbicide-sensitive
photoreduction of quinones; the properties of this protein will be examined to
place it in the context of other known chlorophyll binding proteins as well as
to determine its role in regulation of herbicide binding and quinone
photoreduction. Additional investigations will assess the roles of several PSII-
associated proteins in providing sites for the binding of extrinsic polypeptides
and attempts will be made to determine whether low molecular weight peptides
which copurify with PSII are essential components of activity.%%% Photosystem II
(PSII) catalyzes the light-driven 4-electron oxidation of water to molecular
oxygen. The use of relatively simple biochemical procedures permit the isolation
of PSII from thylakoid membranes of chloroplasts. Application of non-ionic
detergents to these membrane sheets permits the isolation of simpler
preparations which contain reduced numbers of polypeptides, but which at the
same time retain oxygen evolution activity. Removal of various polypeptides from
PSII induces alterations to electron transfer activity, and the repair of these
alterations has proven useful in discovering new cofactors for the oxygen
evolving reaction. This research will deduce the roles of a selected set of
largely uncharacterized polypeptides which, upon removal from PSII, induce
changes to electron transfer activity. It will also be determined whether low
molecular weight polypeptides associated with PSII preparations play significant
roles in electron transfer activity.***