* 8904984
* Trivalent Arsenicals: Probes of Mechanism and Specificity inReactions of Ubiquitin-Protein Ligation
* BIO,MCB
* 10/15/1989,09/30/1993
* Cecile Pickart, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 09/30/1993
* USD 261,750.00

Trivalent arsenical reagents interact specificially with proteins bearing
vicinal sulfhydryl groups, forming very stable cyclic dithioarsenite complexes.
Such complexes are inactive if the sulfhydryl groups are critical catalytic or
regulatory elements. Ubiquitin (Ub) is a small and highly-conserved polypeptide
whose ligation to other cellular proteins can bring about protein degradation.
In some cases, Ub ligation may also serve to regulate protein function.
Trivalent arsenicals have been found to inhibit two enzymes involved in Ub
protein ligation. One of these, a Ub carrier protein (E2-230K), directly
catalyzes Ub conjugation to proteins. The other is an aminoacyl-tRNA protein
transferase. Amino-terminal arginylation catalyzed by the transferase renders
proteins substrates for Ub ligation. The proposed research addresses the
mechanistic and structural implications of inhibition of these enzymes by
trivalent arsenicals. The experiments will reveal whether inhibition is indeed
mediated by interaction of arsenicals with vicinal sulfhydryls, and will also
address how this structural element, if present, functions in catalysis and/or
regulation. This research addresses basic issues concerning catalytic mechanism
and specificity in Ub-protein ligation, and may also lead to development of
better and more specific inhibitors.