* 8904443
* Boron Isotopic Composition of the Troodos Ophiolite
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/1989,06/30/1991
* Hubertus Staudigel, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Jane M. Ernst
* 06/30/1991
* USD 42,477.00

Hydrothermal reactions at mid-ocean ridges have a profound influence on the
chemical and isotopic composition of seawater and the oceanic crust, involving
chemical fluxes of many elements exceeding those from global river discharge.
Despite its importance, fundamental aspects of these hydrothermal processes such
as the extent of reaction at various temperatures and fluid flow paths are not
well constrained. In addition, subduction of the altered crust results in the
reinjection of elements derived from the hydrosphere back into the mantle. The
bulk chemical transfer rates and the chemical signature of these recycled
materials is poorly constrained. Recently it has been demonstrated that there
are large boron isotopic fractionations associated with the alteration of the
oceanic crust (Spivack and Edmond, 1987). This exchange exerts a primary control
on the boron isotopic composition of seawater (~40 per mil enriched in the
11B/10B ratio relative to continental and oceanic igneous rocks|) and imparts a
boron isotopic signature to the crust that should be useful as a tracer of
subducted volatiles, and diagnostic in evaluating the nature of hydrothermal
processes including fluid reaction histories, temperatures of reaction and flow
paths. We propose to conduct a boron isotope study of the Troodos ophiolite that
is aimed at two goals: 1) establishing a first order boron isotope profile for
the altered oceanic crust and 2) developing the background data required for the
future exploitation of boron isotopes in the study of hydrothermal systems. To
these ends we intend to determine (B) and 11B in whole rocks and vein separates
that are mineralogically and chemically well characterized. Alteration
temperatures and fluid evolution wii be constrained by oxygen and strontium
isotope data.