* 8904511
* Biosynthesis Studies of Branched-Chain Amino Acids by       Methanogenic Bacteria
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1989,02/29/1992
* William Whitman, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* M.  Paige
* 02/29/1992
* USD 120,000.00

Acetohydroxy acid synthase (AHAS) is a key regulatory enzyme in the pathway of
branched-chain amino acid biosynthesis. Because these amino acids constitute
about 25% of the dry weight of protein in living tissue, this pathway is of
quantitative significance in many microorganisms and plants. The AHAS from a
methane-producing archaebacterium, Methanococcus aeolicus, is being purified by
standard techniques, and its chemical and physical properties determined. The
gene(s) for this enzyme is being cloned and DNA sequencing begun. A number of
major questions are addressed by this research. Are anabolic enzymes in
archaebacteria homologous to the eubacterial and eucaryotic enzymes? Is the
archaebacterial AHAS homologous to any pyruvate-utilizing enzymes found in
catabolic pathways including the pyruvate oxidase from Escherichia coli? Are the
flavin and herbicide binding sites conserved in AHASs from diverse origins?%%%
Methanogenic bacteria are an economically important group belonging to the third
major kingdom of life, the archaebacteria. They catalyze the last step in the
anaerobic decomposition of organic matter where 95% of the combustion energy is
conserved in the methane formed. Complex biological polymers can be converted to
methane, a clean fuel already in wide use. Therefore, there is great potential
for exploitation of this fermentation in waste treatment. Furthermore, methane
is the second most abundant carbon- containing gas in the atmosphere. Its
concentration has been increasing for the last several hundred years and may
contribute to the greenhouse effect and global warming. Thus these
microorganisms are intimately associated with major global processes of our
planet. These studies on methanogen physiology and regulation will facilitate
their exploitation for useful purposes and help gauge environmental
practices.***//