* 8904613
* Tectonic Significance of Lower Cretaceous Gravels, Southern Canadian Rockies: Quantitative Models of Basin Development
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/1989,05/31/1992
* Paul Heller, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan H. Fink
* 05/31/1992
* USD 51,987.00

PIs will study the paleotopographic, subsidence and source area development
history of the Upper Jurassic to Lower Cretaceous foreland stratigraphic
sequence along the southern part of the Columbian orogenic belt in Canada and
adjacent parts of Montana. The Columbian/Sevier belt, which marks the
culmination of Late Mesozoic orogency in the Norther American Cordillera, is
generally continuous along its length and overall is similar in structural
style, timing and stratigraphic development of the adjacent foreland basin. Both
regions contain Upper Jurassic, mud-dominated fluvial deposits with easterly
paleoflow; comparatively widespread Lower Cretaceous chert-pebble grave; and a
regional sub-Cretaceous unconformity separating the two units. The two regions
differ, however, in the details of distribution and paleoflow directions within
these units. In addition, the interpretation of tectonic driving forces differ
between the two belts with collisions primarily responsible for the Columbian
belt and magmatic activity apparently generating the Sevier belt. By
quantitatively analyzing the southern Columbian foreland sequence and comparing
these data to our previous study of the Sevier foreland sequence we will
determine if the sequences record a similar evolutionary history. If so, then
can two different mechanisms active in the Columbian and Sevier belts produce
the same stratigraphic record? If not, then how do two very different thrust
belt driving mechanisms produce such grossly similar stratigraphic packages and
where does the transition lie between the two orogenic belts?