* 8904977
* Conference: Travel Awards for Second International          Veterinary Immunology Symposium to be held on July 24-28,   1989 in Hannover, West Germany
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/1989,06/30/1990
* James Roth, American Association of Veterinary Immunologists
* Standard Grant
* Maryanna P. Henkart
* 06/30/1990
* USD 5,000.00

This proposal requests partial support for highly qualified junior scientists
and a few invited speakers to attend the Second International Veterinary
Immunology Symposium. This meeting will be held in Hannover, West Germany, July
24-28, 1989, as a satellite symposium of the Seventh Internatonal Congress of
Immunology in West Berlin, July 30-August 5, 1989. The Symposium will cover
research in all areas of immunology focused on data obtained in domestic and
wild animal species. It is intended to be complementary to the Congress in
Berlin. The American Association of Veterinary Immunologists and the American
Association of Veterinary Parasitologists, in their newsletters, will solicit
applications from junior scientists to compete for travel grants to attend the
Symposium. The AAVI and AAVP hope to match the funds requested from the NSF with
travel awards from industry. This Symposium will be an important opportunity for
U.S. scientists to present their current research results and interact with
their international colleagues. Increased knowledge of the immune function of a
variety of domestic and wild animal species will expand our understanding of the
approaches needed to maintain the diversity of organisms.