* 8904563
* Topoisomerases and Disease Resistance in Plants
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1989,06/30/1993
* Lee Hadwiger, Washington State University
* Continuing grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 06/30/1993
* USD 215,678.00

Disease resistance in plants is dependent on an active defense response. The
negation of these pleiotropic responses results in susceptibility. Several genes
of known function and some opf unknown function are activated in plant tissue
soon after challenge by the pathogen. Several genes controlling functional
enzymes such as beta-glucanase and of several disease resistance response genes
(DRRG) have been cloned in this laboratory. The latter genes are highly
activated in temporal association with the expression of resistance and
suppressed when the plant becomes susceptible. Two recent observations, that the
3' and 5' regions of DRRG-49 possess eukaryotic topoisomerase II consensus
sequences and that the fungal challenge of pea tissue sharply increases
topoisomerase I activity, form the basis for this proposal. A substantial body
of recent research has indicated that some increases in transcription are
associated with the topological features of chromosomal loops. This proposal
focuses on the plant topoisomerases, their cleavage sites, and the influence of
their activity on plant defense genes. Because of the limited information on
these enzymes in plants the objectives are designed to purify the enzymes and
specifically define the DNA attachment sites. Eventually, it is planned to
determine whether their accumulation, cellular localization or DNA helix-
altering potential cause or can be a factor in the transcriptional changes
associated with fungal- or fungal elicitor-induced disease resistance responses.
The disease resistance of plants is associated with a response which is
activated following contact of the pathogen with host plant tissue. Multiple
plant genes are activated immediately following the transfer of a signal from
pathogen to host. The proposed research will test the hypothesis that activation
of the transcription of the multiple plant defense response genes is, at least
in part, due to increases in the activity of topoisomerases, enzymes that affect
gene expression by altering the three dimensional structure of coiled DNA in the
nucleus.