* 8904675
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: RUI:  Interactions in Time and      Thermal and Mechanical Processes During Orogeny, Old Woman  Mountains Area, Southeastern California
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/1989,06/30/1992
* Karl Karlstrom, Northern Arizona University
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas O. Wright
* 06/30/1992
* USD 57,094.00

Southeastern California preserves a record of 2 billion years of tectonic
history that occurred along the continental margin of the United States.
Previous work on this consortium project has provided considerable information
about Precambrian structural evolution, Mesozoic compression and Cenozoic exten-
sional events in the Old Woman Mountains. This renewal will build on this
information to address Mesozoic orogenic processes in continental crust,
particularly on the typically obscure early stages of orogeny. The Mesozoic
upper crust in this area was first tectonically buried to depths ranging from
near zero to more than 20 kilometers, then exhumed rapidly at the end of the
Mesozoic, and subsequently preserved largely intact through the mid-Tertiary
extension that strongly overprinted adjacent regions. Work will focus on
developing prograde thermochrono- metry for the region, the thermal and
kinematic history of ductile shear zones, on refinement of thermobarometry and
its application to rapidly evolving orogen, the linkage between pluton
emplacement and tectonism and attempting to characterize the lower continental
crust through high-pressure xenoliths. Results will be integrated in an attempt
to discover in some detail the interactions of thermal and mechanical processes
active in continental margin dynamics.