* 8904489
* Gulf Coast Basinal Mudstones:  Sources or Sinks for         Diagenetic Components?
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/1989,12/31/1991
* Lynton Land, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 12/31/1991
* USD 134,176.00

Mudstones constitute most of the fill of sedimentary basins, yet they are the
least understood of all sedimentary rocks. They are "blamed" for virtually all
reactions that cannot be easily explained, based on the examination of other
rocks. For example, they have been advanced as sources for Pb-Zn mineralization,
for SiO2, Fe++, and Mg+ in sandstone cements, and for H+ for subsurface leaching
of sandstones. Currently available data in Gulf Coast Cenozoic sections dispute
all these inferences. Using available drill cuttings, we propose to characterize
changes in: 1) whole-rock major and minor (esp. Sr, Ba, B, and Li) elemental and
isotopic (esp. O, Sr, B, and Li) chemistry, 2) carbonate mineralogy and
geochemistry, 3) feldspar mineralogy and geochemistry, and 4) quartz morphology
and geochemistry. We will quantitatively document changes in mudstones with
depth in South Texas where extensive data on sandstone petrography and
geochemistry, and formation water geochemistry, already exist. By studying a dip
section through the growth-faulted depocenters, we can minimize the vagaries of
local and temporally restricted sedimentation. Quantitative material balances in
this area will enable us to assess the importance of mudstone diagenesis to the
diagenetic evolution of sedimentary basins and assess the magnitude of import
form underlying and export to overlying strata.