* 8904806
* A Nd Isotopic Study of Early Proterozoic Crustal Growth in  Southern Wyoming
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/1989,12/31/1991
* G. Lang Farmer, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Jane M. Ernst
* 12/31/1991
* USD 50,000.00

Sm-Nd isotope systematics will be applied to Precambrian metasedimentary and
metaigneous rocks in and adjacent to the Cheyenne Belt (CB), an ancient crustal
suture zone in southern Wyoming, constrain models for the genesis of Proterozoic
continental crust and for the accretion of these crustal segments to the margins
of preexisting Archean continental cratons. The Cheyenne Belt represents a rare
example of a well exposed Archean continental margin in North America which is
apparently not directly mantled by a large segment of "mixed" Proterozoic crust,
that is, crust produced in the Proterozoic that intermixed with Archean crustal
material. The proposal will center on determining whether the lack of such crust
at the southern margin of the Wyoming craton reflects the fact that such crust
was never accreted in this region (unlike other segments of Archean cratonal
margins) or whether tectonic movement along the CB has removed and mixed crust
that may have originally been present. Three separate, but interrelated projects
will be undertaken 1) Sm-Nd isotope systematics of Proterozoic miogeoclinal
sedimentary rocks north of the CB. The purpose will be to use the temporal
variations in the Nd isotopic compositions of these sediments to determine
whether Proterozoic island arcs composed of newly formed juvenile or "mixed"
crustal material initially approached the ancient continental margin, 2) Sm-Nd
isotopic systematics of para-and orthogneisses in tectonic blocks within the CB
itself, to determine if these rocks represents remnants of "mixed crust that
might have initially accreted against the southern margin of the Wyoming craton,
and 3) the isotope systematics of Proterozoic igneous and metasedimentary rocks
of the Colorado province south of the CB, to determine if "mixed" crust is
present in the northernmost portions of this terrane, and to determine if the
metasedimentary rocks record the isotopic characteristics (Archean or "mixed"
crust) of the crust against which this terrane initially impinged. The results
of all three projects will be integrated with existing geologic and tectonic
data in an attempt to construct a model for the Precambrian tectonic evolution
of the southern margin of the Wyoming Archean craton.