* 8904802
* Far-infrared Studies of Compound Semiconductors
* NONE,NONE
* 05/15/1989,04/30/1993
* Jacek Furdyna, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 04/30/1993
* USD 214,560.00

This proposal describes a program of far-infrared (FIR) magnetospectroscopic
studies of compound semiconductors, with strong emphasis on layered structures
of II-VI compounds and their ternary alloys, including diluted magnetic
semiconductors (DMS). There will be four areas of investigations. First, they
will employ FIR magnetooptical techniques to study impurity levels of doped
epilayers of wide gap II-VI semiconductor compounds and their ternary alloys
prepared by molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) and by atomic layer epitaxy (ALE). The
focus will be on hydrogenic donor levels, whose characteristic energies (1s - 2p
transition, ionization energy, spin splitting in DMS alloys, etc.) correspond to
the FIR energy range. Second, they propose to apply these same techniques to the
study of impurities in doped II-VI based superlattices and quantum wells, where
the impurity levels depend on the quantum well geometry and on impurity
distribution. Third, they will use FIR magnetospectroscopy to study quantum
wells, superlattices, and interfaces involving narrow gap semiconductors.
Fourth, they will investigate antiferromagnetic resonance in manganese based
diluted magnetic semiconductors, where such studies can provide definitive
information on dynamical spin processes. One of the strengths of the proposed
program is that many of the layered structures to be investigated - as well as
bulk samples - can be prepared in their own materials preparation laboratory,
either by MBE or (in the case of samples for the antiferromagnetic resonance
studies) by conventional crystal growth techniques.