* 8904932
* Transaction Management in a Multidatabase Environment
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/1989,09/30/1992
* Yuri Breitbart, University of Kentucky
* Continuing Grant
* Ron Ashany
* 09/30/1992
* USD 113,709.00

This project deals with transaction processing in a multi- database environment.
A Multidatabase System (MDBS) is a collection of several, locally controlled,
databases. It is assumed that local database management systems (DBMS) are not
aware of each other and cannot exchange concurrency control information. The
objective is to develop systematic methods for maintaining semantically related
information in a consistent and reliable manner. The investigation is focused on
transaction management issues that arise when global and local transactions are
processed concurrently in a multidatabase system. Specific research problems
include: 1. Extension of the existing theory for concurrency control and
recovery in distributed database systems to the case of multidatabase systems.
2. The design of a mechanism for transaction management in a multidatabase
environment, such that each local DBMS uses the same concurrency control
mechanism. 3. Performance evaluation of various transaction management systems
in a multidatabase environment. 4. Development of a theory of transaction
management for cooperating multidatabase systems in a heterogeneous hardware and
software environment. The results of this research will form theoretical
foundations for transaction handling that will be beneficial to large-scale
industrial multidatabase systems development.