* 8904134
* Mechanism and Macromolecular Organization in Photosynthetic Reaction Centers
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/1989,12/31/1992
* Steven Boxer, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Arthur Kowalsky
* 12/31/1992
* USD 318,000.00

Biophysical studies of the mechanism of the initial charge separation steps in
photosynthetic reaction centers (RC) will be continued. The recent X-ray
structure determinations of RCs from two bacterial species has focused attention
on the molecular mechanism of highly efficient electron transfer in this
chromophore-protein assembly. Photoinduced electron transfer generates an
intermediate which is a radical pair and has a large electric dipole moment.
These two characteristics make possible the manipulation of the reaction
dynamics by applied magnetic and electric fields, respectively. The initial
charge separation and energy storage steps in photosynthesis take place in a
membrane bound chlorophyll- protein complex called the photosynthetic reaction
center. The RC is the smallest isolatable unit which carries out the initial
charge separation steps of photosynthesis. The three dimensional structure of
the RC from two species of purple non-sulfur bacteria have been determined to
atomic resolution in the past several years. Although a great deal of
spectroscopic and kinetic data had been obtained before the crystal structure
was solved, the availability of the atomic coordinates of all the reactive
components and their solvent has stimulated great interest in understanding the
underlying physics of the RC function.