* 8904395
* Characterization and Reevaluation of Initial Reactions of Fatty Acid Biosynthesis in Plants
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/1989,02/29/1992
* Jan Jaworski, Miami University
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 02/29/1992
* USD 124,250.00

The sequence reactions initially involved in fatty acid biosynthesis in plants
must be reevaluated in light of the discovery that there is in spinach a
previously unreported 3- ketoacyl-ACP synthase (sc-KAS). This enzyme is specific
for short chain fatty acids and can be distinguished from other 3- ketoacyl-ACP
synthases by its sensitivity to the antibiotics cerulenin and thiolactomycin.
Based on work carried out with E. coli, as well as this work with spinach, there
is strong evidence that this enzyme replaces in this sequence the enzyme acetyl
transacylase, a proposed rate-limiting reaction in fatty acid synthesis. The
objectives of this proposal are an extensive biochemical analysis of sc-KAS from
spinach and isolation of the structural gene for sc-KAS. While the regulation of
fatty acid biosynthesis in plants is poorly understood, there is in vitro
evidence that the initial reactions of the sequence can influence the fatty acid
composition of the products. The sc-KAS may play a critical role in this process
and be the key to our understanding of regulation. For the past 25 years, fatty
acid biosynthesis has been illustrated as a series of reactions catalyzed by the
enzyme complex, fatty acid synthase. According to the pathway, the enzyme,
acetyl transacylase is a key rate-limiting enzyme in this reaction. However, the
discovery of the enzyme, 3-ketoacyl-ACP synthase, is challenging this series of
reactions. It is believed that the latter enzyme is responsible for the step
currently thought to be catalyzed by acetyl transacylase, contrary to the
accepted dogma of fatty acid biosynthesis. This is a significant discovery that
will be investigated through purification,characterization, and examination of
the regulation of this enzyme. Understanding the role of this enzyme in fatty
acid synthesis is of importance, particularly in the production of oilseed
crops. If expression of this enzyme can be controlled through genetic
engineering, there is the potential for over- production of fatty acids. Even if
only a small increase in oil content could be achieved, it would have a major
economic impact.