* 8904935
* Mathematical Sciences: Regularity Theory for Certain        Nonlinear Elliptic Equations Involving Derivatives of       Rearrangements of Solutions
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1989,10/01/1990
* Edward Stredulinsky, LAWRENCE UNIVERSITY OF WISCONSIN
* Standard Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 10/01/1990
* USD 27,780.00

Work will focus on the regularity theory for a class of nonlinear elliptic
partial differential equations and associated variational problems involving
derivatives of the rearrangement of solutions. The equations, known as Grad
differential equations, are a widely used model in the nuclear fusion community.
In addition, questions concerning convex symmetrization and interpolation and
certain free boundary problems will be treated. These questions arise from
models of quasi-static equilibrium of confined toroidal plasmas in thermonuclear
fusion and from rotational fluid flow. From a purely mathematical standpoint
their analysis involves interesting and important problems in the study of
rearrangements of a function, convex symmetrization, free boundary problems and
regularity theory for nonlinear nonlocal variational problems. The main emphasis
will be on variational problems which can be approximated by sequences of
multiphase free boundary problems. Recent work has established convergence
criteria for such approximation schemes as well as various regularity results
for certain solutions. A new approach for establishing analyticity of weak
solutions for convex domains is planned. Part of this effort involves the study
of generalizations of Schwarz symmetrization to convex domains as well as other
methods for decreasing functionals like the Dirichlet norm. //