* 8904895
* Detailed Sea Level and Initial 14C Records From High        Precision 230Th Ages of Huon Peninsula Corals, Papua, New   Guinea
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/1990,01/31/1993
* R. Lawrence Edwards, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 01/31/1993
* USD 70,000.00

This project involves measurement of the concentrations of uranium series
nuclides (238U, 234U, 230Th, 232Th) in fossil corals using the high-precision,
high-sensitivity techniques recently developed by the principal investigator and
colleagues. The new mass spectrometric technique allows one to obtain 230Th ages
of corals that are significantly more precise than was previously possible.
Based on analytical error, corals as young as 3 years old have ages
distinguishable from zero, and corals as old as 600,000 years old have ages
distinguishable from infinity. The ages are generally more precise than 14C ages
all the way through the 14 C range. We now have the potential to obtain detailed
records of events that are preserved in coral stratigraphy and in the
composition of coral skeletons. This proposal aims to take advantage of both of
these potentials. I wish to extract detailed records of (1) the timing of late
Quaternary (last 150,000 y) sea level variations and (2) changes in the 14C/12C
ratio in the atmosphere between 8,000 and 12,000 years ago, and about 28,000
years ago. The records will be extracted from corals collected from the Huon
Peninsula, Papua, New Guinea. This region has a high tectonic uplift rate;
therefore much of the coral record from the last 150,000 years or so is
subaerially exposed and accessible. Such records would shed light on the causes
of late Quaternary climate change and changes in the 14C/12C ratio in the
atmosphere. Funds from the National Science Foundation and the University of
Minnesota have already been obtained for collecting samples, determining the 14C
concentrations in the corals, and renovating the Radiogenic Isotope Geochemistry
Laboratory at the U. of Minnesota, where the high precision uranium series
measurements will be made. This proposal requests funds for the last stage of
the project: analysis of the samples in the Minnesota Laboratory and publication
of the results.