* 8905625
* Archaeological Survey in the Mountains of Oaxaca, Mexico
* SBE,BCS
* 11/01/1989,04/30/1991
* Stephen Kowalewski, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 04/30/1991
* USD 40,285.00

Drs. Stephen Kowalewski and Laura Finsten will conduct a regional
archaeological survey of approximately 1000 square kilometers of mountainous
land adjoining the Valleys of Oaxaca and Nochixtlan in southern Mexico. They
will attempt to locate and describe all substantial archaeological sites, as
well as the environmental contexts (topography, soils, water, vegetation, etc.)
of them. These sites will then be dated using existing ceramic chronologies from
adjacent valleys. Pottery and stone artifacts will be collected and analyzed to
provide information on changing lifestyles and political affiliation over time.
While the archeology of this mountainous region is not well known, extensive
work has been conducted over many years in the adjoining Oaxaca and Nochixtlan
Valleys. In both, large independent polities arose, and their influence expanded
to encompass surrounding areas. However, how the two interacted with each other
is not well understood, and because the present project will focus on the
intervening region, it should provide such information. It will permit a broader
level of macroregional analysis and fill an important gap in a survey project
which, with great success, has continued for many years. While of potential
importance, mountainous regions have been slighted in past work not only in
Mexico but in many regions of the world. Such difficult terrain makes systematic
survey difficult. Sites also can be hard to find. The methodology which Drs.
Kowalewski and Finsten have developed may be applicable in many other regions.
This research is important for several reasons. First, it will fill a major
blank in the archaeological map. Secondly, it will test a new survey technique
of potential widespread utility. Finally, it will provide new insight into the
rise and interactions among complex societies. In the examination of such states
archaeologists have tended to focus attention on the "heartlands." By examining
the "edges" this research provides a needed corrective.