* 8905058
* The Tell Abu Duwari Archaeological Project
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/1989,06/30/1992
* Elizabeth Stone, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 06/30/1992
* USD 75,303.00

Dr. Elizabeth Stone and her colleagues will continue their archaeological
excavation and mapping of Tell Abu Duwari, an ancient Mesopotamian site which
dates to the second millennium B.C. Unlike most major centers of the time
period, this major Iraqi site, scattered over 56 hectares, was occupied for only
a short period of time. Abu Duwari was apparently destroyed in a conflagration
and totally abandoned. Because cultural materials and architectural remains are
covered by only a thin layer of sand, large scale horizontal excavation is
feasible. During two field seasons of work, the team will complete their survey
of the site, surface scrape a large area to gain information on residential
layout, and conduct intensive excavation in one large public structure. Clay
tablets will be deciphered and analyses conducted on ceramic, floral, and faunal
remains. Although much research has been conducted in the Near east, almost
nothing is known about city organization. This is because excavation has
concentrated on deeply stratified temple mounts, and the kind of horizontal
excavation necessary to reconstruct how cities function has not been undertaken.
Tell Abu Duwari was purposely selected from among a large number of potential
sties because it offered the possibility to recover such information. This
research should provide insight into the degree to which much authority was
centralized. Dr. Stone suggests that it may have been spread across a number of
religious and civil institutions. The study will also yield information on the
degree of status differentiation among inhabitants and the role of neighborhoods
in social organization and control. This research is important because it will
increase our understanding of how complex societies, such as our own, first
emerge and are maintained. Because it deals with extended periods of time,
archaeology is in a unique position to investigate such long term processes.
Together with information from other sites, this excavation will contribute to
our understanding of this phenomenon.