* 8905808
* Postpollination Mechanisms and Relative Fitness             Contribution of Differential Outcrossing Distance
* BIO,DEB
* 10/15/1989,03/31/1994
* Mary Price, Rocky Mountain Biological Laboratory
* Continuing Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 03/31/1994
* USD 164,020.00

Research will focus on characterizing which individuals share parentage of the
seeds that form the next generation. By studying mating systems of two species
that are representative of non-woody perennial plants, the investigators will
test the idea that the best mating for a plant will depend on the physical
proximity of mates, because this reflects genetic similarity. Previous research
has indicated that crossing success should be highest between plants separated
by an intermediate distance, and thus neither too similar nor too dissimilar
genetically. A major goal of this research is to obtain complete lifetime
estimates of seedling survival and reproduction in order to test the hypothesis
that offspring from the "optimal outcrossing distance" are most fit. A second
goal is to assess how great the fitness differences are by using a complex kind
of experimental pollination. A third goal is to assess fitness costs associated
with germinations at various distances from parental plants. A fourth goal is to
see whether "postpollination" selection will bring the actual mating system into
closer agreement with the optimal mating system. These studies have implications
for other plants, including crop species. It seems likely in general that
fitness will be sensitive to genetic similarity of mates on a finer scale than
hitherto recognized, and that postpollination selection will modify the outcome.
This research will provide a closer investigation of these possibilities.