* 8905022
* Cytokeratin Organization and Function in Early Development
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1989,01/31/1994
* Michael Klymkowsky, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Ralph Hecht
* 01/31/1994
* USD 243,400.00

Cytokeratin filaments from a major cytoskeletal system in the Xenopus oocyte
and early embryo. Using wholemount immunocytochemistry Dr. klymkowsky has
discovered a dramatic asymmetry in the organization of cytokeratin filaments in
both the oocyte and early embryo. During oocyte maturation cytokeratin filaments
break down. Cytokeratin breakdown appears to be regulated post-translationally
and is induced by maturation promoting factor (MPF). Dr. Klymkowsky will
determine whether MPF acts directly or indirectly to disrupt cytokeratin
organization using an in vitro assay system. With fertilization cytokeratin
filaments reform; this asymmetrically organized embryonic cytokeratin system
persists until the end of gastrulation. To define the function of cytokeratin
filaments in the embryo, he will develop new monoclonal anticytokeratin
antibodies. The epitopes of these antibodies will be mapped on the cytokeratin
protein and its effects on cytokeratin filament integrity and embryonic
development will be determined. This will enable him to define regions of the
cytokeratin molecule involved in cytokeratin filament organization and function.
Dr. Klymkowsky has already identified two monoclonal anticytokeratin antibodies
that specifically disrupt normal gastrulation in Xenopus. To define further the
mechanism by which these antibodies act, he will use light and electron
microscopy to characterize the movement and morphology of cells during
gastrulation and immunocytochemistry to examine cytokeratin organization within
the embryo. Injection of antibodies into specific blastomeres will be used to
determine the regions of the gastrulating embryo affected by these antibodies.
Together these studies offer an opportunity for defining the functions of
cytokeratins, understanding how their organization if controlled and for
furthering our understanding of the major morphogenetic event of vertebrate
development, gastrulation. %%% One of the most dramatic events during the
maturation of the egg in the amphibian, Xenopus is the reorganization of the
subcellular cytokeratin-type intermediate filaments. The resulting mature egg is
asymmetric and this asymmetry defines the axis of the mature organism. Clearly
the events leading to the setting up of this polarity are key events in
development.