* 8905432
* Molecular Characterization of Chlamydomonas Cell Wall       Proteins GP3 Alpha and GP3 Beta
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/1989,12/31/1990
* Bryan Toole, Tufts University
* Continuing Grant
* Maryanna P. Henkart
* 12/31/1990
* USD 121,740.00

Hydroxyproline-rich glycoproteins (HRGPs) of animal and plant extracellular
matrices perform a variety of structural, developmental and homeostatic
functions. While much is known about HRGP organization and structure,
information on HRGP interactions, and their roles in establishment of matrix
architecture is fragmentary. The alga Chlamydomonas is uniquely suited for
analysis of this important problem: (1) Its cell wall is constructed entirely
from HRGPs; (2) its outer wall can be selectively extracted and assembled in
vitro; and (3) Chlamydomonas is an excellent genetic system. HRGP interactions
will be studied by quantitative in vitro assembly, and molecular cloning of two
HRGP genes (GP3A;GP3B). cDNAs encoding GP3A and GP3B will be isolated from an
existing Chlamydomonas lambda-gt11 library, analyzed for evidence of sequence
homologles with each other and previously cloned outer wall HRGPs (GP1 and GP2),
and examined for evidence of conserved repeats. In addition, expression of
GP3A/B genes during cell wall regeneration will be studied to determine whether
genes for outer wall HRGPs are coordinately regulated. Candidate functional
domains will be examined by inhibition of in vitro assembly, using HRGP peptides
and anti-HRGP monoclonal antibodies, and mapped by immunotopography. In
addition, genomic GP3A/B sequences will isolated from a Chlamydomonas Charon 30
library, and employed for gene structure analysis. If GP3A/B genes prove to be
coordinately regulated with outer wall HRGPs, 5' untranslated regions of genomic
clones will be examined for evidence of conserved (potential regulatory)
sequences. The results of these studies will be of great interest to at least
three groups of bioscientists: (1), those interested in the use of Chlamydomonas
as a model organism for a variety of cell biological problems; (2), those
interested in mechanisms of plant cell wall assembly during growth and
development in higher plants, including crop plants, and (3), those interested
in general biochemical principles of structure-function relationships involved
in protein-protein interactions.