* 8905401
* Eye Movements and Perception
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/1989,12/31/1993
* James Enright, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Comer
* 12/31/1993
* USD 174,670.00

When, during monocular viewing of a picture, a person changes fixation point to
an apparent nearer object, convergence of as much as a degree or two usually
occurs. The magnitude of this newly discovered response (called perspective
vergence), can be altered by making relatively minor changes in an illustration.
The trial-to-trial reproducibility of the responses, as well as the cross-
subject agreement in changes of response magnitude for a given change in
stimulus in configuration will permit a systematic exploration of the kinds of
stimuli in perspective illustrations which contribute to this sort of
involuntary oculomotor response. Dr. James Enright will continue his studies of
perspective vergence while performing psychophysical studies and making
measurements of eye movements in humans. His work is directed at exploring
previously unappreciated components of eye movements. Nevertheless, there is
ultimately a potential for clinical appreciation as well. Correction of squint
is one of the most common sorts of surgical interventions in the human visual
system, and a more thorough understanding of the muscular activity associated
with vergence and torsion may well eventually contribute to more efficient
diagnosis and correction of muscular and nervous imbalances responsible for
abnormal eye orientation.