* 8905771
* Finite-size Scaling of Four Helium Near the Superfluid      Transition and Two-Dimensional Behavior of Three Helium in  Four Helium Films
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/1989,08/31/1992
* Francis Gasparini, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing grant
* None
* 08/31/1992
* USD 285,500.00

Liquid helium displays a number of interesting properties at low temperatures.
Some are unique to this quantum fluid, others are common to other systems, but
observable with a higher degree of precision in helium. They have been studying
critical behavior at the superfluid transition in the limit where helium is
confined to such small dimensions that it no longer behaves as a three
dimensional system. They have devised a technique for confining the helium
between two well-spaced silicon wafers. They report first measurements of the
superfluid density in which, as one approaches the superfluid transition, the
helium deviates from three-dimensional behavior and then crosses over into two
dimensions. They propose to continue these investigations for the next funding
period as well as to start measurements of heat capacity. These data will
provide stringent tests of finite-size scaling theories and dimensionality
crossover. At low temperatures they have studied the superfluid transiton of
near-monolayer films of 4He with 3He as an impurity. They report the observation
that the transition of these films into the superfluid state takes place in two
steps. They interpret this as a signature of the formation of the surface state
for 3He. They propose to continue with these measurements to study other
phenomena associated with the phase transition and the hydrodynamic mass of 3He.