* 8905530
* Flagellar Glycoprotein Dynamics and Whole Cell Locomotion
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1989,02/28/1993
* Robert Bloodgood, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Maryanna P. Henkart
* 02/28/1993
* USD 261,014.00

The goal of this research is to understand the mechanism involved in force
transduction occurring at the cell surface that is responsible for whole cell
locomotion. The movement of flagellar membrane glycoproteins (in particular, a
pair of 350 kDa concanavalin A-binding glycoproteins) within the plane of the
flagellar membrane are involved in the whole cell gliding locomotion exhibited
by the eukaryotic algal cell Chlamydomonas. Crosslinking of the flagellar
membrane glycoproteins triggers a transmembrane signaling pathway that activates
intraflagellar machinery responsible for movement of the 350 kDa glycoproteins
within the plane of the flagellar membrane. Experiments are proposed to analyze
the roles of calcium, cAMP, cGMP and protein phosphorylation in the
transmembrane signaling pathway in the flagellum. It will be determined whether
crosslinking of flagellar surface glycoproteins is necessary to activate the
transmembrane signaling pathway and whether the crosslinking results in a
tighter association of flagellar membrane glycoproteins with the underlying
cytoskeleton (axoneme). Experiments are proposed to develop an in vitro model
system for reactivating flagellar surface motility and to exploit such a system
to understand the transmembrane signaling the generation of force for
glycoprotein movement. Efforts will be made to identify and characterize the
components of the motor responsible for flagellar membrane glycoprotein dynamics
and gliding motility. Understanding the mechanisms by which cells control the
distribution of plasma membrane proteins and by which they actively change the
distribution of these proteins will have significance for understanding the
functioning of higher organisms as well as unicellular algae.