* 8905282
* Molecular Analysis of the rbcS Multigene Family
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/1989,06/30/1992
* Wilhelm Gruissem, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 06/30/1992
* USD 327,800.00

This project will investigate the molecular mechanism involved in the
differential expression of the multigene family members for the small subunit
(SSU) of ribulose.1, 5.bisphosphate carboxylase (rbcS genes) using tomato as a
model system. Tomato has five rbcs genes rbcS.1, rbcS.2, rbcS.3A and rbcS.3C,
which encode three iso.variant SSU proteins. The five rbcS genes are
differentially transcribed in cotyledons, leaves and fruit. Several 5' DNA
sequences which are functionally undefined are conserved among the five tomato
rbcS genes which share similar developmental and organ.specific expression
pattern. In addition, mRNAs from the individual tomato rbcS genes accumulate to
substantially different levels in different tissues, but this pattern is not
reflected in the accumulation of the three iso. variant SSU proteins. We will
examine rbcS cis.acting DNA regions to define their role in the developmental
and organ. specific on.off control of transcription and examine how they
interact. We will identify protein.binding domains by DNasel footprint analysis
to determine if the differential transcription of the rbcS genes is correlated
with differences in the DNA: protein binding pattern of 5' DNA fragments. This
will complement our analysis of cis.acting DNA sequences in transgenic plants
and transient assays. Furthermore, transcription run.on assays and quantitative
hybridizations will be used to assess the extent to which transcriptional
regulation of the five rbcS genes establishes the relative levels of their
mRNAs. At the translational level, we will test if variations in the length of
the rbcS 5' untranslated regions result in the differential accumulation of
iso.variant SSU proteins. To attain further information on the role of
differential rbcS express in fruit, we will take advantage of a fruit.specific
promoter for the production of antisense.RNA to block rbcS.1 and rbcS.2
expression. Finally, we will activate the normally inactive rbcS.3A gene to
produce the iso.variant 3 SSU protein in fruit to determine what effect, if any,
this has on organ development. Developmental, organ.specific and light.dependent
regulation of transcription and translation are important control steps in the
expression of nuclear genes encoding photosynthetic proteins found in the
chloroplasts of higher plants. The results of this study should provide greater
insights into those processes.