* 8905824
* Polymers for High Strength, Nonlinear Optics, and Electrical Conductivity
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1989,07/31/1992
* Fred Wudl, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing grant
* None
* 07/31/1992
* USD 265,200.00

Two families of new polymers will be prepared: a) methylenealkoxy-substituted
poly(isocyanates) and the unknown poly(isocyanic acid) and b) methylenealkoxy-
substituted poly(carbodiimides) and the unknown poly(carbodiimide)
?poly)cyanamide) or poly (guanidine)! as well as copolymers within each family.
Because of the highly polar repeat unit, these polymers are expected, upon
polarizing in high electric fields, to produce ferroelectric solids akin to poly
(vinylidene fluoride). Ferroelectric solidss have applications as peizoelectrics
(e.g., transducers such as sensitive microphones) and nonlinear optics (mode
converters, modulators, Y-branch interferometers, and directional couplers).
Other salient features of this research are: 1.) Poly(isocyanic acid), due to
its high degree of hydrogen bonding and the strength of the amide linkage, is
expected to be superior to any known synthetic fiber in strength, strength on
compression, toughness and oxidative stability. 2.) The substituted
poly(carbodiimides) will be prepared in chiral form and depolymerized. Thus, a
novel carbodiimide optical resolution procedure based on thermal
depolymerization of a chiral poly(carbodiimide will be prepared. The chiral
carbodiimide is a fundamentally new functional group. 3.) The parent,
unsubstituted poly(carbodiimide), will become conjugated at intermediate
protonation levels and will be converted to a highly conducting form upon
further protonation via a new concept of protonative positive soliton
generation.