* 8905583
* Wrench-Based Dimensional Synthesis--Theory and              Implementation
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/1989,02/28/1993
* Bernard Roth, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Elbert L. Marsh
* 02/28/1993
* USD 244,830.00

This project develops a method for the design of linkages which allows for
determining the linkage dimensions directly from specifications on the applied
or transmitted forces and moments. Linkages form the basis of many mechanical
systems. They may have either closed chain or open chain (a robot)
configurations, and may require multiple actuators to simultaneously control
several independent degrees of freedom. It has become standard practice to
design linkages with position, velocity, and acceleration requirements as the
foremost criteria in determining linkage kinematic parameters. In contrast to
the primacy of position based design, force is usually considered secondarily
after the kinematic geometry is determined, and is used to size actuators or
structural and transmission members. This research develops the theory for force
based design which allows forces and moments to be taken into account in a more
direct manner and earlier in the design process than heretofore possible. In
addition to leading to an expanded kinematic theory, the results should lead to
more efficient and optimized designs. In summary, the research goal is as
follows: given a requirement for prescribed wrenches (a system of force and
moment) to be applied at prescribed points in space, develop a systematic
procedure for determining the dimensions of all linkages of a given type and
structure which will satisfy the requirements. The project comprises five topics
including dimensional synthesis of open chain linkages to match wrench
specifications, dimensional synthesis of closed loop linkages to match wrench
specifications, design for incompletely specified wrenches (when not all six
wrench parameters need to be specified), design for combined motion-wrench
constraints, and design of linkages with springs or dynamic effects to match
wrench constraints. This work should lead to new approaches to mechanical design
which supplement and enhance traditional position based methods.