* 8905227
* The Uniaxial Stress Measurements Under High Pressure:       Application to Geophysics
* GEO,EAR
* 11/15/1989,09/30/1992
* Yosiko Sorensen, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Michael A. Mayhew
* 09/30/1992
* USD 63,250.00

This is a project to develop a novel new x-ray diffraction technique to
determine the stress distribution under in-situ high pressure conditions
corresponding to the mantle interior. With this technique, studies such as
stress-induced preferred orientation and yield strength measurements of high-
pressure minerals, which are necessary to further understand the dynamics of the
mantle, will become possible. These measurements can be made either in multi-
anvil high pressure apparatus or in diamond anvil cells. A reliable method to
determine the uniaxial stress under high pressure by measuring the anisotropic
compression of standard materials using the new high-precision x-ray diffraction
technique will be established. This technique will be applied to study the
stress-induced preferred orientation in beta-Mn2GeO4 (chosen as a model system
for the (Mg-Fe)SiO4 mantle olivine) as it undergoes the polymorphic
transformation from its olivine- phase to beta-phase under the influence of
uniaxial stress. The PI will apply the new technique to study the changes in the
yield strength of alkali halides across the B1-B2 phase boundary, to look for
possible superplasticity at the transition and to determine the elastic
constants of the B2 phase. The experiments will be conducted in collaboration
with four Japanese high- pressure scientists using the MAX-80 cubic-anvil high-
pressure system stationed at the high-energy (maximum - 140KeV) synchrotron
radiation x-ray source at the national Laboratory for High Energy Physics in
Tsukuba, Japan.