* 8905250
* The Cellular Basis of Amphibian Gastrulation
* BIO,IOS
* 02/15/1990,07/31/1993
* Raymond Keller, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Ralph Hecht
* 07/31/1993
* USD 273,696.00

The broad objective of this research is to determine how cells generate
morphogenetic movements. The specific objective is to learn how deep mesodermal
cells produce the autonomous narrowing (convergence) and lengthening (extension)
of the dorsal axial tissues of the gastrula and neurula of the anuran amphibian,
Xenopus laevis. Previous work showed that convergence and extension is
accomplished by active rearrangement of several layers of cells to form fewer
layers of greater area (radial intercalation) and several rows of cells to form
fewer rows of greater length and lesser width (mediolateral intercalation). The
proposed research will show how the direction of intercalation is determined and
how the motile activities of individual cells contribute to the process. Regions
of the embryo are explanted into a culture system of Dr. Keller's design that
allows direct recording and manipulation of cell behavior. Paths of cell
movement, protrusive activity and contact behavior in normal and microsurgically
altered explants will be recorded with an optical disc recorder after digital
video image processing. Two types of microscopy will be used: normal epi-
illumination and low-light level fluorescence microscopy of cells labeled with
DiI, a fluorescent lipid. These methods resolve the finest details of motility,
which will be analyzed quantitatively and correlated with immunocytochemical
analysis of the cytoskeleton of fixed explants and with cell structure seen by
electron microscopy. Cell fates will be determined by tracing with fluorescein
dextran amine. These data will show how the paths of cell movement are
controlled and how protrusive activity of individual cells results in their
intercalation. Convergence and extension by cell intercalation is an early,
essential step in development of the dorsal axial tissues, the head, the
vertebral column and central nervous system of all vertebrates examined thus
far, and thus is a fundamental process in development. Understanding how cells
intercalate will be a major contribution to our knowledge about how cells
function in morphogenesis. %%% This work will provide a detailed description of
the movements of cells deep in the early developing embryo that lead to the
tissue shape changes. These ultimately cause the early foldings of the embryonic
tissues to shape form the adult animal.