* 8905258
* Genetic Analysis of Small Nuclear RNA Structure             and Function in Yeast
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1989,07/31/1990
* Christine Guthrie, University of California-San Francisco
* Continuing grant
* Philip Harriman
* 07/31/1990
* USD 70,000.00

Using the simple eukaryote Saccharomyces cerevisiae, we have recently succeeded
in identifying a set of five small nuclear RNAs (snRNAs) that mediate pre-
messenger RNA splicing. We have definitively established a 1:1 correspondence
between these spliceosomal RNAs of yeast, and U1, U4, U5, and U6 snRNAs of
mammalian cells, despite surprising differences in size and structural
organization. These data have provided unexpected insights into the evolutionary
constraints operating on the spliceosomal RNAs, revealing a functional hierarchy
which places U6 at the center of this RNA-based machine. Toward the long-term
goal of determining the three-dimensional structure of the spliceosome, we will
now proceed to augment this information by the establishment of a larger
phylogenetic data base comprised of snRNA sequences from selected fungal
representatives. In conjunction with chemical and enzymatic conformational
probing, phylogenetically derived structural models will also be tested using
genetics. Deletion analyses will be used to delineate absolutely required
structure: function domains; since our initial forays have demonstrated that
even phylogenetically conserved elements may perform functions dispensable for
viability, we anticipate generating a collection of "mini-snRNAs" smaller than
any found in nature. In a complementary approach, we will assess the
contributions of species-specific and evolutionarily invariant domains by
performing inter-species "swaps", using engineered chimeras to complement
deletion strains in yeast. Beyond their obvious impact on a mechanistic
understanding of splicing, by focusing on the RNA-based functions of the
spliceosomal machinery these approaches will also provide an experimental avenue
to explore the provocative hypothesis that the trans-acting snRNAs once resided
within the introns of self-splicing RNAs.