* 8905758
* REU:  Multidimensional Analysis of Evolution of Pelvic      Reduction in Sticklebacks
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/1989,07/31/1991
* Michael Bell, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Gregory J. McCants
* 07/31/1991
* USD 111,150.00

Thousands of lakes on coastal lowlands of Cook Inlet, Alaska, contain
populations of the threepine stickleback, Gasterosteus aculeatus. Until
recession of the last (Naptowne) glacial advance 13,000 years ago, Cook Inlet
was filled with glacial ice. As glacial ice withdrew, marine sticklebacks
colonized newly-formed freshwater habitats. Marine threespine stickebacks are
structurally homogeneous and still occur along the Pacific Cost of North
America. Thus, all freshwater sticklebacks in Cook Inlet were derived recently
from a known common ancestor. Preliminary studies indicate that Cook Inlet
stickleback are structurally diverse, and variable reduction and loss of the
pelvic girdle is a common recurrent phenomenon. Recurrent pelvic reduction
permits study of interactions of natural selection and intrinsic properties of
the organism. Associations between pelvic reduction and environmental variables
will be studied using about 300 stickleback populations. The analysis will
provide hypotheses for causation of pelvic reduction. Some populations may be
too young for extensive pelvic reduction to have evolved. This hypothesis will
be tested by analyzing the relation between the extent of pelvic reduction and
lake age. The hypothesis that developmental processes bias evolution of
vestigial pelvic phenotypes will be tested by studying development of the pelvic
girdle in populations without pelvic reduction. Absence of predatory fishes and
resultant increased insect predation has already been implicated in evolution of
pelvic reduction. Feasibility of testing this hypothesis by studying changes of
pelvic phenotype frequencies in lakes with and without introduced predatory
fishes will be determined. The proposed research will provide insights into
evolutionary mechanisms and form the basis for further evolutionary
investigations using pelvic reduction in threepine sticklebacks.