* 8905370
* Engineering Research Equipment Grant: Spectrofluorometer forIn-Situ Probing of Solid-Liquid Interface and Adsorption    Phenomena
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/1989,06/30/1990
* Nicholas Turro, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Foltz
* 06/30/1990
* USD 45,000.00

For a deeper understanding of the adsorption process in general and of the
microstructure of the adsorbed phase in particular, this grant funds purchase of
a spectrofluorometer capable of steady-state and time-resolved fluorescence
measurements. The equipment is provided with double monochromators at the
excitation and emission ends for optimum performance and has the facility to
record corrected luminescence decay-time measurements. It was thyratron grated,
flash lamp triggered nanosecond pulse to excite the luminescent samples. It can
also measure time-resolved spectra. Surfactants and polymers adsorbed on a solid
surface from solution modify surface properties drastically. Such phenomena have
far reaching effects on the industrially and technologically important processes
of flotation, flocculation, fine particle separation, oil recovery, and
processing of electronic and ceramic green bodies. Earlier workers have focused
on measurements such as adsorption density, zeta potentials, and contact angels.
Recent efforts using fluorescence spectroscopy have demonstrated the potential
of luminescence techniques to elucidate the structure and dynamics of evolution
of the adsorbed layer in great detail. This award will significantly expand such
work.