* 8905552
* Developmental Physiology of Dorsal-Ventral Currents During Oogenesis
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1989,01/31/1991
* Elizabeth Bowdan, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 01/31/1991
* USD 87,000.00

The stable currents which have been demonstrated to enter the ventral and leave
the dorsal surface of the vitellogenic oocyte of Blattella germanica are a very
early and a very striking demonstration of dorsal ventral polarity. They may
represent the earliest physiological process to be directly correlated with the
establishment of a dorsal ventral polarity. To elucidate the ionic basis of
these currents Dr. Kunkel plans to use ionic replacement, channel blocking and
metabolic poisons to affect the pattern of measurable currents. The effects of
natural serum components present during vitellogenesis on the currents will also
be examined, including vitellogenin, other serum proteins and juvenile hormone.
The effects of removal of the follicle epithelium on the currents will be
determined. The physiology of these currents will be investigated using the
vibrating probe and patch clamping. This study will allow Dr. Kunkel to examine
the origin and physiological basis of dorsal ventral polarity. %%% The
establishment of asymmetry is an early and fundamental step in the development
of an organism. It occurs before fertilization. The unfertilized egg already
shows polarity. Dr. Kunkel is investigating the establishment of this polarity
early in the development of the egg.