* 8905411
* International Workshop in the Natural Sciences and Their    Methodology:  Lima, Peru, August, 1989
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/1989,07/31/1990
* Alberto Cordero, CUNY Queens College
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 07/31/1990
* USD 8,674.00

This proposal for the participation of five U.S. scientists in an international
workshop in the natural sciences and their methodology to be held in Lima, Peru,
August 10-18 1989, is sponsored by NSF as part of the Science in Developing
Countries Program, in conjunction with Queens College of CUNY, and the Peruvian
National Council for Science and Technology (CONCYTEC-Peru). Funding for
participants from other countries is coming from ICSU/UNESCO and a variety of
international and national research organizations and universities. This
multiple discipline workshop in selected topic in physics, biology, and the
foundations of science, aims at stimulating new professional contacts among
scientists from the US, Peru, and other countries who share common research
interests. Peruvian participants will be selected with the help of CONCYTEC-
Peru. The object is to provide Peruvian faculty with an up-dated picture of
today's increasingly inter-connected scientific view of the natural world, with
emphasis on improved approaches to the teaching of general courses at the
college level mathematics and the natural sciences. Sciences to be covered
include; biology; biochemistry; physics; evolutionary studies; science
education; mathematics; behavioral studies; artificial intelligence; astronomy;
and philosophy and history of science.