* 8905536
* Silicon Graphics Computer Upgrade
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/1990,02/29/1992
* Michael Levitt, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 02/29/1992
* USD 24,065.00

A Silicon Graphics Iris computer system will be acquired for research in
computational biology. With this computer system, Professor Levitt will bring
computer simulation of protein molecular dynamics to the point where it is
sufficiently reliable and realistic to allow prediction of energetic, structural
and dynamic properties of these complicated systems. This will be accomplished
by asking specific questions and answering them by simulation and detailed
analysis of specific applications as follows: 1. Are simulations of proteins in
solution sufficiently stable to allow the extended simulation needed to sample
rare events and accumulate accurate averages? Extending simulations of bovine
pancreatic trypsin inhibitor (BPTI) in solution beyond 100 picoseconds (ps) will
confirm their methodological advances (use of all-atom energy functions, a
flexible water molecule and a smoothly truncated nonbonded potential together
with strict insistence on energy conservation). 2. How does the solution
structure of a protein differ from the crystal structure? Analysis of the
extended BPTI trajectory by calculating the spectral densities of each inter-
proton vector will make it possible to derive a more accurate solution structure
from nuclear magnetic resonance experiments. Comparisons to inelastic neutron
scattering data will also be made. 3. Can simple energy functions and classical
dynamics reproduce the details of protein x-ray structures? They will simulate
the dynamics of two well-refined, high-resolution protein structures, BPTI and
crambin in their native crystal lattices. Systematic differences between the
calculated time-averaged structure and the x-ray structure will be used to
modify the energy parameters. 4. How does water penetrate into and disrupt
native protein structure in the first stages of unfolding? Which interactions
are weakened first, the polar hydrogen bonds or the non-polar van der Waals'
interactions? How rapidly do such "unfolding" fluctuations occur under normal
and denaturing conditions? They will investigate the stability of native BPTI in
solution as temperature, density (equivalent to pressure) and patterns of
disulphide bonding are changed. These methods will also be used on simpler
systems such as alpha-helices and beta-hairpins in solution. 5. By what path and
at what rate are water molecules expelled from protein binding sites? They will
apply these methods to larger proteins, ribonuclease and the trypsin/BPTI
complex, which are also being studied experimentally.