* 8905627
* Mathematical Sciences: Research in Phenomena Occurring in   Disordered Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1989,12/31/1992
* Abel Klein, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 12/31/1992
* USD 153,570.00

Professor Klein's project has to do with mathematical models of phenomena that
occur in disordered physical systems, for example superfluidity and
superconductivity. Part of the work will involve analysis of the Ma-Halperin-Lee
model for strongly disordered superfluids; this is a lattice model whose
Hamiltonian contains a random term. Professor Klein will also continue his
research on the Anderson model in solid state physics. Specifically, he will
investigate spectral properties of random Schrodinger operators with dependent
potentials, and will try to obtain weak disorder expansions in various
situations. A great deal of mathematical physics is concerned with the modeling
of physical systems by means of operators on spaces of functions representing
the possible states of the system. In the general picture, a selfadjoint
operator called the Hamiltonian, corresponding roughly to energy, can readily be
written down on the basis of physical assumptions. A mathematically elegant and
straightforward relationship then produces the time evolution of the system from
the Hamiltonian. This relationship is however more or less useless in specfic
terms unless one knows something about the spectrum (possible energy levels) and
associated mathematical paraphernalia for the Hamiltonian. Analyzing these is
generally difficult and subtle. An additional complicating factor enters in when
the Hamiltonian contains random terms, as apparently it must in order to model
certain kinds of phenomena successfully, for instance superfluidity and
superconductivity. Professor Klein's project is to enlarge our understanding of
these sorts of random models.