* 8905056
* High-Temperature Contact Metamorphism Around the Marble     Canyon Intrusion, Texas
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/1989,09/11/1992
* Lawrence Anovitz, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas O. Wright
* 09/11/1992
* USD 50,440.00

The Marble Canyon intrusions, located near Van Horn, Texas is surrounded by a
contact aureole in which sanidinite facies assemblages occur. Preliminary phase
equilibrium calculations suggest that unusually high temperatures (925 - 1025 C)
were reached near the contact. Heat flow considerations suggest, however, that
this temperature is too high for a contact aureole given reasonable assumptions
about the geometry of the intrusion. A research program is outlined that will
carefully examine the geochemistry of the Marble Canyon aureole, quantitatively
evaluate the thermal aureole and the nature of the fluid and attempt to explain
this apparent discrepancy. The Marble Canyon aureole contains a large number of
mineral species (Table 1), and thus is especially conducive to a study of
contact metamorphism at high temperatures. The study proposed here will combine
petrological and geochemical approaches to yield a combined understanding of the
processes which form high temperature contact aureoles in general, and the
Marble Canyon aureole in particular. Data will allow a quantitative evaluation
of temperature and fluid compositions changes, metasomatism and reaction
progress with increasing distance from the intrusion. Geochemical studies will
concentrate on C/O stable isotopic variations and bulk chemical evaluation of
changes in major and trace elements with distance from the intrusion. Similar
data obtained from different sources (e.g. temperatures from thermal modelling
and phase equilibria and fluid/rock ratios from reaction progress and isotopic
calculations) will be examined for internal consistency, and any observed
differences will be evaluated in terms of the data bases, assumptions, and real
errors involved. Particular attention will be given to the possibility that the
concept of fluid/rock ratios may itself be erroneous and that alternative
descriptions of the interactions between metamorphic fluids and rocks are
needed.