* 8905803
* On the Kinematics, Dynamics and Design Optimization of BasicMechanical Components and Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/1989,11/30/1992
* Ferdinand Freudenstein, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Devendra P. Garg
* 11/30/1992
* USD 190,003.00

Mechanical components ranging from gear trains to belt drives have been in
existence for many decades and their manufacture has reached a high degree of
refinement. However, their mechanical analysis often has been limited to
elementary derivations relating to their simplest characteristics. Although
these components are seemingly simple, their mechanical analysis is quite subtle
and complex. Generally, such components are developed on the basis of experience
and extensive life and wear testing, and they cannot be optimized in the design
stage. This project attempts to put mechanical component design on a more
analytical foundation and addresses the related issues of refined modeling and
optimum design of machine components. It comprises four topics including study
of the efficiency of mechanical components and systems, application of B-splines
to the design and optimization of mechanical systems, study of the trajectories
in noncircular planetary gearing, and study of the mechanics of variable ratio
drives, including band and tape drives, timing belts and pulleys. The first
topic addresses the prediction of power requirements (i.e., the mechanical
efficiency) of mechanical systems in the design stage. Much work has been done
in this area for gearing, but not for other mechanical system components. This
effort focuses on the computer aided prediction and optimization of the
efficiency of mechanical components. For the second research topic, the intent
is to consider the application of B-splines to various two and three dimensional
problems, including robotic path generation, selected problems in the dynamics
of high speed cam follower systems and others. The B-spline concept is one that
evolved in computer science technology, and which provides a very numerically
efficient mathematical method for approximating a function passing through two
end points. It can be used to optimize the design of the class of components
alluded to previously. The planetary gearing research task, the third one
proposed, investigates the algebraic geometry and nature of gear trajectories
generated by noncircular gears. This class of gears has been used extensively
recently in numerically controlled machining and in photo chemical etching
processes, but it is not well understood analytically. The fourth topic is
related to band and tape drives, basic flexible mechanical components used in
film advance, tape transport, and other nonuniform transmission. The proposed
research involves the mechanics of variable ratio band and tape drives, timing
belts and pulleys and focuses on investigation of the possibility of designing
these components with the complete elimination of slack. Such a design would
eliminate the necessity of tensioning devices, and simplify the overall design.