* 8905892
* Engineering Research Equipment Grant:  Power Electronics    Research Equipment
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/1989,01/31/1991
* Thomas Stuart, University of Toledo
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Collins
* 01/31/1991
* USD 59,650.00

This equipment grant proposal is intended to support power electronics research
at the University of Toledo. Power electronics is a rapidly- growing electrical-
engineering specialty area which deals with electronic circuits capable of
efficiently processing electrical energy at high power levels. Two research
projects to be supported are the high-power-factor rectifier and high-power
switching converters suitable for application in space (such as NASA's space
station). Rectifiers convert AC power from the utility distribution system into
DC power for use by computers, variable-speed motors and other electronic
equipment. However, simple rectifiers draw relatively large currents for the
amount of power being processed. This research seeks advanced circuit designs
which draw lower AC line currents for equal amounts of power. NASA's space
station will initially use a 100 kilowatt power distribution system. This will
require electronic converters to raise or lower DC voltage levels, or convert DC
to AC power. The researchers at the University of Toledo are looking for
electronic converters which can perform unattended for long periods of time in
the hostile environment of outer-space. The equipment requested meets the
specialized measurement and testing needs of these research projects.