* 8905772
* Mathematical Sciences: Phase-space Analysis and Scattering  Theory of Shcrodinger Type Hamiltonians
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1989,12/31/1992
* Avraham Soffer, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Kevin Clancey
* 12/31/1992
* USD 62,878.00

Professor Soffer's project is concerned with the spectral and scattering theory
of hamiltonian systems. It includes as a major part the study of N-body long
range potential systems and quasiparticle dynamics such as spin waves. Related
problems will also be tackled, including the spectral theory of time-dependent
hamiltonians and multichannel nonlinear scattering. It is expected that this
work will provide a rigorous basis for some important concepts in physics as
well as new mathematical techniques of analyzing the asymptotic behavior of
solutions of partial differential equations. The general idea here is the use of
sophisticated mathematics to model the behavior of physical systems, especially
those involving several interacting particles. (These might be electrons
interacting by Coulomb forces, or at the opposite extreme, stars interacting
gravitationally.) Such a system may variously be described by a system of
partial differential equations, or by an operator (called the hamiltonian) on a
space of functions that represent the possible physical states. There is in
principle a quite straightforward relationship between the hamiltonian and the
time evolution of the system. Working this out for a given class of hamiltonians
in sufficient detail to make strong qualitative statements about what happens to
the system in the long run is a major analytical task, however, and the focus of
the mathematical research for this project.