* 8905629
* A Chemical Examination of Himalyan Aconitum Species,        A Cooperative Project at the University of Georgia, Award inU.S. and Indian Currencies
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/1989,07/31/1992
* S. Pelletier, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 07/31/1992
* USD 12,357.00

Description: This project supports participation of an Indian scientist, Dr.
K.S. Khetwal of the Department of Chemistry, Kumaon University, Nainital, India,
in a project managed by Dr. S. Pelletier at the University of Georgia, Athens,
GA. The research objective is to investigate the alkaloid constituents of
certain Himalayan alkaloid-bearing species, including Aconitum balfourii Stapf
(Ranunculaceae), A. laeve Royle, and A. violaceum Jacq. The extracts of these
species will be screened for their biological activities. The funds will enable
Dr. Khetwal to travel to Athens and work with Dr. Pelletier for approximately
four months on the structural determination of active compounds using modern
instrumentation including infrared, GC-MS spectra, proton and carbon-13 NMR
spectroscopy. Techniques such as specific homonuclear- heteronuclear decoupling,
off-resonance techniques, broad band decoupling, NOE, relaxation experiments and
2D-methods will be utilized to provide further insight into the complex
structures. Scope: The project is expected to increase understanding of the
chemistry of Indian plants, especially those from the Himalayan region, to
select pharmacologically interesting compounds that merit careful study, and to
better understand the relationship between the chemical structure and the
bioactivity. The work will enhance the capability of the Indian scientist for
carrying out useful Indo-U.S. collaboration when he returns to India.