* 8905214
* U.S.-Poland Cooperative Research on Raw Materials Procurement in the Paleolithic of Northcentral Europe
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/1989,10/31/1991
* Anta Montet-White, University of Kansas Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Gerson Sher
* 10/31/1991
* USD 12,850.00

The main objective of this U.S.-Poland cooperative research project between Anta
Montet-White of the University of Kansas and Janusz Kozlowski of the
Jaqielonnian University in Krakow is to complete a series of studies of the
acquisition, distribution, and use of raw materials during the Middle phases of
the Upper Paleolithic age. The geographic focus of the project is a limestone
plateau in the foothills of the Carpathian mountains in southern Poland, one of
the richest sources of good quality Paleolithic raw materials in Central Europe.
Polish scholars have led the way in this field and have been among the first to
demonstrate long-distance transport of raw materials in the Paleolithic. The
project offers American researchers and students unique opportunities for field
access to important archeological sites and testing models of early human
settlement organization and economy. The ultimate goal of the project is to
arrive at a better understanding of settlement patterns and territoriality that
developed in north-central Europe in response to changing climatic conditions
before and during the time marked by the last major advance of the glaciers.
This project fullfills the program objective of advancing scientific knowledge
by enabling leading experts in the United States and Poland to combine
complelmentary talents, pool resources, and share research facilities in areas
of strong mutual interest and competence.