* 8905399
* Evolutionary Ecology of Mycophagous Drosophila
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1989,02/28/1993
* John Jaenike, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory J. McCants
* 02/28/1993
* USD 302,200.00

Drosophila have played a central role in the study of genetics, development,
and evolution. Dr. Jaenike's research focuses on mushroom feeding species of
Drosophila which are ideally suited to studies of the ecology and behavior of
these insects. A primary concern of the proposed research will be with
ecological interactions between these Drosophila and a species of nematode that
parasitizes them. Because as many as 50% of these flies are parasitized at any
time and because infected flies are seriously debilitated in terms of fertility,
these nematodes have a substantial impact on populations of Drosophila. A series
of field and laboratory studies will be used to investigate how nematodes affect
survival, mating success, and competitive interactions of their Drosophila
hosts. How ecological factors, such as ambient temperature, mushroom species,
and Drosophila population densities, affect frequencies of parasites will also
be examined. This research will provide basic information on the ecology of
host-parasite interactions. In additions, because nematodes have the potential
to be important agents for biological control of insects, this work could shed
light on how best to carry out such control programs. Dr. Jaenike also has plans
to study chromosomes which he has discovered to affect sex ratio in a species of
Drosophila. Because "sex ratio" males sire only daughters, these chromosomes are
expected in theory to increase in frequency and eventually cause population
extinction. In reality, they do not do so. Dr. Jaenike will study ecological
factors, including competitive ability and susceptibility to nematode
parasitism, that may prevent the spread of these chromosomes. This research will
provide insight on how selection at one level (chromosomes within individuals)
is counteracted by selection at another level (individuals within populations).