* 8905219
* Factors Controlling Nutrient and Sediment Discharges from the Watershed of Chesapeake Bay
* NONE,NONE
* 10/15/1989,09/30/1993
* David Correll, Chesapeake Research Consortium Inc
* Continuing grant
* Richard F. Dame
* 09/30/1993
* USD 730,169.00

This project uses a combination of whole watershed discharge measurements,
observations of nutrient fluxes within riparian forests, and landscape modeling
to study the effects of geochemistry, land use distributions, and weather on
watershed discharges of nitrogen and phosphorus to Chesapeake Bay. Comparisons
of discharges from watersheds in the three geological provinces of the
Chesapeake watershed (Appalachian, Piedmont, and Coastal Plain) will examine the
importance of regional geochemistry. Within each province, a comparison of
discharges from watersheds with contrasting distribution patterns of cropland
and forest will be made in order to quantify the variability of discharges
within a province and to test the generality of the nutrient-filtering ability
of cropside riparian forests previously observed on coastal plain watersheds.
Multi-year data would be collected to gain insight into effects of weather
variation. Fluxes of nutrients moving through cropside riparian forests will be
measured and determine the spatial pattern of nutrient retention (particularly
nitrate) within those forests. The importance of factors such as geochemistry,
forest age, slope, and forest width will be evaluated. Landscape models of
nitrate discharge from cropland/forest systems will be developed and used to
predict landscape discharges by combining data on retention within forests with
detailed information on the spatial distribution of forest relative to cropland,
developed with the aid of a computer-based geographic information system
(ARC/INFO). Model predictions will be compared with spatial data at different
levels of resolution in order to evaluate model performance and develop
recommendations for regional efforts to model discharges to the Chesapeake. The
investigators are well qualified to do this type of research, and the
institutional support is excellent.