* 8905578
* Mathematical Sciences: Arithmetic of Automorphic Forms on   Unitary Groups in Three Variables
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1989,06/30/1992
* Jonathan Rogawski, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* Gary Cornell
* 06/30/1992
* USD 57,100.00

This award supports the research in Automorphic Forms by Professor Jonathan
Rogawski of the University of California at Los Angeles. Dr. Rogawski's project
is to continue his investigation of the relations between Number Theory and the
theory of automorphic forms on unitary groups in three variables. He plans three
interrelated lines of research: The first involves a continuation of his
collaboration with S. Gelbart on the representation of the L-function by an
integral of Rankin-Shimura type. The second concerns p-adic families of
automorphic representations on U(3) and their relation with Galois
representations. The third is the investigation of period relations, special
values of L-functions, and the Beilinson conjectures for Shimura varieties
associated to U(3). Non-Euclidean plane geometry began in the early nineteenth
century as a mathematical curiosity, but by the end of that century,
mathematicians had realized that many objects of fundamental importance are non-
Euclidean in their basic nature. The detailed study of non-Euclidean plane
geometries has given rise to several branches of modern mathematics, of which
the study of Modular and Automorphic Forms is one of the most active. This field
is principally concerned with questions about the whole numbers, but in its use
of Geometry and Analysis, it retains connection to its historical roots.