* 8905524
* Icesheet, Sea-Level, Climatic Interactions During the       Younger Dryas/Cockburn Interval (11-8KA):  Evidence Based   on a Lake Coring Program
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/1989,11/30/1990
* John Andrews, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 11/30/1990
* USD 60,000.00

The investigations will continue investigation of the interactions between: 1)
glacial response, 2) sea-level variations, and 3) climate, around the margin of
the Laurentide Ice Sheet (LIS) in the vicinity of Hudson Strait and Frobisher
Bay, Eastern Canadian Arctic. The time-scale for the investigation includes two
major moraine forming intervals, the Hall and Frobisher Bay moraines, that are
C-14 dated at &gt;=10.3 and ca. 8.4 ka respectively. The former may be coeval
with the Younger Dryas stadial of NW Europe; the latter is a major event
(Cockburn Substage) around the residual Laurentide Ice Sheet. In the first year,
1987, we cored three lakes a few kilometers form the Terra Nivea Ice Cap, on the
south side of Frobisher Bay, and distal to the Frobisher Bay moraines. In 1988
three lakes were cored distal to the Hall moraines. These lakes were cored at or
below the marine limit so that we could 1) date the marine/freshwater transition
for sea-level studies; and 2) use the litho-stratigraphy and diatom assemblages
to investigate whether sea-level fell monotonically after deglaciation or if
later transgressions occurred. Early studies by INSTAAR had suggested sea level
fell rapidly after 9 ka ago unlike the more gradual emergence history farther
north on Baffin Island. Stratigraphic sections in raised marine deposits
indicated a possible transgression ca 8 ka ago. In cooperation with the AMS C-14
facility, University of Arizona, we have dated two of the marine/freshwater
transitions in the first area; both date ca. 8.6 +/- ka despite a difference in
elevation of 24 m. The emphasis in this renewal is to continue our program of
lake coring in the region that lies distal to the 10.3 ka Hall moraines, but
proximal to deposits of the Loks Land aminozone that has an estimated age of
40-50 ka. Numerous lakes exist in the area and are accessible for both winter
and summer coring operations.