* 8905270
* Are There Two Protein Disulfide Isomerases in the ER?
* BIO,MCB
* 10/01/1989,09/30/1993
* Michael Green, Saint Louis University
* Continuing Grant
* Maryanna P. Henkart
* 09/30/1993
* USD 186,250.00

The general aim of this research is the isolation and characterization of
components of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) that are involved in the processing
and modification of newly synthesized proteins. This proposal focuses
specifically on the components of the ER that may mediate the formation of the
correct disulfide bonds during the early stages of protein folding and assembly.
The luminal microsomal enzyme protein disulfide isomerase (PDI) has long been
the best candidate to carry out this function. Recently, however, a newly
described luminal microsomal protein, ERp72, has been cloned in our laboratory.
ERp72 has the striking property of possessing three repeats of the amino acid
sequences that are thought to be the active site sequences of PDI. Accordingly,
the research described in this proposal is designed to provide new insights into
the possible functional relationship between ERp72 and PDI. The first specific
aim of this proposal is to determine directly whether ERp72 can act as a protein
disulfide isomerase. Full- length expressible cDNA clones encoding ERp72 and PDI
will be expressed in eukaryotic and bacterial cells and the expressed protein
will be assayed for PDI activity directly. The second specific aim of this
proposal is to obtain insights into the functional relationship between ERp72
and PDI by investigating and comparing important biological parameters of the
two proteins. The relative expression of the two proteins in various tissues
will be determined. In addition, the mechanism of ER localization of the two
proteins and their protein "neighborhoods" in the ER will be elucidated. The
approaches described n this proposal should help us elucidate the way in which
the environment in the ER helps to mediate the processes of protein folding and
disulfide bond formation. The results of our studies may increase our ability to
engineer cells that would be extremely efficient in the synthesis, folding,
processing, and transport of cloned protein of potential commercial and
therapeutic value.