* 8905498
* Maternal Effects on Sexually Dimorphic Neural Development   (Neuroscience)
* EHR,HRD
* 09/01/1989,02/28/1991
* Celia Moore, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Lola E. Rogers
* 02/28/1991
* USD 106,366.00

This research will explore the possibility that afferent input to developing
brain regions provided by the natural environment during neonatal periods
contributes to neuroanatomical development. It is particularly interesting that
some stimulation is provided unevenly to developing males and females. In rats,
maternal stimulation associated with licking the pups is sexually biased, with
males typically receiving more stimulation than females. In this study, maternal
stimulation will be experimentally reduced and effects on selected sexually
dimorphic structures within the spinal cord and brain of adults will be
examined. Measures will include number and size of motor neurons in two spinal
nuclei, volume and neural density of the sexually dimorphic nucleus of the
preoptic area (POA), dendritic structure of Golgi-stained neurons in POA, and
ultrastructural measurements of axonal number and size in the posterior fifth of
the corpus callosum. Interactive activities include guest lectures to be given
in several different undergraduate psychology courses, research seminars and
discussions of research material in both structural and informal settings. This
project furthers VPW program objectives which are (1) to provide opportunities
for women to advance their careers in engineering and in the disciplines of
science supported by NSF and (2) to encourage women to pursue careers in science
and engineering by providing greater visibility for women scientists and
engineers employed in industry, government, and academic institutions. By
encouraging the participation of women in science, it is a valuable investment
in the Nation's future scientific vitality.