* 8905145
* Conference Entitled: Biological Actions of Extracellular ATPHeld on November 27-29, 1989, in Philadelphia, PA.
* BIO,MCB
* 11/01/1989,10/31/1990
* George Dubyak, New York Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Maryanna P. Henkart
* 10/31/1990
* USD 5,000.00

This proposal seeks support for a conference on The Biological Role of
Extracellular ATP to be sponsored by the New York Academy of Sciences. Effects
of extracellular ATP on the in vivo and in vitro functions of a variety of
tisssue and organ systems have been known for over 20 years. Modification of the
contractile responses of cardiac muscle and vascular and visceral smooth muscle
in the presence of exogenous ATP have been particularly well characterized. More
recently, extracellular ATP at nanomolar to micromolar concentrations has been
shown to trigger, modulate, or inhibit physiological responses in a much broader
range of non-contractile tissue and cell types including exocrine and endocrine
secretory tissues, vascular endothelium, epithelial cell types, phagocytic
cells, hepatocytes, and certain nerve/neuronal preparations. Furthermore,
studies using state- of-the-art methods for monitoring receptor-mediated
signalling events in single cells or in highly homogeneous cultured cell systems
have demonstrated that extracellular ATP can trigger activation of several well-
defined transmembrane signalling effector systems. Since ATP is stored in, and
can be released from, a variety of neuronal and non-neuronal secretory granules,
these past and recent observations strongly suggest that ATP may be a
physiologically significant inter-cellular signalling agent which exerts its
functional effects via interaction with specific cell surface receptors.
Increasingly, scientists investigating these various aspects of the biological
role of extracellular ATP represent a much wider range of disciplines (cellular
physiology, neurobiology, endocrinology, and immunology) than the smooth muscle
pharmacology which previously dominated the field. Since previous conferences in
this general area have been focused on the effects of adenosine and ATP on
smooth muscle or cardiovascular biology, many of the recent studies on ATP-
induced actions in other tissue and cell types have never been discussed in a
focused conference setting. The proposed conference will provide such a setting.
There will be sessions concerned with the following topics: 1) the effects of
ATP on the integrated, specialized functions of various excitable and non-
excitable cell types, 2) ATP chemistry and the classification of ATP effects and
the receptors mediating these effects, 3) the coupling of ATP receptors to
specific transmembrane signalling mechanisms, 4) the sources of extracellular
ATP, and 5) the metabolism of extracellular ATP by ecto-enzymes. This conference
on the biological role of extracellular ATP will provide a forum for the multi-
disciplinary discussion of the increasing number of studies which indicate that
extracellular ATP may have important inter-cellular signalling and regulatory
roles in diverse biological systems.