* 8905117
* REU Supplement to NSF DMB-8905117 X-Chromosome Function     during Spermatogenesis
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1989,02/28/1993
* Mary Handel, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 02/28/1993
* USD 262,579.00

The goal of the proposed studies is to understand the function of the X
chromosome and X-chromosome inactivation (XCI) during mammalian spermatogenesis,
and the relation of these events to meiosis and spermatogenic differentiation.
Since abnormalities in either structure or number of X chromosomes almost
inevitably result in male (but not female) sterility, the cycle of X-chromosome
activity in male germ cells is likely to be an integral, controlling element of
their meiotic activity and differentiation. The development time of X-chromosome
expression and XCI during spermatogenesis will be determined to test the
hypothesis that XCI coincides with the onset of meiosis. The genetic extent of
XCI will be examined to test the hypothesis that inactivation includes genes in
the non-pairing region, but not those in the pairing region, of the X
chromosome. The genetic control of XCI will be investigated to determine if it
is controlled from a single site on the chromosome and to test the hypothesis
that it is not associated with hypermethylation of regulatory sequences. The
expression of X-linked genes will be investigated in sterile mouse mutants to
determine if the deleterious effect of supernumerary X chromosomes on
spermatogonia is due to failure of dosage compensation and if the lethal effect
of structural abnormalities of the X chromosome on spermatocytes is due to
failure of XCI. These studies will lead to more complete understanding of the
biological role of sex chromosomes during male meiosis and germ cell
differentiation.