* 8905890
* Taxonomic Revision of Rhodospatha (Araceae)
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/1990,06/30/1993
* Thomas Croat, Missouri Botanical Garden
* Continuing Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 06/30/1993
* USD 179,802.00

Dr. Thomas Croat of the Missouri Botanical Garden will undertake field
collecting in South America followed by laboratory and herbarium study of the
estimated 70 species of the aroid genus Rhodospatha. A relative of the
philodendron, well known horticulturally, Rhodospatha along with many other
aroid genera is poorly represented in herbaria collections and consequently is
poorly known. Members of the group are rather common in moist low-elevation
forests of the New World tropics, where they contribute to the rich community of
vines and epiphytes present in the rainforest. Plants exhibit an interesting
difference between juvenile leaf shape and adult leaf form, partly related to
the need to germinate on the ground followed by growth upward as a vine
requiring neighboring plants for support. Dr. Croat will study morphological
features of leaf, stem, flower, and fruit to discern reliable characters for
distinguishing species. An extensive survey of herbarium holdings of specimens
of these species will enable detailed mapping of the geographic ranges and
habitat preferences of the species. Growth of selected taxa in the greenhouse
will permit close observation of subtle morphological features as well as study
of flowering and fruiting seasonality (if present at all). A comprehensive
taxonomic revision of the estimated 70 species, with analysis of generic
relationships with other aroids, will be completed at the end of the project.
The work will contribute to our understanding of tropical plant diversity, and
will make available materials and specimens for other researchers and students.