* 8905867
* Two-Stage Life Histories and Species Interactions:  Models  and Tests with Sunfishes
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/1989,11/30/1992
* Craig Osenberg, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Lindsay Fox
* 11/30/1992
* USD 184,171.00

In this study a simplified two.life.stage model to examine the interaction
between two competing sunfish species and their prey resources. The model can be
used to predict patterns of species abundances, size.specific growth rates, and
resource densities under the following general conditions: 1) species found in
sympatry and allopatry, and 2) species coexisting across gradients in resource
productivities. Preliminary field data suggest that the model, and that the
observed responses run counter to expectations based on traditional,
not.structured models. Comparative surveys among six northern Wisconsin lakes
(where the pumpkinseed sunfish is found in sympatry and allopatry with the
bluegill) will be used to test a species' predicted response to the
presence/absence of its competitor. Comparative surveys among eight southern
Michigan lakes will test the predicted responses of two competing species and
their resources to variation in resource productivity . A series of experimental
studies in Michigan lakes will elucidate the mechanisms driving the observed
patterns of species abundance and individual responses. The responses observed
at the individual level (e.g. diet shifts and growth patterns) will be
integrated with the responses of populations (changes in densities), to provide
rigorous tests of the model.