* 8905553
* Comparative and Developmental Analysis of Surface Domains
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/1989,01/31/1992
* G. Benjamin Bouck, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Maryanna P. Henkart
* 01/31/1992
* USD 164,008.00

The control of the synthesis, assembly and segregation of distinct surface
domains in a model unicellular system will be addressed in this proposed study.
In Euglena a surface fraction and its subfractions enriched in plasma membranes
and membrane skeletons will be independently evaluated and compared with a
flagellar fraction that lacks or differs in these components. First surface
isolates will be used to resolve the dynamics of attachment of the membrane
skeleton to the plasma membrane by calculating turnover rates of the membrane
skeletal proteins and by detailing the behavior of unassembled cellular pools of
these proteins. Secondly, to what extent the membrane skeletal proteins
themselves determine surface organization will be evaluated in experiments in
which proteins with slightly different biochemical properties but markedly
different assembly patterns are separately or in combination reassociated on
plasma membranes. In a third set of experiments the significance of a relatively
minor membrane skeletal protein that shares immunological determinants with
spectrin will be assessed by peptide mapping, overlay experiments and cloning.
Fourthly, in order to gain a fuller understanding of the timing of synthesis and
assembly of replicating surfaces and regenerating flagella, molecular probes
will be constructed for specific integral and peripheral membrane proteins.
Recombinant from a cDNA library in the expression vector, Agt11 have yielded
clones tentatively identified as coding for cell surface-specific proteins, a
flagellar specific protein as well as a and B tubulins. Clones will be further
confirmed, recloned and restriction mapped. Sequencing of the cDNA coding for an
integral membrane protein will be given first priority as this protein appears
to be a putative membrane skeletal anchor restricted to the cell surface. It is
anticipated that DNA probes derived from sequences specific for proteins of the
cell surface or the flagellar surface will be useful ultimately for isolating
genomic clones and examining upstream regions for sequences common to genes
coding for proteins targeted to either of those two domains. The results of
these experiments will significantly increase our understanding of how membrane
domains are maintained, and how cell surface components interact with components
of the cellular interior.