* 8905055
* Mechanism of Hormonal Induction of ACC Synthase
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/1989,12/31/1992
* Allen Phillips, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Vincent P. Gutschick
* 12/31/1992
* USD 235,420.00

Ethylene is a plant hormone of particular importance in agriculture today
because of its many effects on plant growth and development, from seed
germination through senescence and death of the plant. Commercial use of
ethylene in stimulating plant ripening is currently practiced, despite the fact
that little is known about how its natural production by the plant is regulated
or how it acts in controlling the plant's growth and maturation. The
purification of the enzyme ACC synthase which is primarily responsible for the
production of ethylene has been completed. This purification was achieved for
the enzyme from mung bean tissue, an excellent system for further studies on the
molecular events which surround ethylene formation for the following reasons:
the tissue is quickly grown, it can be obtained in large quantity, and it
exhibits rapid and large increases in ACC synthase production upon appropriate
stimulation. This proposal is designed to address the question of how production
of the ethylene-forming enzyme ACC synthase is regulated in mung bean tissue and
whether the dominant controls are exerted at the gene expression level. Towards
this goal, the molecular events which lead to increased formation of ACC
synthase (and therefore of increased ethylene) will be examined. Through the use
of antibodies directed against ACC synthase, the extent to which increased gene
expression accounts for the elevation in ACC synthase production and how this
process is affected by other plant hormones, specifically indole-3- acetic acid
and brassinosteroids will be determined. In addition, the gene for ACC synthase
in mung beans will be isolated and its DNA sequence determined. This information
will greatly assist efforts to understand how the enzyme works in producing
ethylene.