* 8905812
* Mathematical Sciences:  Noncommutative Homotopy Theory and  Proper Actions on C*-Algebras
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/1989,11/30/1991
* N Phillips, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* William Y. Velez
* 11/30/1991
* USD 35,621.00

Professor Phillips will continue his ongoing study of the homotopy theory of
inverse limits of operator algebras. This includes a noncommutative version of
the Bott periodicity theorem describing the iterated loop spaces of the infinite
unitary group up to homotopy, and the search for noncommutative classifying
algebras for K-theory and other cohomology theories. Another facet of his
project involves proper actions of noncompact groups on noncommutative operator
algebras, where it is hoped that the theory will develop along the lines of the
topological case of groups acting on spaces. The mathematical research for this
project falls under the heading of noncommutative algebraic topology. Topology
is the study of shape, the overall conformation of objects (called topological
spaces when one looks at them from this point of view). Topology becomes
algebraic when one systematically computes invariants (numbers, say, or slightly
more complicated mathematical objects) that are defined for classes of
topological spaces. For instance, algebraic topology assigns invariants that
count numbers of holes of various dimensions in topological spaces, useful when
the space is itself too high-dimensional to permit a pictorial rendering. One
popular topological procedure is to take a standard space, like a circle or a
sphere, and look at how it maps into the space under examination, two such
mappings being considered identical if one can be continuously deformed into the
other; this is homotopy theory. Topology becomes noncommutative when you replace
the space by an appropriate algebra of complex functions on it, and then forget
about the space and allow the algebra to be more or less arbitrary. One result
of this is to be able to count holes, so to speak, in objects entirely outside
the traditional purview of topology, objects such as operator algebras that have
heretofore been of interest mainly to functional analysts. The more general
framework also yields some insights on the older subject matter by providing
more elbow room for constructions. Professor Phillips' project is concerned with
certain facets of this work of extending the machinery of topology into new
domains.