* 8905901
* Theoretical Studies in Tropospheric Chemistry:  InteractionsWith the Biosphere and Hydrological Cycle
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/1989,02/28/1993
* William Chameides, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Jarvis L. Moyers
* 02/28/1993
* USD 460,600.00

As part of the NSF's continuing program in Global Tropospheric Chemistry, this
three-year research project will investigate key mechanisms which couple the
trace gas chemistry of the atmosphere to the biosphere and to the atmospheric
hydrological cycle. The investigations of biospheric/atmospheric interactions
will focus on the cycle of photochemical oxidants in the atmosphere. Using the
resistance formulation to simulate the mass transfer and deposition of
atmospheric oxidants (eg., O3, H2O2) to mesophyllic leaf cells, this research
will attempt to identify the key chemical and physical processes which control
the rate of removal of atmospheric oxidants by dry deposition as well as the
degree of sensitivity of a plant to damage from the deposition of these
atmospheric oxidants. In a related study a one-dimensional photochemical model
will be used to study the role of biogenic emissions of hydrocarbons in
controlling the levels of atmospheric oxidants in pristine and polluted
continental environments. The investigations relating to the hydrological cycle
will focus on the processes which control the removal and chemical conversion of
soluble trace species by clouds and the development of algorithms to simulate
these processes in three- dimensional, chemical transport models of the global
troposphere.