* 8906142
* RUI:  A Genetic Analysis of the Production and Perception ofPheromonal Signals
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/1989,02/28/1993
* David Scott, South Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Tarri Joyner
* 02/28/1993
* USD 161,800.00

Mating activity in many insects is mediated by chemical, visual or auditory
courtship signals. Changes in insect courtship signals are closely associated
with changes in the perception of the signals, so that as the signal produced by
a particular species evolves, so does the perception of the signal. Divergence
in courtship signals between members of different populations is one of the
evolutionary processes that may eventually lead to the formation of new species.
The proposed research will provide a genetic analysis of the coupling between
changes in production and perception of chemical courtship signals, sex
pheromone. This will be accomplished by a comparison of two divergent strains of
the fruit fly, Drosophila melanogaster. This study will reveal new information
about the genetic complexity of the relationship between production and
perception of courtship signals, and about the complexity of genetic events that
occur during the formation of new species. The results of this study will also
be applicable to insect management strategies. Modern insect management
techniques often involve the use of an insect's own pheromone to disrupt mating
activities or to lure the insect to traps. These techniques are effective on a
short term basis, but over the long term insects may evolve resistance through
changes in the production and perception of specific pheromone. Knowledge about
the genetic basis for changes in the production and perception of pheromonal
courtship signals will help in determining whether resistance to pheromonal
techniques is likely to evolve, and how rapidly such evolution might proceed.