* 8906397
* RUI:  Distribution and Genes for Naphthalene Degradation    Among Bacteria of Sediments and Soils:  Gene Exchange in theEnvironment
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/1989,06/30/1993
* Michael Shiaris, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Standard Grant
* Althea Ball
* 06/30/1993
* USD 200,000.00

Naphthalene degradation is an excellent model system for studying the
relationship of bacterial function, naphthalene degradation, to bacterial
community structure and gene exchange in the environment. Naphthalene-degrading
bacteria are taxonomically diverse and the catabolic pathways for naphthalene
are often encoded on plasmids. In a preliminary experiment, the initial genes of
the Pseudomonas putida pathway for naphthalene degradation, nahAB, were used to
probe the DNA of naphthalene degrading bacteria isolated from sediments and
soils. Most of the soil isolates, about 50% of the freshwater isolates, but only
10% of the estuarine isolates displayed homology with the nahAB probe under
highly stringent conditions for hybridization. The results indicate that gene
exchange among naphthalene-degraders may be habitat-specific. The objectives of
the proposed investigation are to collect and classify naphthalene-degrading
bacteria from diverse environments, to determine the extent of homology between
nahAB and the DNA of the degraders, and to analyze the relationship among nahAB
homology, phenotypic- relatedness of the naphthalene degraders, and habitat
distribution. First, a large collection of naphthalene degraders will be
established by using a relatively nonselective isolation technique and by
obtaining strains from existing cultures. Naphthalene-degraders will be
classified by a numerical taxonomy approach. Degraders will be screened for
plasmids and their degree of homology with the nahAB DNA probe will be
determined by a semi-quantitative slot blot method. Field and laboratory data
will be coded, stored in a mainframe computer, and analyzed for possible
relationships by multivariate statistical methods. The study will yield baseline
information on the ecology of naphthalene degraders and the extent of genetic
exchange among bacteria of biogeochemical importance in the natural environment.