* 8906827
* Biosystematics of Plant Pathogenic "Mycoplasma-Like         Organisms"
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1989,01/31/1993
* Barbara Sears, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 01/31/1993
* USD 240,000.00

More than 200 economically important plant diseases are caused by "mycoplasma-
like organisms" (MLOs). These diseases affect a wide range of vegetable and
fruit crops, including celery, carrots, lettuce, cherries, peaches and
blueberries, causing symptoms ranging from severe yellowing to "witch's broom"
to stunting and fruit loss. Up until 20 years ago, MLO-diseases were thought to
be due to plant viruses, since they caused some of the symptoms of viruses, and
were transmitted by insects, as are many viruses. However, electron microscopy
revealed that these diseases were caused by the presence of cell wall-less
bacteria in the plant vascular system. Because of their small size, pleiomorphic
structure, and lack of cell walls, these organisms resemble bacterial
mycoplasmas, which are animal pathogens, and hence they have been referred to as
"mycoplasma- like organisms". MLOs become systemic in plants, and thus, they are
able to survive over the winter in roots of infected cherry trees, blueberry
bushes, or other perennials. As a result, an infected perennial plant will have
chronic disease symptoms until it dies of the disease or is removed and
destroyed. The only effective treatment is injection with tetracycline, but even
that antibiotic causes just a remission of symptoms, without eliminating the
MLO. Development of improved procedures for prevention and treatment of MLO
disease would be assisted significantly by a better understanding of the disease
agent. This proposal is designed to examine aspects of the physiology and
membrane biology of a plant pathogenic MLO. This will provide a better
understanding of the organism, including whether it shares traits of the
mycoplasmas that are animal pathogens. Attempts will be made to grow the plant
MLO on an artificial medium. If an MLO culture can be established, the
nutritional requirements of the organism and its antibiotic sensitivities could
be more thoroughly assessed. This would contribute significantly to our ability
to manage and treat diseases caused by this widespread plant pathogen.