* 8906748
* Bandelier Archaeological Excavation Project
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/1989,12/31/1992
* Robert Powers, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/1992
* USD 61,921.00

Dr. Kohler and his colleagues will conduct two seasons of archaeological
research in the Bandelier National Monument, a national park located in New
Mexico. The park contains numerous cliff dwellings and other archaeological
remains. Prior archaeological work indicates that Anasazi peoples were present
in the park between approximately 1,200 and 1,500 A.D. The data also indicate
that over this time period small scattered settlements gave way to larger
aggregated groupings, and a similar pattern is seen in other parts of the
Southwestern United States. Dr. Kohler and his colleagues wish to document this
trend and discover its cause. To do this, they will conduct two seasons of
excavation in sites which have been located during prior work. They will collect
ceramic materials to construct a fine grained chronology. This will permit them
to determine how population changed over time. Faunal and floral remains will
allow reconstruction of both diet and changing environment over this roughly 300
year interval. On this basis the interactions between climate, diet,
environmental degradation, and social change can be examined. Although
archaeologists for many years have recognized that a process of population
aggregation occurred in the prehistoric Southwest, it has been difficult to
isolate the forces which underlay this development. Dr. Kohler believes that
population growth led to the depletion of wild resources and the need to
intensify agricultural production. These factors in turn elicited social
responses that favored the development of aggregation. This project will provide
data to test the hypothesis. This research is important for several reasons. It
will shed light on the factors which led to the development of complex
societies, such as our own. It will also increase our understanding of native
American prehistory and provide useful environmental data for the management of
Bandelier national park. Finally, since this research will be conducted in
conjunction with an archaeological summer field school, it help to train
students and encourage them to pursue careers in science.