* 8906004
* Excavation and Radiocarbon Dating of Ancient Viable Seeds   and Permafrost Soils in Arctic Tundra
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/1989,05/31/1991
* James McGraw, West Virginia University
* Standard Grant
* Althea Ball
* 05/31/1991
* USD 25,916.00

The length of time that seeds remain viable in soils of natural plant
communities has long intrigued ecologists and plant physiologists. The proposed
project attacks this question directly for tundra soils, which are most likely
to contain long-lived seeds. Previous work has demonstrated that isolated viable
seeds are found in abundance in solifluction-buried organic soil in alpine
tundra environments. Radiocarbon dates of both seeds and soil show that the
seeds are on the order of hundreds of years old, at least. Preliminary work also
suggests that seeds much older than this are likely to be uncovered by
additional fieldwork. The present study will seek still older seeds with
extensive excavations of six additional solifluction- buried soil profiles.
These extensive excavations are made possible by a grant from Earthwatch, which
will support the field research and will supply volunteers. To take maximum
advantage of this opportunity both soils and seeds from these profiles will be
radiocarbon dated. Radiocarbon dating of the seeds will be accomplished using
tandem accelerator mass spectrometry, which allows direct dating of small
carbon-containing objects. Through a demonstrated procedure, seed coats will be
carefully removed from emerging seedlings and dated, while the seedlings will be
transplanted to pots in the greenhouse. Thus, in addition to establishing how
long seeds may persist in permafrost soils populations of old and young
genotypes of known age classes for future work will be established. Soil will be
dated with conventional radiocarbon dating, and rates of solifluction movement
will be estimated as a check on the accelerator dates of the seeds themselves.
Other checks on the accelerator method of dating will include: (1) measurement
of the 14C/13C radio to determine whether isotope discrimination needs to be
taken into account in the dating procedure, (2) replication of the dating
procedure on several lobes, and (3) dating of seedlings that emerge in the dark,
as well as their seed coats.