* 8906313
* Conference on Improving Institutional Arrangements for      Research and Education About Global Environmental Change,   March 1989, University of California, Los Angeles
* NONE,NONE
* 02/15/1989,07/31/1989
* Richard Berk, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Thomas J. Baerwald
* 07/31/1989
* USD 7,500.00

Recent initiatives to monitor and model the complex relationships between
geophysical, biological, and climatic processes throughout the world have
emphasized the need to understand how people and human institutions modify and
respond to global environmental change. Multi- disciplinary, integrated research
on the human dimensions of global environmental change has been slow to develop,
however, in part because most social and natural scientists have had little
experience in working with scholars from other disciplines on large-scale
analyses of complex human and environmental interrelationships. This project
will convene a small group of social and natural scientists from throughout the
nation for a conference at the University of California at Los Angeles to assess
how institutional structures at universities can be altered to facilitate
research and teaching on human and natural dimensions of global environmental
change. Discussions at the conference will focus on identifying disciplinary and
organizational barriers that inhibit cooperative research and teaching.
Alternative arrangements for enhancing cooperative work will be proposed and
evaluated. A written report about the conference will be prepared for
distribution to scholars and administrators not in attendance. This conference
will examine an important facet of the process of encouraging and conducting
research on a topic of rapidly growing importance from both scholarly and
applied perspectives. Publication of the results of this conference will enable
the conclusions reached by scholars in attendance to be shared with interested
persons elsewhere. As a result, the conference likely will have beneficial
impacts on research and teaching on global environmental change throughout the
nation.