* 8906628
* Engineering Research Equipment Grant: Acoustophoretic       Titrator With Fiber Optic Laser Light Scattering Probe for  Proteins and Micelles
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/1989,12/31/1990
* Michael Ladisch, Purdue Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Foltz
* 12/31/1990
* USD 74,000.00

A darkfield microscope/image analysis system used in this research has obtained
direct observations of protein micelles in the range of 500 to 5000 angstroms.
Studies of casein micelles by this technique have shown that van der Waals and
double layer forces do not adequately account for the stability of the
unhydrolized micelles. An additional steric force appears to be important. In
contrast, the balance between double layer forces and van der Waals forces
dominate for hydrolyzed micelles. It is concluded from these observations that
the accurate measurement of zeta potentials for relatively concentrated micellar
solutions is essential for understanding protein micelles. This grant will be
used to purchase an acoustophoretic titrator which includes a fiber optic laser
light scattering probe. This instrument will allow measurement of the zeta
potential and surface charge in the characterization of the behavior of
solutions of protein of micelles. The objective of the project is to understand
the transport fundamentals and rate processes governing interactions of protein
micelles so that the behavior of these organized assemblies can be simulated
using advanced computational methods. This work will lead to improved general
understanding of parameters which control behavior of proteins with respect to
solid surfaces, interactions between living cells in mammalian and bacterial
systems, and relating the charge of peptides to their ionization potential. The
understanding will have implications for biomedical technology, protein
separation and purification, and biotechnology.