* 8906734
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1989,12/31/1990
* John Huber, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 12/31/1990
* USD 4,290.00

Recent experiences in France with "cohabitation" and minority Government
demonstrate that the rules of parliamentary procedure shape the behavior of
parliamentary actors and consequently play a central role in determining policy
outcomes. These experiences also show that electoral outcomes determine
opportunities for parliamentary actors to utilize parliamentary rules. Hence, if
we are to understand how French parilamentary institutions promote - - or
inhibit - - the political representation of French citizens, it is essential
that we clearly understand how parliamentary institutions in France shape
behavior by parliamentary actors. This doctoral dissertation research project
examines theoretically and empirically parliamentary decision making rules,
political influence, and legislative outcomes in the French National Assembly.
The research attempts to describe and explain how election outcomes shape
opportunities for parliamentary actors to utilize parliamentary rules in ways
that influence final policy. The study focuses on the use of parliamentary
procedures by four actors: the President, the Government (i.e., the prime
minister and cabinet), committees, and private members on the floor. As a
theoretical framework, the study relies heavily on formal, deductive models of
legislative choice. The plan of research includes two tasks to be accomplished
in Paris, France. First, the relationship between procedural rules and
legislative outcomes will be assessed by constructing a data set that codes
various procedures invoked in connection with bills submitted to the National
Assembly during four different periods in the last twelve years. Items that will
be coded include motions to delay, motions to censure, blocked votes, referrals
to the Constitutional Council, gatekeeping by committees, gatekeeping through
agenda control by the Government, declarations of non-germaneness of amendments,
presidential "vetoes" of decrees, conference committees with the Senate, and the
Government status. Second, interviews will be conducted with the Assembly's
parliamentarian, the permanent secretaries of several committees, and deputies
from several parties in order to learn how these actors perceive the
relationship between decision rules and legislative influence during the periods
of interest. This study will contribute significantly to our understanding of
how French parliamentary institutions and election outcomes shape opportunities
for parliamentary actors to influence policy. The study will also illuminate the
assumptions that must be made to model legislative institutions that are unique
to parliamentary systems, making possible a more general theory of legislative
choice in democratic systems.