* 8906413
* High-Energy Physics Research at the Fermilab Tevatron       Collider
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/1989,12/31/1992
* Suzanne Willis, Northern Illinois University
* Continuing Grant
*   name not available
* 12/31/1992
* USD 105,295.00

The main focus of the research is the development, and use in physics
measurements, of a particle detector system for the DO proton-antiproton
intersection region of the highest energy collider in the world located at
Fermilab. This detector system, called the DO detector, is expected to be one of
the most important instruments for elementary particle physics research during
the next decade. This work is a large collaborative effort amongst more than 20
institutions in which Willis, et al. play a significant role. The DO detector
will be used to: measure the properties of the "weak bosons", carriers of the
weak nuclear force; study the properties of the strong nuclear force (quantum
chromodynamics); and search for yet undiscovered phenomena. Willis, et al. will
also complete the analysis and publication of their work on Fermilab experiment
E653, which measures the properties of short lived particles (e.g., charmed and
beauty mesons) produced in nuclear emulsion. The field of research is that of
experimental elementary particle physics. This research studies the basic
building blocks of matter (e.g., electrons, positrons, quarks, and weak bosons)
at very high energies. The experiments use accelerators and colliders which
provide the highest energy particles made in the laboratory. The data is
collected and analyzed using highly complex and sophisticated apparatus and
techniques.