* 8906787
* Mathematical Sciences: Bayesian Design and Analysis,        Stochastic Optimization, and File-Merging Methodology
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1989,12/31/1990
* L. Berliner, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Alan Izenman
* 12/31/1990
* USD 36,100.00

The research problems to be studied belong mainly to four areas: Bayesian
comparison of experiments and optimal designs, hierarchical models in robust
Bayes studies, stochastic optimization, and statistical aspects of file-merging
methodology. The statistical theory for file-merging methodology, which is used
heavily in evaluating policy implications by federal agencies, will be
developed. To provide a solid theoretical foundation for usage of multi-stage
probability models the area of hierarchical models for robust Bayes analysis
will be studied. The goal of a stochastic optimization project is the
development of a mostly automated and possibly fast converging algorithm for
finding the global minimum of a complicated function. In the Bayesian comparison
of experiments area, new tools and theories will be investigated for choosing
the better of two experiments. Optimal experimental design theory will be
applied to a number of models for which popular designs exist but little is
known concerning their optimality properties. Research will also be conducted on
adaptive Bayesian designs for quantal response under a variety of assumptions
which will be very useful for biostatistical applications. If adopted in
clinical trials, they should lead to time savings. Problems in robust design,
process design and design of computer experiments will be analyzed through the
application of optimal design theory.