* 8906291
* REU:  Ecological Consequences of Environmental Maternal     Effects in Plantago lanceolata
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1989,07/31/1993
* Johanna Schmitt, Brown University
* Continuing grant
* None
* 07/31/1993
* USD 255,310.00

Recently plant population biologists have recognized the importance of maternal
effects in plants, that is, the transmission of traits from a plant to its seed
offspring through means other than normal chromosomal inheritance. Drs. Schmitt
and Wulff propose to investigate one such maternal effect, the effect of a
plant's environment on the relative success of its offspring, in natural
populations of the common lawn and pasture weed, >Plantago>>> >lanceolata>
(ribwort plantain). By propagating clones of individual plants and planting them
into different environments, then crossing them and collecting their seeds, the
investigators will be able to determine how parental environment affects
offspring traits such as seed size and germination rate, while controlling the
genetic background of the parent across environments. By planting these seed
progeny back into the same experimental sites, the investigators will be able to
determine how parental environment affects offspring success. The proposed
research will make several contributions to the field of plant population
biology. First, it will provide unique data on the magnitude of environmental
maternal effects generated by environmental heterogeneity within and between
natural populations. Second, this will be the first study to investigate the
impact of environmental maternal effects on offspring fitness under natural
conditions. The findings will be important both for studies of plant population
dynamics and seed demography and for understanding the evolution of seed and
seedling traits within natural populations. This work will also have
implications for applied plant biology because >Plantago> >lanceolata> is a
common weed and because environmental maternal effects are undoubtedly important
in many crop species.