* 8906268
* Collaborative Research: Landscape Modeling: The Synthesis of Ecological Processes Over Large Geographic Regions and Long Time Scales
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1989,06/30/1993
* Fred Sklar, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Continuing grant
* James R. Gosz
* 06/30/1993
* USD 319,024.00

This research project will measure, describe, and model change in ecological
patterns and processes over large geographical areas in ways that will test the
utility of the landscape approach for analyzing and predicting changes in
ecological processes (i.e. productivity, succession), for optimizing resource
management, and for evaluating human impacts. The work will help establish
guidelines for the development and testing of spatial ecosystem models by
testing the relative performance of different spatial simulation techniques and
by combining new computer technologies with data-rich coastal study sites.
Approaches that can predict the way landscape patterns change are crucial to the
development of landscape ecology, yet no coherent predictive tools have emerged.
The investigators will synthesize current ecological data and gather new data
for incorporation into spatial models that predict change in landscape patterns.
The theories embodied within a spectrum of spatial models, ranging from process-
based simulation to transition probability models, will be tested using a system
of descriptive statistics and pattern matching techniques which will be
developed and evaluated as part of this research. Models will be developed for
three different coastal landscapes, for which much historical data and ongoing
long term research already exists. Results will provide: (1) increased
understanding of the processes controlling changes in landscapes; (2) principles
for adjusting spatial and temporal scales to optimize predictability in models;
(3) comparison of landscape data sets; (4) principles for determining the
optimal type of model for a particular set of objectives, scale and resolution;
and (5) new methods for examining the goodness-of-fit between predictions and
data that are appropriate for spatial ecological data and which require a degree
of spatial pattern recognition. Finally, to the extent possible, the project
will attempt to synthesize the principles and methods into a generalized theory
for predicting landscape dynamics. The investigators are innovative in their
approach. Institutional support and facilities are excellent. Results from the
work should be of significance to the establishment of new basic ecological
research directions as well as to the areas of land use planning and resource
management.