* 8906003
* High Resolution Low Energy Electron Diffraction Studies of  Surface and Overlayer Ordering
* MPS,DMR
* 11/15/1989,04/30/1993
* Toh-Ming Lu, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 04/30/1993
* USD 198,000.00

The fundamental physical laws that govern the equilibrium and non-equilibrium
collective phenomena of a clean surface near the melting temperature, and of an
adsorbed overlayer will be investigated using the high resolution low-energy
electron diffraction technique (HRLEED). They propose to study the change of
structural and thermodynamic properties of clean metal surfaces during surface
roughening/melting using HRLEED. Research efforts will include: (1)
identification of the nature of the disorder and measurement of the density of
defects generated at the surface near the melting temperature; (2) measurement
of the short range correlations and critical exponents associated with the
surface roughening/melting phase transition. For an adsorbed overlayer, research
efforts will include (1) quantitative determination of overlayer domain growth
during the relaxation of statistical mechanical states far from equilibrium; (2)
testing of 2-D kinetic scaling theory and universality for an overlayer with
ground state degeneracy greater than two; and (3) effects of impurities (random
fields) on 2-D phase transitions and domain growth of a system with ground state
degeneracy greater than two. The results of this research will not only help us
gain insight into the fundamental power, scaling and growth laws which describe
the clean surface and adsorbed overlayer ordering, but will also increase our
knowledge in controlling important practical processes such as crystal growth
and heterogeneous catalysis.