* 8906451
* ABR:  Evolutionary Genetics of Salmonid Fishes
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1989,07/31/1993
* Thomas North, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Tarri Joyner
* 07/31/1993
* USD 150,000.00

The long range goal of the research is to gain an understanding of the genetic
basis of evolutionary change in salmonid fishes (trout, salmon, grayling, char,
and whitefish). Dr. North will continue his study of the phenotypic effects of
differences in the liver-specific expression of a phosphoglucomutase gene in
rainbow trout and on the developmental genetic basis of morphological variation.
Two new studies will be initiated. The objective of the first study is to test
the assumption that mitochondrial DNA genotypes do not have phenotypic effects,
and therefore, are selectively neutral. Demonstration that mtDNA is subject to
natural selection would have important implications for the widespread use of
mtDNA as a marker for studies of genetic variation and population structure. The
second new study will test if previously observed effects of multiple locus
heterozygosity is caused by the loci examined or by closely linked chromosomal
segments. The major significance of this work is increasing our understanding of
the phenotypic effects and evolutionary importance of genetic variation in the
regulation and expression of genes. Furthermore, the studies with multiple locus
heterozygosity will provide an important test of the significance of genetic
variation in natural populations. Results will be applied to the management of
trout and salmon populations, as well as to the conservation of biological
diversity.