* 8906911
* Augmentation of Transitional and Turbulent Heat Transfer by Eddy-Promoters in Wall-Bounded Flows
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/1989,07/31/1991
* Alexander Smits, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* George P. Peterson
* 07/31/1991
* USD 105,000.00

An essential process in many industrial systems is the transfer of heat from a
surface to a flowing fluid stream with a minimum dissipation cost. As a result
of the critical role that efficient heat transport plays in applications,
several heat transfer enhancement techniques have been devised in the past. A
common form of transport enhancement is flow destabilization via cylindrical
eddy-promoters placed inside a channel. Previous studies suggest that
appropriate destabilization of the flow in the laminar regime results in
increasing transport rates up to 500 percent. In this work, the transitional and
turbulent flow regime, mostly encountered in engineering practice, will be
studied. Destabilization should be applied at the naturally stable scales of
motion, i.e. excitation of the -near-the-wall viscous sublayer. The work will
include both Direct Numerical Simulation (DNS), as well as companion detailed
experiments. The numerical simulations are based on spectral element methods
that combine high-accuracy, as well as flexibility in handling complex
geometries. The experiments are chosen to allow a maximum overlay with the
numerical data in measuring time lines and fluid particle paths of velocity and
temperature fields. Experimental techniques include flow visualization via
hydrogen bubble, schlieren photography, and laser-sheet scanning techniques. The
research will have a direct impact on the development of innovative heat
exchanger systems. At the same time, it will underline the potential of DNS as a
very powerful tool in gaining deep understanding and obtaining detailed results
for transport processes. The companion experiments will provide a basis for the
validation of the computations.