* 8906623
* Mechanisms of Calcium Regulation in Smooth Muscle Cells
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/1990,08/31/1993
* Donald Gill, University of Maryland at Baltimore
* Continuing Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 08/31/1993
* USD 298,000.00

The goal of this research is to determine the cellular and molecular basis of
intracellular calcium signalling mechanisms operating within cultured smooth
muscle cells. Cell biological and biochemical approaches will be applied to
analyze the molecular basis of two recently identified mechanisms controlling
the release and transfer of calcium within cells activated by inositol
1,4,5-triphosphate (InsP3) and guanosine 5'- triphosphate (GTP), respectively.
The project has three specific objectives: 1. Identification of the nature and
organization of intracellular calcium pools. Studies will assess the function of
calcium regulatory organelles in clonal and primary smooth muscle cell cultures,
identify at the subcellular level those organelles responsive to InsP3 and GTP,
and use electron microscopy and electron probe microanalysis to localize
intracellular calcium pools. 2. Analysis of the mechanisms of intracellular
calcium transport activated by InsP3 and GTP. Measurements will be made on the
nature and specificity of ion fluxes activated by InsP3 and GTP, and on the
physical and biochemical changes in the properties of intracellular membranes
which correlate with GTP- activated calcium translocation. 3. Molecular
characterization of the calcium translocation mechanisms. Studies will attempt
to isolate and identify proteins involved in InsP3 and GTP-activated calcium
translocation and to determine immunochemically the existence of known calcium-
regulatory proteins within discrete membrane subfractions from cells. These
studies represent a comprehensive approach to understanding the cellular
location and molecular basis of the two calcium regulatory mechanisms, and will
assess the validity of a model based on prior work which predicts that GTP
induces the translocation of calcium between distinct calcium pumping
organelles, including that responsive to InsP3. Changes in intracellular free
calcium are involved in the signal transduction pathways for a large number of
important cellular messages such as hormones and electrical excitation. The
regulation of intracellular calcium by cellular organelles is thus critical for
the function of all cells. With prior NSF support Dr. Gill has discovered that
in subcellular fractions two calcium pumping activities can be distinguished (in
addition to mitochondria), presumably corresponding to different organelles. The
molecule, GTP, causes calcium to shift from one of these calcium-pumping
organelle to another. These results reveal a new level of complexity of cellular
calcium regulation and signal transduction. Continuation of support for this
research will permit further analysis of this important finding and permit more
detailed characterization of the mechanisms involved in regulation of
intracellular calcium.