* 8906903
* Measurements of Actinides &amp; Long-Lived Radionuclides, Third International Conference, January 29-February 2nd, 1990,    Bombay, India, Group Travel Award in Indian Currency
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1989,07/31/1991
* Narayani Singh, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 07/31/1991
* USD 37,800.00

Description: This project supports participation by fourteen U. S. scientists in
the Third International Conference on Low Level Measurements of Actinides and
Long-Lived Radionuclides in Biological and Environmental Samples, planned for
January 29 to February 2nd, 1990 in Bambay, India. The Indian organizer is Dr.
Z.R. Turel of the Institute of Science, in Bombay. The conference will discuss
the follwoing subjects as related to the conference title: Method of
develolpment for measuring ultra low or low level actinides and long-lived
radionuclides (RN), determination of the chemical speciations of the RN, macro
and microdistrubution of RN in humans, environmental behavior of actinides and
long lived RN, and quality control of their measurements. Round table
discussions will follow on these topics. The full text of papers will be
reviewed and submitted for publications in Journals dealing with this scientific
area. Scope: This is the third in a series of meetings that started in June of
1986 in Lund, Sweden. The second was held in Akita City, Japan in May 1988.
These meetings deal with measuring low level RN to predict their behavior in the
environment, intake and body distribution in humans, and with estimating the
doses to aquatic and human populations. Each of the first two meetings was
attended by scientists from over 15 countries with some 40 invited papers which
were published in the International Journal of Radioanalytical and Nuclear
Chemistry. The third meeting, in Bombay, is planned to bring together
investigators from many countries with interest in measurements of RN in a wide
variety of environmental and biological samples including air, water, soil, and
hard and soft tissue.