* 8906792
* Spherical Hydrophilic Polymers: Synthesis, Characterization,&amp; Applications
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/1990,02/28/1993
* George Newkome, University of South Florida
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 02/28/1993
* USD 260,100.00

Based upon the application of mathematical progressions to organic synthesis, a
series of multi-directional cascade polymers ("arborols") with specific size and
shape are being constructed. These molecules have a defined topology with a
polyfunctionalized surface over a totally, or nearly so, inaccessible core. The
research will emphasize the synthesis and characterization of a variety of
cascade polymers using different central core molecules,combinations(s) of
building blocks (branching molecules), and diverse terminal groups. The surface
will be modified by changing these terminal groups to ensure a side range of
solubilites and physicochemical properties. These physical and chemical
properties of this class of polymer will be characterized by a combination of 13
C NMR spectroscopy, electron microscopy, light-scattering, fluorescent-probe
methods, solubility, osmotic pressure, conductivity, and mass spectroscopy. The
shape of these specifically designed polymers will be studied in detail to
determine the parameters that cause their aggregation into micellar assemblies.
The covalent linking of these unimolecular micelles into supramolecular cascades
("superaborols") will give rise to the construcation of large micellar molecules
possessing shapes analogous to the parent arborol, but macroscipic in molecular
dimensions. The use of these (supra)cascade polymers, as solubilizing agents,
phase- transfer catalysis, resolving agents, and microencapsulation agents, will
be continued.