* 8906340
* REU:  Systematic Study of Chusquea subg. Rettbergia         (Poaceae: Bambusoideae) in Brazil
* BIO,DEB
* 10/15/1989,09/30/1993
* Lynn Clark, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 09/30/1993
* USD 93,000.00

Bamboos, often known as the tree grasses, are an ecologically and economically
important group of primarily tropical plants. The tall, graceful plume-like
stems of bamboo are a familiar element of any tropical scene, but bamboos are
actually very diverse in size, form, and habitat. In addition to the typical
"giant" bamboos, some species are very grass-like with relatively soft stems,
while others are vines or shrubs. Many bamboos grow in or near the tropical
lowland forest, but many species can be found in high montane forests, with some
species occurring at high elevations on windswept ridges. Some hardy bamboos
grow in the temperate zone and can survive frost and snow. Although there are
approximately 1000 species of bamboos in the world, most have not been studied
intensively because of their size and the difficulty in collecting them. Dr.
Lynn Clark of Iowa State University will study a group of 30 or so species of
viny bamboos native to South America, mostly in Brazil. Although these species
have little current economic use, they are common in the lower montane forests
of eastern Brazil and are ecologically important. The first step will be the
observation and collection of these plants in the field, aided by collaborating
Brazilian students and researchers. Pressed and dried specimens, and leaves and
flowers preserved in liquid, will be taken back to the laboratory for the second
step, involving detailed comparative studies of morphology, cytology, and
anatomy. Once the data are assembled, a complete description of each species
will be prepared, along with geographical distribution data and notes on habitat
and flowering and fruiting behavior. The third step of the study involves a
higher level of analysis, in which the evolutionary relationships among these
bamboo species are explored by searching for consistent patterns of unique
biological similarities. The results of this project will have application for
those interested in the inventory, conservation, and ecology of native American
bamboos, the economic potential of bamboos, and the diversity and evolution of
grasses.