* 8906290
* Insect Herbivores and Plant Succession:  Interactions and   Mechanisms
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1989,09/01/1991
* Catherine Bach, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Lindsay Fox
* 09/01/1991
* USD 237,553.00

The proposed research will investigate the effects of insect herbivory on rates
and patterns of species replacement during primary plant succession on sand
dunes. The research will focus on a specialist beetle, Altica bimarginata, and
the willow, Salix cordata. An integrated set of field and greenhouse experiments
will examine both the effects of plant successional stage on rates of herbivory
and effects of herbivores on plant successional processess, as well as provide
critical tests of the underlying mechanisms. To study how herbivore abundance
varies between and within plant successional stages, field experiments will
examine how attributes of host plants and the surrounding plant community
influence herbivory. The role of genetic differences between plants in
influencing rates of herbivory will be addressed with a reciprocal transplant
study. Herbivore exclusion experiments will examine the role of herbivory in
influencing plant successional patterns. The importance of surrounding plant
neighbors in influencing succession and how herbivores affect succession will be
studied with plant neighbor removal experiments. Greenhouse experiments varying
the level of herbivory will examine what aspects of host plant fitness are
affected by herbivory. Although herbivory is known to strongly affect plant
fitness and competitive interactions, the role of herbivory in influencing plant
succession has been largely ignored. By focusing on both the effects of plants
on insects and the effects of insects on plants, the interactive nature of
insect-plant dynamics in successional systems will be elucidated. These
contributions are of central importance to insect and plant ecology, as well as
understanding of communities and factors controlling species diversity.