* 8906129
* Evolutionary Dynamics of Chloroplast DNA
* BIO,DEB
* 10/15/1989,09/30/1994
* Brook Milligan, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 09/30/1994
* USD 222,771.00

Evolutionary biology involves two major processes: the origin of genetic
variants in a population, and the genetic differentiation of populations and
species. Understanding both of these processes is critical to managing the
earth's natural resources for sustained agriculture, as well as for answering
basic questions concerning life itself. Since these two processes apply to all
genetic traits- including the three plant genomes (nuclear, mitochondrial and
chloroplast)- this framework serves to focus the research proposed here. In
particular, this research concerns the origin of genetic diversity in the
chloroplast genome of higher plants. Previous studies of chloroplast DNA
evolution have often compared distantly rated groups of plants and observed
structural rearrangement of the genome. From these data, mechanisms have been
inferred to explain the origin of novel genotypes; however, no direct studies of
those mechanisms have been attempted. As a result, much about the origin of
genetic diversity in the chloroplast genome of higher plants is unknown. The
proposed research aims to study two possible mechanisms involved in the origin
of new chloroplast genotypes. Using a unique set of dispersed repeated elements
located in the chloroplast genome of some clovers, plants in the genus
Trifolium, Dr. Milligan will examine both mechanisms. By studying the genomic
structure in several closely related species with differing numbers of repeats,
he will be able to identify whether or not rearrangements are associated with
the repeats. By sequencing different copies of the repeats he will be able to
detect whether nonreciprocal recombination has occurred. This more direct study
of the origin of genetic diversity in the chloroplast genome of higher plants
will greatly increase our understanding of the mechanisms involved. not only
will this provide information important to our basic understanding of evolution,
but it may also provide a basis for modifying the genome in the future. since
the plant chloroplast is responsible for photosynthesis, modifications of the
genome may prove to be an important tool in the future agricultural efforts.