* 8906562
* Genetic Parentage in Red-Winged Blackbirds:  Tests of       Alternative Reproductive Strategies
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1989,08/15/1990
* David Westneat, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Tarri Joyner
* 08/15/1990
* USD 73,525.00

This project seeks to test several hypotheses about the ecological factors
affecting the genetic parentage of red-winged blackbirds (Agelaius phoeniceus).
This work will improve our understanding of the process of evolution and the
genetic structure of populations. Because in many animals, especially birds,
individuals often mate outside the observed social bonds, the factors
influencing genetic parentage will ultimately influence how evolution proceeds
and which genes are represented within a population. Only the use of genetic
markers can uncover the effects of such extra-bond matings. Previous genetic
methods for analyzing parentage have not provided enough genetic information to
completely analyze parentage. This study will expand on those previous methods
by using a new technique, known as DNA fingerprinting, which can assay highly
variable regions of the genome. These regions provide information sufficient to
determine completely the parentage of every offspring. This study will combine
behavioral observations of free- living redwings with these new genetic analyses
of parentage to achieve several goals. First, the study will uncover the effects
on genetic parentage of when a female breeds relative to other females. Second,
the effects of male behavior on genetic parentage will be tested by increasing
male presence on the territory through supplemental feeding and by decreasing
male presence by temporary removals. Third, the genetic parentage of young
raised on territories will be analyzed in light of the characteristics of
territory location and quality. Fourth, the effects of female mating behavior on
genetic parentage will be assessed by detailed observations of females and
subsequent analysis of parentage. Finally, the impact of variation in genetic
parentage on parental behavior and on the action of selection in natural
populations will be documented. Upon completion, this study will provide
information on a number of ecological factors that might affect genetic
parentage. This information will be incorporated into general concepts about the
ecology and evolution of reproductive and about the influence of such behavior
on population structure.