* 8906860
* Engineering Research Equipment Grant: Flow Reactor for      Oxidation Studies in Supercritical Water
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/1989,04/30/1990
* Phillip Savage, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 04/30/1990
* USD 24,100.00

Several technologies have been developed for the safe disposal of hazardous
wastes. For dilute aqueous streams with moderate organic concentrations,
oxidation in supercritical water (SCW) to innocuous compounds (such as carbon
dioxide and water) has been shown to be effective. The overall objective of the
PI's research is to elucidate the fundamental reaction pathways, kinetics, and
mechanisms occurring during such oxidation in SCW and to understand fully the
role and effect of the supercritical fluid in these reaction. An understanding
of the fundamental physical and chemical phenomena operative during this process
could lead to more efficient and economical process designs. In this phase of
his work, the PI plans experimental studies on the conversion of some typical
organic compounds (such as phenol and substituted phenol) present in waste
streams. This equipment grant will provide the funds to purchase the components
needed to construct a flow reactor. Flow reactors are well suited for
experimental studies of such rapid exothermic reactions. Using the experimental
results, the PI plans to deduce the reaction pathways and determine the relevant
kinetics parameters such as the reaction order, rate constant, activation energy
and activation volume for each reaction step. Reaction mechanisms will be probed
by using isotopically tagged phenol, water, and oxygen and monitoring the
ultimate fate of the tagged functional groups.//