* 8906215
* Flora of China Project to Translate, Revise, and Computerizethe Florae Reipublicae Popularis Sinicae
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/1989,08/31/1992
* Peter Hoch, Missouri Botanical Garden
* Continuing Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 08/31/1992
* USD 344,412.00

Since the mid-19th century, when America's first professional botanist, Asa
Gray of Harvard University, pointed out the similarity, botanists have been
fascinated with the large number of related species and genera of plants growing
in eastern North America and in eastern Asia. Climatic similarity can explain in
part many of these plant distributional ranges, as gardeners may suspect, who
have grown varieties developed first in China. Geological events, from the
Pleistocene and earlier, have also helped shape similarities in the floras of
the two continents. But the similarities are in fact outweighed by substantial
differences in species composition, and by the rich diversity of eastern Asian
biota, with an estimated 30,000 plant species occurring in China. Unfortunately,
accessibility of this rich plant biota has been severely limited for the last
two generations, and Chinese botanists in turn have worked in relative
isolation. The Flora of China project presents an opportunity to reverse that
isolationist separation, and bring together Chinese and American botanists to
translate, revise, and computerize taxonomic information about China's rich
flora. Since 1959 Chinese scholars have been collecting plant specimens
throughout China and preparing descriptive floristic publications on the flora.
About 50 volumes have been published, all in Chinese; 50-70 additional volumes
are to be completed in the next decade. The present project would facilitate the
translation into English of the published volumes, in synoptic format. In
addition, American botanists would work with their Chinese counterparts on
selected taxonomic revisions, incorporating data from specimens held in U.S.
institutions that have not been used by the Chinese in their own studies; the
collections at Harvard University and at the California Academy of Sciences
especially are important resources. Finally, all the floristic data will be
incorporated into computer databanks now under development at the Missouri
Botanical Garden, using formats compatible with those now being employed for the
Flora of North America program already established there. This first award, made
at a difficult time in the history of U.S.-Chinese relations, builds upon close
contacts and research agreements established after years of consultation and
involving the four principal botanical institutes in China as well as three
major botanical institutions in the U.S., with Prof. Peter Raven and his
colleague Dr. William Tai serving as principal investigators. Numerous
colleagues have also pledged their support to this ambitious and important
undertaking, which promises a significant expansion in scientific knowledge of
northern hemisphere plant resources.