* 8906807
* RIA: Electromagnetic Scattering and Radiation by Composite  Materials With Novel Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/1989,01/31/1992
* Ahmed Kishk, University of Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 01/31/1992
* USD 60,000.00

This Research Initiation Award project will study the electromagnetic scattering
and radiation from impedance surfaces in the presence of dielectric materials
and analyze some new antennas and scatterers. The proposed study will be based
on the use of the surface integro-differential equations to generate different
formulations. While exact boundary conditions will be applied on the dielectric
surfaces, the concept of the impedance boundary conditions will be introduced on
the impedance surfaces. The use of this concept provides the means for modeling
different surface types of practical significance such as complex composite
objects. The solution will be carried out numerically using the method of
moments. The solution accuracy will be established through comparison with other
available analytical and numerical results as well as new experimental data.
Many problems will be investigated such as the internal resonance problem. The
proposed approach is particularly useful in studying the radiation and
scattering from axisymmetric complex composite objects such as the new microslab
antenna. the microslab antenna is similar to the microstrip one except that the
conducting patch is replaced by a physically thin disc of high dielectric
constant to reduce the conduction losses from the radiating conducting patch.
The study of the radiation characteristics of microslab antennas will be carried
out numerically and experimentally. Different excitation techniques are also
under consideration for economic use in the phased array antennas.