* 8906997
* RUI:  Risk-Sensitivity, Sampling Behavior, and Seasonal     Absconding in the African Honeybee
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/1989,12/31/1990
* Stanley Schneider, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Tarri Joyner
* 12/31/1990
* USD 78,525.00

The proposed project will investigate the factors regulating the absconding
(migration) behavior of the African honeybee in Botswana, Africa. Absconding can
result in an enormous loss of colonies, which (1) may negatively impact on U.S.
beekeeping with the arrival of the African honeybee from South America, and (2)
continues to impede the development of commercial beekeeping in many regions of
Africa. Honeybee migration often appears to occur in response to changing
foraging conditions. However, it is unclear exactly how food availability and
colony food needs interact to determine a colony's decision to abandon an area.
This study proposes to use field studies and experimental manipulations to
explore if colonies abscond in response to (1) fluctuations in the average rate
of food intake, (2) changes in the day-to-day variability in foraging success,
or (3) some weather cue. The proposed research has both scientific and economic
merits. Since absconding is an all-or-none response in which all members of a
colony depart simultaneously, it represents a group- level decision to switch
foraging patches. Absconding therefore provides a unique opportunity to explore
the mechanisms underlying group decision-making processes, which remain some of
the least understood aspects of animal social behavior. Economically, the study
will benefit beekeeping in both the U.S. and Africa. A better understanding of
the factors regulating absconding may facilitate the incorporation of the
African bee into U.S. beekeeping and agricultural practices. In Botswana bees
are abundant and honey brings a high price. Yet, beekeeping is undeveloped in
much of the country, due in part to absconding, which makes it difficult to
maintain colonies for extended periods. A greater knowledge of absconding may
therefore help lay the groundwork for improving commercial beekeeping in
Botswana.