* 8906665
* Systematics, Distribution and Ecology of Argentine Mammals: A Proposal to Collect Mammals in Argentina - "Applications  of Geographic Information Systems (GIS) in Mammology"
* BIO,DEB
* 01/15/1990,07/31/1994
* Michael Mares, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 07/31/1994
* USD 161,082.00

Much of South America has been undergoing rapid habitat change due to the
activities associated with habitat disruption, increasing human population
densities, and the conversion of habitats into agricultural and ranching areas.
The entire continent is moving from what was a pristine situation four hundred
years ago to one where scientists are predicting waves of extinction to occur
some time in the next century. This potentially critical loss in numbers of
species of plants and animals is predicted to have global ramifications in its
effect on weather patterns, the cohesiveness of ecosystems, and the storehouse
of genetic information that is contained within the tremendous numbers of
species that are found in tropical and extratropical habitats of South America.
This proposal is designed to assess the current status of mammal populations in
Argentina. Argentina includes a vast array of the tropical and non-tropical
habitats that are found in South America. Argentina contains almost 40 percent
of all species found in South America, and by determining how these species are
being affected in their distribution and abundance throughout the country, an
understanding can be gained as to how the mammalian fauna might be changing
throughout the continent. The research is designed to examine patterns of
species occurrence, reproductive status, relative population density, and
general distribution of the mammals of Argentina. In particular, possible trends
in species or population loss will be compared with data that were gathered in
the early 1900s or the late 1800s. Information will also be collected on the
genetic composition of mammals and the ectoparasite community that is associated
with the mammals. This information will have direct bearing on studies of the
genetic relatedness of the mammals of South America, on their rates of
evolution, and on their possibilities as vector sources for diseases. The
collections of mammals that will be made throughout Argentina will provide
foundational data by which future trends in species abundance and distribution
can be determined. These collections will be deposited in Argentine and U.S.
museums and are expected to provide the necessary data to produce field guides
and popular and technical literature on the mammals of Argentina as well as
provide base-line information that will help develop a conservation ethic in
Argentina. It is hoped that these kinds of materials will prove useful to other
areas of South America as well.