* 8906134
* 5S RNA Regulation and Ribosome Biogenesis
* BIO,MCB
* 10/15/1989,03/31/1993
* Aimee Bakken, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 03/31/1993
* USD 278,200.00

The research is directed toward studying the regulation of 5S RNA, which is one
component of ribosome biogenesis. In higher eukaryotes, 5S RNA is small 120 nts
RNA which, although an essential component of ribosomes, is still only partially
understood in its ribosome location and function. In somatic cells 5S RNA is
synthesized in the nucleus, and targeted to the nucleolus where it is
incorporated into nascent larger ribosomal subunits. In oocytes, the synthesis
of a large amount of 5S RNA precedes by several weeks, the activation of rRNA
and r protein synthesis and the beginning of ribosome biogenesis. Therefore,
this naturally occurring a synchrony in the on set of synthesis of ribosome
components affords us a unique opportunity to study the various step sand the
regulation involved in the targeting of 5S RNA to the nucleolus and the
requirements for 5S RNA incorporation how 5S RNA is added to the nascent large
ribosomal subunit during oogenesis in Xenopus laevis. A further aim is to
establish the mechanism(s) for ferrying the 5S RNA out to the cytoplasm, keeping
it stored there, and then transporting it back into the nucleus, specifically
into the nucleolus. In a larger context, the oocyte system will facilitate our
understanding of how nuclear proteins interact with specific RNA molecules, and
what is required for transport of RNPs in and out of the nucleus. The oocyte
studies will likely amplify our understanding of how somatic cell 5S RNAis
targeted to and incorporated into nascent ribosomes forming with in the
nucleolus, a process which probably occurs entirely with in the somatic cell
nucleus.