* 8906984
* Genetic Analysis of Inclusion Body Formation in Phage       Infected Bacteria
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1990,02/29/1992
* Jonathan King, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 02/29/1992
* USD 90,000.00

The intracellular accumulation of polypeptide chains from cloned genes as non
native aggregates - inclusion bodies- has emerged as a problem in biotechnology.
One of the few systems for which intracellular intermediates in polypeptide
chain folding and aggregation have been identified is the thermostable trimeric
tailspike of bacteriophage P22. Mutations which interfere with intermediates in
the folding pathway, rather than the native protein, map at over 30 sites in the
central region of the polypeptide chain. Use of these mutants has revealed that
the inclusion bodies form from an early single chain intermediate in the
intracellular folding pathway. Second site suppressors have been isolated which
alleviate the tsf folding defects. Suppressors at two nearby sites within the
gene appear to act by inhibiting the aggregation pathway. They do not affect the
biological activity of the protein once correctly folded. This suggests that the
role of some local sequences in the chain is to block off-pathway reactions
rather than to stabilize the native protein. Such amino acid sequence
information could be of practical significance in the recovery of cloned
proteins and of theoretical significance in deciphering the rules through which
amino acid sequences encode protein conformation. This proposal focuses on
elucidating the mechanism of action of the second site suppressors by preparing
urea denatured forms of the purified tsf, sutsf, tsf / sutsf and wild type
proteins and comparing their refolding in vitro. These experiments will define
whether the suppressors act through intrachain interactions, or require
interactions with cellular components such as chaperonins.