* 8906937
* Use of Toughness Data in Specification, Design and          Performance Evaluation of Fiber Cement Composites
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/1989,03/31/1992
* Surendra Shah, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Ken Chong
* 03/31/1992
* USD 60,676.00

Improved fracture and impact resistance are among the improved attributes of
fiber reinforced concrete (FRC). Toughness, which is a measure of the energy
absorption capacity, is used to characterize FRC's ability to resist fracture
when subjected to static, dynamic and impact loads. The debate on how it is
measured, interpreted and used is still inconclusive. The objectives of the
research program are hence to (a) investigate the influence of specimen size,
loading configuration, and loading rate on the load-deformation characteristics
of FRC (energy absorption, flexural strength, first-crack strength and elastic
modulus), (b) evaluate the effectiveness of the currently used toughness indices
and associated specifications, (c) provide an analytical basis for the
interpretation and use of the strength and toughness data, and (d) recommend
guidelines for the use of flexural strength and toughness data in specification,
design and performance evaluation. The investigation comprises experimental and
analytical components. Since the scope of the problem is extensive and since
statistically significant toughness data needs to be generated, an inter-
university testing program involving six universities is included. As an outcome
of the study, specific recommendations will be made on the use of the toughness
data in specification, design and performance evaluation of fiber cement
composites.