* 8906496
* Molecular Systematics of the Malpighiaceae
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/1989,12/31/1992
* Mark Chase, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 12/31/1992
* USD 193,800.00

The Malpighiaceae are a medium-sized family of tropical and subtropical
flowering plants, comprising about 65 genera and 1200 species, with 85% of the
species native to the New World, the rest found in the Paleotropics. The family
is internally homogeneous and externally isolated, that is, the members all look
a great deal alike and are clearly related, but do not closely resemble any
other family. Traditional systematic methods, relying principally on gross
morphology, have failed to resolve many questions of relationships within the
family, because of the aforementioned similarity, and also to reveal where this
family fits into the larger group of relatively unspecialized flowering plants
(related to the rose group) whose flowers have free parts in whorls of five. The
research proposed by Dr. Mark Chase at University of North Carolina and Dr.
William Anderson at University of Michigan is designed to apply new, molecular
techniques to these old, intractable problems. The chloroplasts of green plants
contain numerous circular chromosomes, which are relatively easy to characterize
because they hold so much less DNA than the huge nuclear genome. Several
researchers have had great success in recent years at using comparative studies
of chloroplast DNA (cpDNA) to resolve problems in plant systematics. Drs. Chase
and Anderson plan to study the cpDNA of the Malpighiaceae and representatives of
several putatively related families in two quite different ways, attempting to
answer questions about relationships within the family and between families.
Nucleotide sequencing of selected cpDNA genes will allow construction of an
informative phylogenetic hypothesis for Malpighiaceae and related families.
Then, using the technique of restriction site mapping, they plan to compare the
cpDNA of 60 species of Malpighiaceae that represent most of the diversity within
the family. The within- family phylogeny will resolve questions about whether
functionally analogous and even morphologically similar fruits have evolved once
or several times in parallel; how the genera are related to one another; and
which of two diametrically opposed hypotheses about the place of origin of the
family and the nature of the earliest members is correct. Collaboration between
the two workers, which combines the strengths of traditional morphological
systematics with a modern molecular approach, should serve as a model for future
collaboration between other traditional and molecular systematists.