* 8906217
* From Host Races to Species:  Systematics of the Rhagoletis  pomonella Species Complex in the Southern United States
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1989,07/31/1993
* Stewart Berlocher, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 07/31/1993
* USD 200,716.00

Insect pests of agricultural plants often show a tendency to form new
populations on new, previously uninfested plant species. An example is the apple
maggot fly, which is a native insect that originally infested fruits of native
hawthorn trees but began infesting apples about 125 years ago. As a result of
research carried out over the last 20 years, it has become clear that the
original hawthorn fly populations and the new populations on apple are
genetically different from one another. This finding has important implications
for both agriculture and evolutionary biology. Evolutionary biology predicts
that populations on new food plants, like the apple population of the apple
maggot fly, may continue to accumulate genetic differences and eventually become
different species. This prediction is suggested by the observation that there
are many close relatives of the apple maggot fly living on fruits such as
blueberry, snowberry, dogwood berries, and other plants. The purpose of the
current research is to determine how many species related to the apple maggot
fly actually exist in the southern United States, and determine their genetic
similarity to the apple maggot fly. This is important for two reasons. First,
the southern species are extremely similar to the apple maggot fly, and will
reveal the first steps in the evolution of new species. Second, production of
blueberries and other fruit is increasing in the South and control of the fruit
flies of these crops is impeded by current ignorance of the number and basic
biology of these flies.