* 8906475
* REU:  Effects of Bison Herbivory on Two Tallgrass Prairie   Species:  The Influence of Fire, Neighbors, and Pattern     of Defoliation on Plant Response
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/1989,06/30/1992
* David Hartnett, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* James R. Gosz
* 06/30/1992
* USD 83,775.00

Herbivores can strongly influence plant fitness, population dynamics, and
community structure. Plant responses to herbivory vary along a continuum
depending on the spatial/temporal patterns of defoliation and the competitive
neighborhood or physical environment of the defoliated plant. The proposed
research will 1) assess the consequences of bison herbivory on tiller growth,
reproduction, clonal spread, and survivorship of tallgrasses (Panicum virgatum
and Andropogon gerardii) and 2) determine the interacting effects of
competitors, spatial and temporal patterns of defoliation, and fire on plant
responses to bison herbivory on a prairie. The studies will test the hypothesis
that the effects of fire and biotic neighborhood variation alter responses to
grazing and that the relative grazing tolerances of different species change
under different fire regimes. Vegetative growth, seed reproduction, and clonal
growth performance, and plant responses over two growing seasons will be
measured to determine long-term effects of herbivory on individuals and
populations and whether a single herbivore may have opposite or congruent
effects on different plant life history stages. These experiments will examine
proximal consequences of herbivory on herbaceous plants and plant growth form
and how abiotic and biotic interactions influence plant responses to herbivory.
They will also provide insight into the interactions of grazing and fire effects
on tallgrass prairie perennials, and its consequences for individual clone
success and species relative abundances. This proposed project is part of a
longer-term research program that will more fully address patterns of variation
in responses to herbivory among species and among years.