* 8906913
* Long &amp; Medium Term Research:  Historical Biogeography of    Spatangoid Echinoids
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1989,12/31/1990
* Joseph Ghiold, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Russell Sveda
* 12/31/1990
* USD 49,750.00

Long and Medium Term Research: Historical Biogeography of Spatangoid Echinoids.
This award recommendation is made under the Program for Long and Medium-Term
Research at Foreign Centers of Excellence. The program is designed to enable
young U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct long-term research abroad at
research institutions of proven excellence. Awards provide opportunities for the
conduct of joint research and the use of unique or complementary facilities,
expertise and experimental conditions in foreign countries. The award will
support a ten month research visit by Dr. Joseph A. Ghiold of Louisiana State
University at Baton Rouge, with Dr. Kenneth J. McNamara, Curator, Department of
Paleontology, Western Australia Museum, Perth, Australia. The researchers will
analyze the interplay of current ecological and historical factors which jointly
shape the biogeographic subdivision of these marine benthic organisms. This goal
will be achieved by: (1) accumulation of data pertaining to the
paleobiogeographic distribution and stratigraphic range of fossil spatangoid
species; (2) comparison of spatangoid paleobiogeographic patterns with those of
modern spatangoids; (3) subsequent analysis of these patterns in terms of area
phenograms supplemented with independent paleontologic and geologic data; (4)
comparison of these results to those previously determined for clypeasteroid
echinoids and various shelf benthos. Results from this study will help assess
the importance of historical biogeography in explaining current patterns of the
biosphere and the potential of the fossil record as a source of biogeographic
information. This project may shed some light on the historical routes of
evolution and on the dynamics of evolutionary processes that shaped the world
biotas. The award recommendation provides funds to cover, as appropriate,
international travel, local travel abroad, stipend, dependents' allowance, if
applicable, and a flat administrative allowance of $250.00 for the U.S. home
institution.