* 8906264
* REU:  Effects of Resource Quality and Microarthropods on    Forest Floor Nitrogen Dynamics
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1989,08/31/1993
* D. Crossley, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 08/31/1993
* USD 247,100.00

Resource quality is a major factor controlling rates of organic matter
decomposition and nutrient release in forested ecosystems. Within the
constraints of resource quality and microclimate, decomposition and nutrient
dynamics are the product of faunal-microbial interactions. Activities of
microarthropods generally increase decomposition rates of leaf litter and, data
suggest, enhance immobilization of exogenous nitrogen. The objectives of this
project are to examine the effects of resource quality on the decomposer
community and on forest floor N fluxes, using 15N as a tracer, and to examine in
more detail the effects of microarthropod activities on nitrogen movement. Field
experiments will examine the influence of resource quality on (1) net
mineralization of N from 15N-labeled litter substrates, (2) the movement of
released 15N through the forest floor profile (litter N, F-layer N, soil active
(microbial) N, soil slow/passive N, and soil extractable N); (3) immobilization
of 15N-labeled exogenous inputs and subsequent mineralization and movement, and
(4) fungal translocation of N from the soil horizon to surface litter using 15N
as a tracer. In research now nearing completion, exclusion of microarthropods
from decaying substrates has produced a significant effect on decomposition
rates and N retention. The mechanisms for this effect will be examined in detail
under more controlled conditions, by directly manipulating microarthropods in
laboratory incubations, and by measuring the quantitative effects of
microarthropod-microbial interactions on: (1) microbial standing stocks and
total heterotrophic respiration, (2) mineralization of N from 15N-labeled litter
and (3) immobilization of 15N-labeled exogenous inputs. This research group has
demonstrated consistent excellence and productivity. Institutional
accommodations are first-rate. Products of this research should be of importance
to the better management of forest resources as well as to the fundamental
understanding of forested ecosystems.