* 8906214
* Nonlinear Dynamics of Phase-Locked Semiconductor Laser      Arrays
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/15/1990,02/28/1994
* Herbert Winful, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 02/28/1994
* USD 367,523.00

The University of Michigan and Oregon Graduate Center are collaborating on
theoretical and experimental investigation of the nonlinear spatio-temporal
dynamics of phase-locked semiconductor laser arrays. These arrays are of great
technological importance as high power sources for applications such as optical
communications, optical data recording, and optical pumping of rare-earth solid
state lasers. In this proposed program, the process of self-organization in
which a collection of initially independent lasers lock to produce a spatially
coherent structure will be studied. The stability of the phase-locked state will
be studied and means will be devised to enhance the temporal stability of laser
arrays. Their response to current modulation will also be investigated. When
stable phase locking of the array is not achieved, the predicted behavior
includes regular self-pulsations, temporally chaotic structures, and full
developed spatio-temporal chaos. The various operating regimes of laser arrays
will be characterized by means of a streak camera that permits real- time
monitoring of spatio-temporal phenomena with a 2-picosecond temporal resolution.
The results of this investigation will not only extend our understanding of the
collective behavior of coupled nonlinear oscillators but will aid the
technologically important quest for stable, compact, high power semiconductor
laser sources.