* 8906989
* Monograph of Macroscopic Freshwater Rhodophyta of North     America
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1989,02/29/1992
* Robert Sheath, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Penelope L. Firth
* 02/29/1992
* USD 77,719.00

Approximately one-half of all small streams in North America contain freshwater
red algae and many maintain several species of Rhodophyta. These organisms
constitute a significant food source for riverine grazers, and they provide
habitat for numerous prey and predator species. Despite the importance of
freshwater red algae in stream ecosystems, few aquatic biologists are able
readily to identify these organisms. To rectify this problem, Dr. Robert Sheath
of the University of Rhode Island is working on a comprehensive inventory of all
genera and species of red algae of North America, employing morphological and
chromosomal data to construct reliable identification keys, supplemented with
photographs and illustrations to highlight critical characters. In assessing
variation among the species, Dr. Sheath employs computerized image processing to
analyze structural features of the specimens. Geographic groupings of species
will be related to ecological conditions, and trends will be analyzed in
relation to past glacial periods, bedrock, water chemistry, stream flow regimes,
and flyways of waterfowl (a major mechanism of dispersal of spores and fragments
of red algae). A comprehensive taxonomic treatment of all the freshwater red
algal species will provide the necessary foundation for further evolutionary and
ecological studies.