* 8906580
* Mathematical Sciences: Models for the Dynamics of InfectiousDiseases and Social Interactions with Applications to AIDS  Epidemiology
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1989,12/31/1992
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 12/31/1992
* USD 143,000.00

8906580 Castillo-Chavez This project has two objectives. The first is to
identify mechanisms that may be crucial in determining the rate of spread of
infectious diseases and to make initial evaluations of the relative value of
possible intervention strategies. The emphasis will be on the dynamics of HIV
(Human Immuno-Deficiency Virus, the etiological agent for AIDS). The second
objective is to create the basis for a solid long-term research program in
mathematical epidemiology at the population level, on social dynamics, and on
their connections to the field of theoretical population biology. This project's
principal goal is to begin a systematic study of the dynamics of social
interactions and their role in the dynamics of sexually-transmitted and
communicable diseases. Castillo-Chavez will use a phenomenological framework to
describe human mixing patterns, and deterministic mathematical models (involving
single or interacting populations) will be developed to determine the role of
social mixing, variable infectivity, long periods of infectiousness and, co-
factors in the dynamics of HIV. Secondary goals include upgrading of the
mathematical methodology in the areas of mathematical epidemiology and
population dynamics by systematically integrating different types of social
mixing and analyzing their effect on the transmission of other infectious
diseases.