* 8906041
* Comparing Genetic Variation Patterns Among Tamarin Species  (Saguinus)
* BIO,DEB
* 10/15/1989,09/30/1993
* James Cheverud, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 09/30/1993
* USD 199,000.00

Dr. Cheverud will measure patterns of heritable variation and covariation in
the size and shape of the face in two tamarin species, the saddle-back tamarin
(Saguinus fuscicollis) and the endangered cotton-top tamarin (S.oedipus), to
determine the relative stability of inheritance patterns across these closely
related species and the extent to which interspecific differences in facial size
and shape are consistent with the inherited pattern. These results will be
important in evaluating the genetic basis for evolutionary change in tamarins
generally, and also specifically in the endangered cotton-top tamarin. Dr.
Cheverud will also examine the extent to which the pattern of facial character
inheritance and co-inheritance is consistent with patterns of facial growth. Do
characters which are under the influence of the same growth factors tend to be
inherited together? In this study, concepts from quantitative genetics and
systematics are fused to form the groundwork for future studies in which it may
be possible to reconstruct the selective forces responsible for facial size and
shape evolution in tamarins. The study populations consist of skeletons obtained
over the past 15 years through normal attrition from the Oak Ridge Associated
Universities" (ORAU) Marmoset Research Center. Detailed demographic records,
including age-at-death and genealogical relationship are available for these
specimens providing a rare opportunity for genetic studies on primates. The
three-dimensional coordinates of facial landmarks will be recorded and used in a
finite-element scaling analysis of facial size and shape. The numerical results
of this analysis will be used in a quantitative genetic study of inheritance and
co- inheritance of facial features. Patterns of heritable variation will be
compared between species and to growth relations using randomization statistical
procedures. This study will be unique in bringing together new techniques and
concepts in quantitative genetics, morphometrics, and statistics for the study
of evolutionary systematics.