* 8906988
* Molecular Phylogeny and Evolution of Compositae of the Juan Fernandez Islands
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1989,12/31/1992
* Tod Stuessy, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 12/31/1992
* USD 218,500.00

Drs. Dan Crawford and Tod Stuessy of Ohio State University will use molecular
DNA information to study the evolution of three genera of plants occurring on
the Juan Fernandez Islands, located 600 km west of central Chile. Oceanic
islands, and the Juan Fernandez archipelago in particular, offer ideal systems
in which to study plant evolution. It is possible to place a time frame on the
origin and evolution of plants on oceanic islands because the islands can be
dated geologically with reasonable accuracy. In the Juan Fernandez, the older
island (Masatierra) is four million years old while the age of the younger
island of Masafuera is one to two million years. The flora of the Juan Fernandez
is small in numbers but contains a high percentage of unique (endemic) species.
This makes it feasible to study the origin and evolution of the endemic plants
on the archipelago. The two largest endemic genera are Dendroseris and
Robinsonia in the sunflower family, Asteraceae. These are bizarre tree-like
plants whose presumptive ancestors from the South American mainland can only be
guessed from morphological comparisons. The use of molecular characters such as
chloroplast DNA restriction sites and sequences, ribosomal DNA, and protein
iszoymes will help to compare the island taxa with mainland species and
determine possible progenitor stocks. Molecular methods will also be employed to
determine evolutionary relationships among the species of Dendroseris and
Robinsonia on the islands, and to study the evolution of a third genus in the
archipelago, Erigeron. Field trips with Chilean scientists and students will
provide materials for these comprehensive studies. Once origins and phylogenetic
relationships of these insular plants are determined with DNA and protein data,
it will be possible to study the important changes in life-form and physiology
associated with dispersal to and establishment upon isolated oceanic islands.
This in turn should lead to a better understanding of processes involved in the
evolution of new plant species.