* 8906518
* US-Mexico Cooperative Research:  Geomagnetic Paleointensity Determinations on Historic Lava Flows
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/1989,07/31/1991
* Horst Worm, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 07/31/1991
* USD 8,125.00

This award will support Professor Horst Worm and Professor Subir Banerjee of the
University of Minnesota in collaboration with Prof. Jaime Urrutia-Fucugauchi of
the Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico (UNAM). The researchers intend to
study the magnetic record in historic lava flows and to compare it with magnetic
observatory data. Mexico is uniquely suited for this purpose because its active
volcanic history has supplied numerous historic lava flows of varying
composition and cooling history. Equally important, direct deter- minations of
the geomagnetic field are available since 1791. The proposed research will
consist of two phases. First, the variation of magnetic remanences in lava flows
of different charac- teristics will be systematically studied in vertical and
horizontal profiles. Additionally, magnetic properties and ore petrological
characteristics will be determined. Results from the first phase of the study
will provide an excellent basis for systematic paleointensity method studies.
Thermal and non- thermal methods will be evaluated for their applicability,
accuracy, and efficiency. Natural remanent magnetizations (NRM's) will be
studied in the paleomagnetic laboratory at UNAM while magnetic hysteresis,
anisotropy and other measurements as well as detailed intensity determinations
will be performed at the University of Minnesota. In addition microprobe and
scanning electron microscope work will involve Prof. Negendank in Germany, thus
adding a multi- lateral dimension to this project. The proposed work will be the
first stage in studying the paleointensity record all the way back to Permian
times since when Mexico has retained an almost unique continuous volcanic
record.