* 8906678
* Extensions to the Rewrite Rule Laboratory and Research in   Automated Deduction Based on Rewriting Techniques and       Completion
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/1989,06/30/1993
* Deepak Kapur, SUNY at Albany
* Continuing Grant
* Forbes D. Lewis
* 06/30/1993
* USD 310,332.00

A software system called RRL, the Rewrite Rule Laboratory, developed over the
past four years with partial support from previous NSF grants, is both a theorem
prover and an environment for experimenting with and developing new automated
reasoning procedures based on rewrite methods. RRL includes implementations of a
collection of rule-completion and rewriting algorithms that can be applied to
proving predicate calculus and structural induction theorems. RRL has been
successfully used for solving problems often considered a challenge for
mechanized theorem provers, including significant applications in verification
and specification of hardware and software. Further development of RRL and
research in the associated theory are proposed. The focus will be to develop and
extend RRL to be more useful and convenient for reasoning about software and
hardware specifications and implementations. Towards this goal, RRL will be
enhanced to provide powerful methods for automatically proving properties by
induction. Theoretical research will be undertaken to combine two different
approaches for automating proofs by induction, the proof by consistency approach
and the explicit induction approach developed under the last NSF grant. Further
investigations will also be conducted on methods for analyzing structural
properties of specifications such as the consistency and definitional
completeness properties and for reasoning about incomplete specifications.
Theoretical and experimental research in developing heuristics, including
identifying unnecessary computations, will be undertaken to improve the
performance of completion procedures and of first-order theorem proving methods.
Complexity studies and efficient implementations of primitive operations will
also be continued and results will be incorporated into RRL.