* 8906300
* Systematics of Gladiolus and Radinosiphon (Iridaceae) in    Tropical Africa and Madagascar
* BIO,DEB
* 11/01/1989,04/30/1993
* Peter Goldblatt, Missouri Botanical Garden
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 04/30/1993
* USD 83,958.00

Iridaceae are a moderately large family of monocots of some 92 genera and 1620
species distributed mainly in the southern hemisphere. One of the few larger
monocot families so far investigated in any detail, it is becoming a model
example of the patterns of geographic radiation, adaptation, and evolution in
the monocots. The proposed research by Dr. Peter Goldblatt of the Missouri
Botanical Garden consists of a basic taxonomic revision of the tropical African
species of Gladiolus and Radinosiphon. Gladiolus, largest genus of subfamily
Ixioideae, comprises some 185 species of which 112 are southern African, ca. 60
occur in tropical Africa and Madagascar, and 20 species are spread through
southern Europe, the Mediterranean basin, and Middle East. Neither genus has
been thoroughly studied since 1898 and together they constitute the last
significant genera of African Iridaceae for which there are no modern synthetic
treatments available, this despite the obvious horticultural importance of
Gladiolus and considerable confusion over the delimitation of species and their
correct names. Field collecting and herbarium study will yield morphological and
chromosomal characters useful in species recognition and comparison. Gladiolus
is of particular interest geographically as it is one of few genera distributed
throughout southern and tropical Africa that has radiated significantly both in
the tropics, in temperate southern Africa, and in the winter rainfall area of
the southwest coast of South Africa. The establishment of a soundly based
taxonomy for the genus will make it possible to compare patterns of evolution
over its entire range and to identify centers of endemism and speciation on the
African continent.