* 8906337
* RUI:  Magnetism and Phase Transitions of Mixed Magnetic     Insulating Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/1989,11/30/1992
* Gary DeFotis, College of William and Mary
* Continuing Grant
* David Nelson
* 11/30/1992
* USD 89,400.00

They will examine magnetic behavior and phase transitions in a variety of mixed
and dilute magnets with short-range exchange interactions. Effects of competing
spin anisotropies and/or competing exchange interactions are of particular
interest, especially their influence on the structure of T-composition magnetic
phase diagrams. New systems exhibiting tetracritical or other multicritical
points should emerge, some with qualitatively new features. New examples of the
insulating spin glass will be examined, including cases of model classes not yet
realized experimentally. The nonlinear susceptibility will be studied, in order
to further their understanding of spin glass universality classes; time-
dependent effects will also be examined. Work is also proposed on certain
Fe(III) bisdithiocarbamate and bisdiselenocarbamate compounds. Interest centers
on characterizing the magnetic ordering in these unusual pentacoordinate
systems, determining zero-field splitting parameters and exchange interactions,
and discovering new examples of XY or Ising systems. Methodology will consist
primarily of variable temperature, variable field magnetization and
susceptibility measurements on both single crystal and polycrystalline samples.
This work will have a major impact on the departmental research environment,
especially in opportunities afforded undergraduates for research during the
academic year and during summers. Such experiences will be valuable preparation
for later scientific work.