* 8906380
* Engineering Research Equipment Grant: Laboratory Equipment  for Geotechnical Stress-Strain-Flow Research
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/15/1989,05/31/1991
* William Kovacs, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* La Tanya Darby
* 05/31/1991
* USD 61,690.00

The objective of this project is to replace some of the research equipment at
the University of Rhode Island's Marine Geomechanics Laboratory (URI/MGL) that
is being removed by a previous sponsoring agency, and to replace some used,
outmoded equipment with state-of-the-art equipment and instrumentation for
research on marine sediments. The MGL facility has been an internationally
recognized source for state-of-the-art developments in understanding the
behavior of deep marine sediments and significant contributions have been made
through field and laboratory studies and computer analysis. The project is
directed at enhancing and extending the research capabilities of the current
URI/MGL facility. The acquisition of the equipment requested in this proposal
will greatly enhance the ability to carry on current and projected research. The
primary specific projects that will directly benefit include: a) the ongoing NSF
sponsored research on creep processes (in second year of 3-year project), b) a
proposed program to study the as yet unexplained phenomenon of
underconsolidation seen in certain deep sea regimes, c) a proposed program to
study the processes by which debris flows are initiated, and d) a broader
program on submarine slope processes. Other studies of nearshore sediments have
been initiated. Most of the research is of critical importance to the nation in
terms of utilization of the Exclusive Economic Zone for commercial and security
needs.