* 8906751
* Profit Regulation of Defense Contractors
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1989,07/31/1992
* William Rogerson, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Lynn A. Pollnow
* 07/31/1992
* USD 66,687.00

Although economists have made great strides in analyzing the nature of the
regulatory problem in a variety of industries, comparatively little attention
has been devoted to the detailed, all-encompassing and arcane set of regulations
that determines the prices that defense contractors will receive for their
products. These regulations are often referred to as Department of Defense (DoD)
"profit policy." The major goal of this project is to explore what new light can
be shed on defense procurement by recent advances in the economic theory of
regulation and incentives and by modern financial and accounting theory. A major
reason economists have been slow to explore defense procurement procedures is
that accurate and detailed information on the procurement procedures that the
DoD actually uses is very inaccessible to the economics profession. Thus, a
second goal of the project is to produce a complete and detailed description of
the institutions in a form which is understandable and accessible to the
economics community. Specific topics investigated include the cost allocation
process, incentives for cost-minimization, incentives for innovation, and the
impact of the budgeting process on the military services' incentives to
negotiate prices. The results of this project will provide useful insights into
the billion dollar a year defense procurement industry. Many of the issues
studied in the context of defense procurement also arise in some form in other
regulated sectors. Therefore, the analysis of this project should contribute to
the general theory of regulation. Finally, the project will provide an
invaluable source of information on the institutional aspects of defense
procurement for other economists to use.