* 8906486
* Vegetation-Sensing Properties of Pollen and Plant           Macrofossil Assembleges:  Effect of Lake Size, Pollen       Dispersal, and Vegetation Pattern
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1989,01/31/1992
* Stephen Jackson, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Althea Ball
* 01/31/1992
* USD 180,133.00

The objective of this research is to understand the vegetation-sensing
properties of pollen and plant macrofossil data, which are the primary sources
of information on past vegetation. Of specific concern will be the documentation
of effective pollen source areas for important tree taxa in the northeastern
United States and understanding the factors that affect them. Understanding of
these factors, which include lake size, pollen dispersal properties, and
vegetation patterns, is crucial to the design and interpretation of
paleoecological studies, because pollen source area determines the spatial scale
at which vegetation is recorded by fossil pollen data. Understanding of how
plant macrofossils record vegetation composition is also important because
macrofossils represent the absolute limits to spatial resolution attainable from
paleoecological data. Modern pollen assemblages will be studied from 20 small
lakes (&lt;2 ha) and 40 medium-sized lakes (5-30 ha) in addition to data from 19
small lakes which have been studied previously. Pollen percentages will be
compared with tree abundances within different radial distances (20 m to 30 km)
surrounding the lakes. Scatter plots and regression analyses will be used to
identify pollen source areas and test models of pollen dispersal and
representation. Modern macrofossil assembleges from the small lakes will be
compared with forest composition within 20 m of the lakes using similar methods.