* 8907999
* Learning, Credibility and Asset Markets
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1989,08/31/1991
* David Levine, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 08/31/1991
* USD 83,027.00

The goal of this project is to understand, both in a general theoretical way,
and in concrete and empirically relevant economic problems, asset market
equilibrium. Algorithms for computing equilibria in models with a mixture of
private and social risk were programmed under the previous grant. They are used
in this product to study a new class of models with limited insurance
possibilities: debt constrained asset markets. Liquidity constraints emerge in
this model from the assumption that it is not possible to force borrowers to
service or pay off debts from their future income. Traders may be denied credit,
and their assets may be attached for the payment of past debts. This is a
reasonable representation of the way in which actual asset markets work. Debtor
prison no longer exists, and indeed, modern bankruptcy laws make it possible for
traders to preserve some assets even in the face of bankruptcy laws. Debt
constrained markets could explain why insurance markets are incomplete in real
world economies. Research is continued on the dynamics of asset distribution
models. This project relaxes the assumption of a representative economic agent
made in real business cycle models. Numerical simulation on the supercomputer is
used to determine the global picture of the set of equilibria of asset
distributions with a mix of private and social risk. The project develops and
tests methods of accurately approximating these asset distribution. Methods
developed in the previous project to study reputation and learning in repeated
games are extended and used to study learning and approximate knowledge in asset
markets. This is important because it permits rigorous analysis of asset market
behavior that can't otherwise be explained. Most current theories either assume
common knowledge or assume behavior that is so stupid that it is hard to imagine
even a naive agent behaving this way. In sum, this research develops powerful
new methodological tools for studying market dynamics with heterogeneous agents
and for rigorously modelling markets in which agents make mistakes but learn
from their mistakes. These tools are used to study realistic models of asset
markets in which certain risks can not be insured or can be insured at
prohibitive rates.