* 8907585
* Archaeological Investigations at Alcaria Longa
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1989,07/31/1991
* James Boone, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/1991
* USD 77,715.00

Following a preliminary season of NSF sponsored investigation, Dr. Boone and
his colleagues will conduct an intensive archaeological investigation at the
site of Alcaria Longa, an abandoned medieval village site in the Lower Alentejo
region of southern Portugal. In addition to excavation, the team will also
conduct limited survey to find other sites and examine comparative materials
from other locations. The fundamental question Dr. Boone wishes to address is
how rural communities respond socially and economically to cycles of economic
and demographic growth and decline associated with succeeding regimes of
conquest and administration. In Portugal, these include the Romans, Visigoths,
Muslims, and Christians and cover the period from approximately 100 to 1500 A.D.
An ancillary issue to be addressed is the problem of ethnicity and the social
organization of medieval populations inhabiting the dry upland areas of the
Iberian Peninsula where irrigation was impossible. These populations are known
to have been distinct from groups in better watered regions. This research is
important because it will provide insight into how relationships develop and are
changed over time between urban and rural areas. The conditions which held in
medieval Portugal still apply today to many areas in the Third World, and the
complex relationships which exist between rural inhabitants and the ruling urban
elite (who are often culturally distinct) complicate regional politics and
developmental efforts. Thus, the work may have practical relevance. Archaeology
has a unique contribution to make in such studies because it can examine such
relations over long spans of time.