* 8907351
* Long &amp; Medium Term Research:  Exchange of Genetic Material  Among Plant Viral RNAs
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/1989,12/31/1990
* Keith Perry, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* Russell Sveda
* 12/31/1990
* USD 6,310.00

Long and Medium Term Research: Exchange of Genetic Material Among Plant Viral
RNAs. This award recommendation is made under the Program for Long and Medium-
Term Research at Foreign Centers of Excellence. The program is designed to
enable young U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct long-term research abroad
at research institutions of proven excellence. Awards provide opportunities for
the conduct of joint research and the use of unique or complementary facilities,
expertise and experimental conditions in foreign countries. The award will
support a ten month research visit by Dr. Keith L. Perry and Dr. William E. Fry
of Cornell University - State, Department of Plant Pathology, with Dr. Richard
Francki, Waite Agricultural Research Institute, University of Adelaide, South
Australia. While plant RNA viruses exhibit an extraordinary degree of
variability with respect to host range and induced host range responses, little
information is available on what mechanisms lead to this diversity. The
researchers propose to address this variability among plant viral RNAs through a
study of recombination (the exchange of sequence domains between two RNAs) and
pseudorecom- bination (the reassortment of intact genomic RNAs from
multicomponent viruses), assessing the role of recombination and
pseudorecombination as well as point mutations in the evolution of plant viruses
and the generation of new disease agents. The researchers seek: (1) to isolate
recombinant and pseudorecombinant viruses and obtain an estimate for the minimum
frequency of their occurrence in mixed virus infections; (2) to assess the
competitive fitness of recombinant viruses; and (3) to make a detailed molecular
characteri- zation of recombinants to determine if recombination is homologous,
if hotspots for recombination exist, and if crossover points occur
intragenically or within non-translated RNA domains. The experi- mental system
consists of (1) a group of tripartite RNA viruses, the cucumoviruses; (2) their
aphid vectors; and (3) a wide host range of plants in which virus-plant
interactions can be observed and manipulated. The award recommendation provides
funds to cover, as appropriate, international travel, local travel abroad,
stipend, dependents' allowance, if applicable, and a flat administrative
allowance of $250.00 for the U.S. home institution.