* 8907068
* Engineering Research Center for the Carnegie Mellon Data    Storage Systems Center
* ENG,EEC
* 04/15/1990,04/30/2001
* R. White, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Mary Poats
* 04/30/2001
* USD 28,447,419.00

This award establishes an Engineering Research Center for Data Storage Systems,
at Carnegie-Mellon University (CMU), with Professor Mark Kryder as Director. The
long term goal of the proposed ERC is to accelerate the rate of progress in data
storage device density and performance by establishing a long- term research and
education program with thrusts in magnetics, nmagneto-optics, and allied
technologies such as signal processing and coding, with a target of increasing
storage density by several orders of magnitude beyond today's systems. The ERC
will supersede the existing industry-funded Magnetics Technology Center (MTC)
and will expand its scope to include longer-term research with a systems
perspective. The research objectives focus on advances in magnetic and magneto-
optic media; inductive, magneto-resistive, and optical heads; media-head
interface reliability; positioners and servo control systems; signal processing
and coding; and modeling of the recording system. The extreme complexity and
cross-disciplinary nature of disk-drive technology requires a well-integrated
approach to the research. The staff at CMU is a highly respected group of
researchers with an outstanding record for innovative, high quality research,
across the spectrum of proposed research areas. This combination of strengths in
individual research areas integrated by a strong systems focus is unique to the
CMU Center. The proposed education program will double the number of graduate
students specializing in data storage research at CMU and will create
opportunities for a considerable number of undergraduates to participate in the
research as well. All these students will receive a valuable exposure to
industrial problems and perspectives. Graduate and undergraduate curricula will
be improved via new and upgraded courses. A proposed summer institute for
secondary school teachers will expose these teachers to the excitement of
engineering and encourage them to help attract highly;y qualified students into
engineering.