* 8907380
* RIA: Testing for Physically Realizable Faults in CMOS       Integrated Circuits
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/1989,06/30/1991
* Frankie Ferguson, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Robert B Grafton
* 06/30/1991
* USD 59,967.00

This research is on test and fault simulation algorithms that provide better
fault coverage than the single-stuck-at (SSA) fault model. It is well known that
faults occur in CMOS circuits that cannot be modeled by the traditional SSA
fault model. This can lead to undetected physical faults, as well as inaccurate
estimates of the product's defect level. The approach of Professor Ferguson is
to use a software tool, FXT, which automates the concept of inductive fault
analysis. He is characterizing realistic faults that occur in CMOS circuits,
incorporating them into FXT and analyzing a wide variety of CMOS circuits.
Computationally feasible testing procedures that detect those realistic CMOS
faults are being developed and applied to real physical circuits to demonstrate
compatibility of this testing approach with CMOS technology. Because of the
increase in VLSI chip complexity, VLSI testing is becoming a critical aspect of
IC manufacturing. This research investigates new concepts and algorithms for
VLSI testing, which address detecting realistic physical faults in finished VLSI
chips. The novelty is in the concepts that go beyond those in standard methods
and should produce better tests for manufacturing faults. The principal
investigator is a promising and competent young professor who should make
significant contributions to the field.