* 8907403
* A U.S.-Sri Lanka Seminar on the Development of a Science    Information Center and Information Science Program
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/1989,01/31/1991
* Paul Wasserman, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 01/31/1991
* USD 9,304.00

Description: This project supports pariticipation by four U.S. scientists in a
U.S.-Sri Lanka Seminar on Development of a Science Information Center and
Information Science Program to be held in Kandy, Sri Lanka. The objectives are
the strengthening of the science information resources and capabililties of Sri
Lanka to enhance the progress of scientific research in that country, and to
develop the mechanisms for implementing resource sharing on both an
international and a domestic level in a developing country environment. The
collaborating scientist in Sri Lanka is Dr. Cyril Ponnamperuma, director of the
Institute for Fundamental Studies (IFS) in Kandy. Topics to be covered will
include: user requirements and disciplines, collection and resources
development, regional, national and international network relationship and
information storage, retrieval and dissemination as well as policy and
management issues. Research papers on these topics will be presented, and
specific areas for future collaboration will be identified. Scope: The U.S. team
from the University of Maryland, College of Library and Information Services is
experienced in the area of this project. They will interact with the top
research scientists at the IFS and at a dozen research institutes and centers in
the Kandy area. The experience gained through this collaborative effort would be
quite useful to U.S. scientists in building the research and scientific
infrastructure in third world countries.