* 8907320
* Techniques to Improve Charge Couple Device Quantum          Efficiency
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/1989,05/31/1992
* Gary Sims, Photometrics Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 05/31/1992
* USD 218,397.00

Charge coupled devices (CCDs) with high sensitivity throughout the vacuum
ultraviolet, ultraviolet (UV), visible, and near infrared wavelengths are
necessary for many proposed investigations in astronomy. The best technical
approach to improve CCD sensitivity in these wavelengths is backside
illumination, but such devices with high sensitivity are not available,
commercially or otherwise. Commercial backside illuminated CCDs produced
currently and in the past have exhibited many problems including low
sensitivity, spatial and temporal variations in sensitivity, and optical
distortion and interference. Recently, the need for UV sensitive CCDs for space
flight applications has prompted research into methods to improve backside
illuminated CCD technology. The backside charging treatments developed through
this research has proved promising, but several problems still exist before
sensors with the desired characteristics are produced. The Phase I research
explored the problems and tradeoffs of CCD thinning and backside charging. The
results obtained were promising and insightful, however two significant areas
need to be further investigated. These are the problem of quantum efficiency
hysteresis and the use of antireflection coatings to reduce reflection losses.
Under this Phase II SBIR Award, quantum efficiency hysteresis will be reduced by
chemically modifying the backside surface oxide. Antireflection coatings will be
applied to the backside surface to reduce reflection loss, interference
fringing, and protect the backside surface from contamination.