* 8907279
* Scientific and Technical Oversight of the U.S.-India Scienceand Technology Initiative
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/1989,12/31/1991
* John Hurley, National Research Council
* Contract
* Rose Gombay
* 12/31/1991
* USD 154,310.00

Description: This contract continues support for an independent oversight panel
of the National Academy of Sciences/National Research Council to assess progess
and results of cooperative research projects under the U.S.-India Science and
Technology Initiative (STI). The oversight panel will be responsible for
evaluating progress in the four basic areas of STI: Health, Agriculture, Solid
State Science and Engineering, Monsoon Research; and new initiatives in
infectious diseases (AIDS, Neurological Disorders, Leishmaniasis), the 1987
Monsoon Drought, and cooperation on the Superconducting Supercollider. The
Oversight Panel will report annually its findings directly to the U.S. Senior
Policy Group (SPG) chaired by the President's Science Adviser. Panel members
will interact with program coordinators of the STI research areas, with the
Senior Policy Group, and with the counterpart Indian oversight panel. The
proposal was submitted in response to RFP ESS 89-002. As Executive Agent for
STI, the NSF's Division of International Programs is responsible for supporting
the NAS/NRC oversight panel as set forth in the January 1983 Scientific Panel
Report to President Ronald Reagan and Prime Minister Indira Gandhi, which
established this initiative. Since 1983, the STI has been renewed twice, most
recently, in October 1988 for a three year period. In view of the importance of
this Presidential scientific initiative and the usefulness of panel evaluations
in 1985 and 1988, the NSF recommends continued support.