* 8907095
* NSFnet Orientation and Training Workshop for Minority Institutions-June 21-23, 1989.
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/1989,11/30/1989
* Robert Von Hollen, Southeastern Universities Research Assn
* Standard Grant
* Gerald L. Engel
* 11/30/1989
* USD 9,800.00

The Southeastern Universities Research Association, Inc. (SURA) will render
logistical services in coordinating for the Computer and Information Science and
Engineering (CISE) Directorate of NSF an NSFnet Orientation and Training
Workshop for Minority Institutions (NOT-MI). The workshop will be held at the
Continuous Electronic Beam Accelerator Facility (CEBAF) in Newport News,
Virginia. SURAnet is a regional network of 52 nodes in the Southeast United
States which provides user services and connection to the NSFnet. They seek to
extend the network and services to all research and teaching institutions in the
Southeast, including historically black colleges. Most of the nations
predominantly minority institutions are located in the SURAnet area. NOT-MI will
begin on the evening of June 21, 1989 and terminate in the afternoon of June 23,
1989. Participation will be limited and include selected institutions receiving
Foundation support under: 1) the Comprehensive Regional Centers for Minorities,
2) the Minority Research Centers of Excellence, and 3) the Institutional
Infrastructure-Minority Institutions Program. Approximately 40 attendees are
expected. NOT-MI will allow computer networking experts and users to present
instructions on internet technology, major protocols, principles and
applications with hands-on experiences to educators/researchers and technical
specialist of minority institutions that can readily benefit from NSFnet
connection.