* 8907619
* Development and Testing of an Advanced Electron Optical System for Photoelectron Microscopes and Other High Resolution Imaging Systems
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1989,06/30/1995
* G Rempfer, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing grant
* Michael K. Lamvik
* 06/30/1995
* USD 705,870.00

This grant application seeks funds to carry out the second phase of a joint
project between Portland State University and the University of Oregon on the
development of a photoelectron microscope (PEM) of advanced design and higher
resolution (theoretically 1 nm to 2 nm, as compared with the present 10 nm). The
project will achieve this resolution by incorporating an electron mirror to
correct for chromatic and spherical aberrations. The first phase of this project
was funded by a private foundation in the Northwest (the M. J. Murdock
Chawitable Trust). The first phase covered the design and construction of an
electron mirror and the electron lenses and other components used in studying
the mirror, and theoretical and experimental investigations of the mirror
properties. The second phase, planned for three years, focuses on further
research on aberration correction, on mirror design, deflector design, and on
instrument design and construction. Specific goals include a detailed study of
the aberration correcting properties of the mirror in combination with the
electron optical components of the photoelectron microscope in a vacuum optical
bench, and the design and construction of an experimental test column in which
the resolution of the corrected electron optical system can be evaluated. The
successful demonstration of a corrected system would represent an advanced in
the field of electron optics. The correction method would also be applicable to
a range of other instruments which require aberration correction and improved
resolution (e.g., electron or ion probes and advanced photoelectron microscope,
when completed, will be valuable in studies of organic and biological specimens,
semiconductors, and other surface studies where high resolution and low specimen
damage are important.