* 8907222
* RUI: Purchase of Cyclic Triaxial Apparatus for Determining  Dynamic Properties of Caliche Soil
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/1989,01/31/1991
* Pat Leelani, Texas A&M University-Kingsville
* Standard Grant
* La Tanya Darby
* 01/31/1991
* USD 50,000.00

Caliches or caliche soils are deposited mostly in the southern parts of the
United States and a more mature type of caliche is widely used as a construction
material. Little data exists in the literature pertaining to the static and
dynamic properties of caliche soil. The properties of caliche soil will be
determined by the ASK cyclic triaxial apparatus, model DTC-283 which is capable
of conducting static, cyclic, and irregular dynamic loading tests. An IBM
computer PC can be programmed to control the amplitude of cyclic axial stress.
The amplitude response of vibration similar to that of vibrating foundations and
earthquake shaking can be simulated to replace the sinusoidal cyclic axial
loading condition. The following different types of triaxial loading conditions
for evaluating the static and dynamic properties of caliche soil can be
conducted by the proposed equipment: 1. Static and regular cyclic loading; 2.
Stepwise increase in amplitude of cyclic loading; 3. Irregular dynamic loading
with two different types of time histories: the earthquake spectrum, and the
vertical response of a vibrating foundation. Test results are presented in the
form of dynamic stress ratios with the corresponding axial strains. The results
are applicable to problems where the caliche soil is used as a structural
material for road bases and for foundations subjected to either static or
dynamic loading.