* 8907612
* Mathematical Sciences: Banach Algebras and Their            Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1989,06/30/1992
* Sandy Grabiner, Pomona College
* Continuing grant
* William Y. Velez
* 06/30/1992
* USD 50,931.00

Professor Grabiner will continue his research on analytic extensions of the
umbral calculus, on weighted convolution algebras, and on Banach algebras of
power series and their analogues. Umbral and Sheffer shifts, investigated by
Rota in the algebraic setting of polynomials, will be looked at for spaces of
entire functions. The work on convolution algebras will concentrate on
homomorphisms, convolution semigroups, and closed ideals. For radical Banach
algebras of power series, Grabiner will study the structure of such algebras
without assumptions of regularity of growth of the weights, and try to relate
computationally feasible conditions on the weights to the structure of the
algebras. One fairly concrete setting for the mathematical research to be
undertaken in this project is that of power series, which may be thought of as
polynomials of infinite degree. Many familiar functions such as sine and exp,
which are called entire, have power series representations valid throughout the
complex plane, and it is often reasonable to treat such functions as a species
of extended polynomial. In another direction, one can form Banach algebras of
power series by placing an appropriate constraint on the limit behavior of the
coefficients. It may happen that the only way to evaluate all of the series in
the algebra is by taking the constant term. In this case, one has a radical
Banach algebra, a very exotic object whose understanding is one of the goals of
Professor Grabiner's research.