* 8907369
* Animal Economy and Sociopolitical Change in Ancient         Philistia
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1989,08/31/1992
* Brian Hesse, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/1992
* USD 77,668.00

Drs. Brian Hesse and Paula Wapnish will combine field and laboratory research
in Israel and the United States to study the changes in animal utilization
between ca. 1500 and 600 BC. A series of five stratified urban sites - Ashkelon,
Tel Batash, Tell Jemmeh, Tel Miqne, and Tel Qasile - all located in southern
Canaan span this time interval, and careful excavations are providing large well
provenienced faunal samples. The investigators will identify remains to a
species level, determine the minimum numbers of individuals represented, and the
ages at which animals were slaughtered. Through radiographic analysis of bone,
they hope to determine whether animals such as cattle were used for draft or
consumption and, in the latter case, whether they were raised primarily for meat
or milk. Finally, examination of differential representation of individual
skeletal elements and breakage patterns of each will permit reconstruction of
butchering practices. This analysis will provide important insights into how
complex economic systems developed in the Old World and how these were
influenced by political change. Animals were an important component of the
economies of the ancient world, and as political fortunes shifted between
periods of disaggregation and centralization, so too did the social institutions
that managed production and consumption switch between independence and
integration. Superimposed on the environmental framework within which herdsmen
made their decisions, socio-political forces acted to influence the choices made
by individual animal husbanders and households. In the ancient eastern
Mediterranean, four supra- household institutions had an impact on animal
production and use: the market, the ritual center, the taxation/tribute system,
and the relations between the agricultural and pastoral sectors of society. All
four of these have been identified in ethnographic and historical models of
culture change and linked with faunally measurable variables. During the period
under study (1500 to 600 BC), this region underwent several major well
documented political changes, and the study by Drs. Hesse and Wapnish should
reveal the economic effects of these. This research is important for several
reasons. First, it will increase our understanding of how complex societies,
such as our own, are developed and maintained. Secondly, the models of economic
organization which emerge will provide direct insight into how more traditional
Middle Eastern economies function at the present time.