* 8907440
* Epilimnetic cAMP:  Dynamics and Modulation of PhotosyntheticCarbon Assimilation
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/1989,07/01/1990
* David Francko, Oklahoma State University
* Continuing Grant
* Althea Ball
* 07/01/1990
* USD 12,300.00

This project will examine the importance of ambient dissolved and intracellular
cAMP concentrations, relative to other physical and chemical factors, in
regulating in situ photosynthetic performance in epilimnetic planktonic
assemblages. Experiments conducted in eutrophic Sangre Isle lake will be used to
accomplish the following objectives: (1) Develop a comprehensive seasonal and
diel model of in situ cAMP dynamics in epilimnetic lake water. These experiments
will use both previously published methods and novel HPLC and monoclonal
antibody techniques to identify the key organisms driving cAMP dynamics; (2)
Test the hypothesis that seasonal and diel phytoplanktonic PCA rates are
influenced by naturally-occurring dissolved or particulate cAMP concentrations;
(3) Using the activated charcoal method for cAMP removal from lake water
developed under previous funding, test the hypothesis that removal of naturally-
occurring cAMP from lake water alter planktonic PCA rates, and that readdition
of cAMP restores PCA rates to nominal levels; and, (4) Conduct membrane polarity
and proton translocation experiments, on planktonic isolates from Sangre Isle
Lake to test the cAMP electrogenic regulation model in natural planktonic
assemblages. These experiments should determine if cAMP is an important
regulator of phytoplankton production in aquatic systems.