* 8907397
* Cleavage and Formation of Carbon-Carbon Bonds by Transition Metal Complexes
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/1989,05/31/1992
* Russell Hughes, Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* E. Kent Barefield
* 05/31/1992
* USD 232,600.00

The long term objective of this project in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and
Organometallic Chemistry Program is to achieve greater understanding of how
transition metal compounds can effect the cleavage and formation of carbon-
carbon bonds. Such reactions are among the most important in chemistry and are
involved in industrial processes such as reforming gasoline to upgrade the
octane number. The overall strategy of the project is to isolate and model the
individual steps of organic transformations involving C-C bond forming or
cleavage as effected both stoichiometrically and catalytically by transition
metal reagents. Emphasis will be placed on compounds with cyclopropenyl,
cyclopropene and vinylcylclopropene ligands. Reactions of perfluorocyclopropene
with transition metal centers will serve as a model for the C-C bond cleavage
reaction, with oxidative addition of the C-C bond providing a route to
metallacyclobutene complexes. The mechanism of transformation of
3-vinyl-1-cyclopropenes into 1,3-cyclopentadienes, or into
eta-5-cyclopentadienyl(hydrido) metal complexes, are of particular interest
since sequential C-C bond cleavage and C-C bond formation steps are involved.
For some Rh- and Ir-promoted reactions intermediates can be isolated, and the
structures of these intermediates demonstrate that the mechanism for opening the
cyclopropene ring is more complicated than for simpler cyclopropenes, and cannot
involve a "simple" oxidative insertion of the metal into the C-C bond. Reactions
of selectively isotopically labelled precursors will be used to map the course
of the novel skeletal rearrangements, corresponding to previously unknown
organometallic transformations, which occur during the ring opening reactions.
Isotopically labeled precursors will be used also to further elucidate the
mechanism of the C-C bond forming reaction whereby 1,2,3,5-eta-pentadienediyl
and 1,5-eta-pentadienediyl- (1-metallacyclohexa-2,4-diene) complexes of Rh(III)
and Ir(III) undergo conversion to eta-5-cyclopentadienyl(hydrido) metal
compounds.