* 8907133
* US-France Cooperative Research:  Cooperative Study of Rings and Atmospheres in the Outer Solar System
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/1990,08/31/1993
* William Hubbard, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 08/31/1993
* USD 15,832.00

This award will support collaborative research between Dr. William Hubbard,
Lunar and Planetary Laboratory, University of Arizona and Drs. Andre Brahic and
Bruno Sicardy, Observatory of Paris, Meudon, France. The objective of the
project is a joint effort on the reduction and analysis of coordinated
observations of stellar occultations by outer solar system bodies, particularly
focusing on Saturn and Neptune. These studies will be used to derive new results
about the ring systems and the atmospheres of these objects, which will
complement and expand the latest information from Voyager encounters. Based on
results from the 1989 Neptune encounter, the researchers will plan further
coordinated observa- tions of future occultation events, as well as theoretical
investigations of ring dynamics and atmospheric structure related to the
observational data base. The stellar occultation technique is used to probe the
structure of distant atmospheres and rings with a spatial resolution of a few
kilometers. With the dearth of spacecraft observations of outer system bodies
following Voyager's Neptune encounter, it is particularly important to carry out
this work. Neptune's bizarre ring-arcs were first identified by a collaborative
effort of these investigators, and the recent confirmation of these structures
by the Voyager research has emphasized the value of the proposed research. Also,
both groups were highly successful in obtaining recent stellar occultation
observations of Saturn's rings and atmosphere, involving a fifth magnitude star,
which resulted in data of unusually high quality. Furthermore, the Meudon group
obtained the first stellar occultation probe of Saturn's satellite Titan.
Because of the diversely located sites at which data are obtained, it is
important that these two groups have the continued opportunity to work together
closely.