* 8907008
* Doctoral Dissertation in Law and Social Science:  Judicial  Impact on Attorney Advertising
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/1989,06/30/1991
* Bradley Canon, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Martin
* 06/30/1991
* USD 4,192.00

A considerable amount of research on law and public policy has concerned
decisionmaking processes and various inputs into the political and legal system
with an underlying assumption that mandated changes have their desired effect on
the populace. In recent years, however, this assumption has been challenged by a
number of scholars seeking to understand the impact of governmental decisions on
society. The impact of judicial decisions, or what happens after courts render
policy, has spawned a large body of research focused primarily on those
responsible for interpreting and implementing judicial decisions. This
dissertation research seeks to expand knowledge of judicial impact by exploring
responses at the individual level of those most directly affected by a change
embodied in a particular governmental decision. Specifically, the student will
analyze attorney responses to the United States Supreme Court decision of Bates
v. State Bar of Arizona (1977). In Bates, the Court disallowed a blanket
prohibition on attorney advertising but did permit some regulation by the
states. No specific behavior was mandated of lawyers, and thus the effects of
the decision offers a vehicle by which to explore judicial impact. Accordingly,
advertising by attorneys in four different states will be examined. Three
competing theoretical explanations pertaining to economic incentives, the
influence of state bar regulations, and attitudes will be tested on the basis of
survey and interview data. The analysis will focus on why some lawyers and their
firms altered their behavior in light of the change in the status quo and others
did not. Conclusions will be drawn about the ultimate effectiveness of judicial
decisions which do not mandate action but open previously prohibited avenues of
behavior. Such a study has the potential to facilitate a broader interpretation
and theoretical understanding of the impact of law across institutions.