* 8907956
* Magnetic Field Stabilized Melt and Solution Growth of       Pseudo-Binary II-VI Semiconducting Alloys
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/1989,01/31/1995
* Shariar Motakef, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* mary chen
* 01/31/1995
* USD 304,285.00

Research on the growth of pseudo-binary II-VI semiconductors will be conducted,
aimed at the stabilization of convection in the fluid phase through application
of large magnetic fields as a means for controlling the chemical composition of
materials grown from the melt and solution. A quantitative relationship between
transport processes and chemical composition of the grown material will also be
established. The research program will be based on a two-tier approach of
development and application of numerical transport models for solution and melt
growth process applicable to pseudo-binary alloys, and Bridgman and Travelling
Heater laboratory growth of II-VI alloys in the presence of applied axial
magnetic fields, followed by characterization of the grown material. The
transport process present in the Bridgman and Travelling Heater system will be
quantitatively differentiated, and the potential for increasing the growth rate
while minimizing compositional variations through a hybrid melt- solution growth
process will be explored. The primary material to be studied is HgMnTe, whose
properties as an infra-red detector material are, in some respects, superior to
HgCdTe. The study will also be extended to growth of HgFeSe where the higher
electrical conductivity of the fluid phase will allow for stronger magnetic
effects on convection stabilization. The performance and yield of electronic
devices based upon pseudo binary II-VI semiconducting alloys are strongly
related to their chemical composition. There is a need to closely control the
crystal growth process to maintain chemical uniformity. Magnetic stabilization
of the transport processes occurring in the melt may be a way to produce very
high quality crystals without resorting to a micro-gravity environment.