* 8907147
* Preservation of Nelson Bay Cave
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/1989,06/30/1990
* Richard Klein, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 06/30/1990
* USD 2,593.00

In 1970 the NSF provided funds to Dr. Richard Klein for an archaeological
excavation at Nelson Bay Cave. Work at this South African site revealed a series
of stratified deposits which spanned the Upper Pleistocene (Ice Age) and
continued into the post-glacial period. Dr. Klein uncovered a series of
archaeological industries associated with abundant faunal remains and
established a developmental sequence for this coastal region. It was during this
period that modern humans appeared, and thus, these data are of considerable
archaeological significance. When excavation was completed, the site was fenced
and investigators mistakenly believed that this barrier would protect the
remaining deposits. Unfortunately, this has not happened and undisturbed
sediments are slumping into the hole. Funds provided by this grant will permit
Dr. Klein to fill the excavation, and thus, protect the intact deposits. As
technology advances, archaeologists often return to excavate additional portions
of partially dug sites to recover new classes of information. Thus, only under
the most exceptional circumstances are entire sites excavated and areas are
preserved for future research. In this context, it is important to prevent the
further deterioration at Nelson Bay Cave. Since NSF was responsible for the
initial excavation, it is eminently reasonable for it to provide preservation
funds.