* 8907260
* Long and Medium Term Research:  Role of Phospholipases in   Tumor Necrosis Factor Action
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1989,05/31/1991
* Kathleen Kelly, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Russell Sveda
* 05/31/1991
* USD 33,970.00

Long and Medium Term Research: Role of Phospholipases in Tumor Necrosis Factor
Action. This award recommendation is made under the Program for Long and Medium-
Term Research at Foreign Centers of Excellence. The program is designed to
enable young U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct long-term research abroad
at research institutions of proven excellence. Awards provide opportunities for
the conduct of joint research and the use of unique or complementary facilities,
expertise and experimental conditions in foreign countries. The award will
support a 15 month research visit by Dr. Kathleen L. Kelly, Boston University
School of Medicine, with Dr. Faustino Mollinedo, Ph.D, of the Consejo Superior
de Investigaciones Cientificas, Centro de Investigaciones Biologicas, Madrid,
Spain. The researchers will seek (1) to characterize the acute effects of tumor
necrosis factor on phospholipases A2 C and D activities in adipocytes, and (2)
to determine if this effect correlates with inhibition of lipoprotein lipase
activity and synthesis. Tumor necrosis factor, produced by macrophages in
response to invasive stimuli, is a primary mediator of immunity and
inflammation. In addition to its mediator of immunity and inflammation. In
addition to its anti-tumor effects, tumor necrosis factor inhibits anabolic
processes in adipose tissue. It has been postulated that in the acute phase of
infectious challenge, tumor necrosis factor would induce a net flux of lipid
into the circulation, where the host defense system could use it as an energy
source. However, an adverse effect of tumor necrosis factor is a loss in the
anabolic regulation of adipocytes by insulin. The molecular events and
signalling mechanisms which underlie the effects of tumor necrosis factor remain
to be delineated. Preliminary data from other laboratories suggest that
phospholipid hydrolysis may be an obligatory event in mediating the cytolytic
effects of tumor necrosis factor stimulates phospholipase activity in
adipocytes, and that this effect is correlated to its catabolic actions. The
results of this study could have implications in developing therapies for the
treatment of diseases such as type II diabetes and AIDS, which are characterized
by insulin resistance, hypertrigly- ceridemia and tissue wasting. The award
recommendation provides funds to cover, as appropriate, international travel,
local travel abroad, stipend, dependents' allowance, if applicable, and a flat
administrative allowance of $250.00 for the U.S. home institution. //