* 8907968
* REU:  Plant-Herbivore Interactions in Stream Ecosystems
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/1990,06/30/1993
* Gary Lamberti, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 06/30/1993
* USD 274,049.00

Herbivory is a fundamental process in both aquatic and terrestrial ecosystems.
Although herbivory is often viewed as simple plant consumption, numerous
ecosystem features operate to determine the nature and outcome of plant-
herbivore interactions. The basic premise of this research is that dynamics of
the herbivory process in stream ecosystems are determined by the productive
capacity of plant assemblages and the consumptive demand of herbivores. In many
streams, benthic algae are the predominant plants, while macroinvertebrates such
as insects and snails are the dominant herbivores. Because herbivores typically
consume a large proportion (&gt;50%) of the plant biomass in streams, the
potential for competition for limited resources is greater streams than in many
other ecosystems. A combination of laboratory and field experiments will
evaluate (1) the influence of ecosystem productive capacity on plant-herbivore
interactions, (2) the intensity of competitive interactions among stream
herbivores, and (3) the importance of the interaction between algal productivity
and consumer dynamics to stream ecosystem structure and function. Results of
these studies will be incorporated into the herbivory subsystem of a
mathematical model of stream ecosystems. Implications of subsystem modifications
will be assessed in terms of behavior of the total ecosystem model. Completion
of the proposed research and modeling will allow crucial comparisons of
herbivory to be made between aquatic and terrestrial ecosystems. Results of the
research will enable stream ecologists to interpret herbivory relative to other
important ecosystem processes, rather than as an isolated activity.//