* 8907269
* Storage Improvement and Stabilization of Archaeological     Textiles
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/1989,06/30/1992
* G. Michael Jacobs, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 06/30/1992
* USD 26,528.00

The Arizona State Museum, part of the University of Arizona at Tucson, houses
an excellent archaeological textile collection which includes approximately 1200
textiles and textile fragments. A 1987 conservation condition survey identified
ca. 300 items which required improved storage conditions and 26 items in need of
immediate conservation. With NSF support both goals will be achieved. The
project includes examination, photodocumentation, and historical research on the
materials. They will be carefully removed from damaging backings, mounts, and
supports. Protective archival mounts and pads will be constructed, and the
textiles will be stored in a custom-built oversize cabinet which affords
protection from fluctuating environments and deleterious particulates. An
experienced textile conservator and conservation specialist will be hired for
this purpose and a well-equipped conservation laboratory in the Museum made
available to these personnel. The textile materials derive from archaeological
contexts both in the American Southwest and the coast of Peru. It is rare for
such fragile remains to be preserved, but in both areas the extremely dry
climates provided protected environments. Many scientists who have worked with
these materials have attested to their importance. In prehistoric societies
textiles served many functions, and through analysis of them, scientists can
gain insight into many aspects of prehistoric society. Analyses provide
information on status differences and mechanisms of production and distribution.
Examination of dyes and weaving techniques reveals information on technological
advances and innovation. Ironically, archaeological materials are often best
protected if left in the ground. If museum storage conditions are inadequate,
objects which have survived for thousands of years unattended can rapidly
decompose. This project is important because it will assist in the preservation
of archaeologically significant specimens and make them available to a wide
range of researchers.