* 8907860
* RUI:  Acquisition of an Ultramicratome and Acillaries              for Research in the Department of Biology
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/1989,12/31/1991
* Nathan Okia, Auburn University at Montgomery
* Standard Grant
* Kathie L. Olsen
* 12/31/1991
* USD 20,000.00

A proposal is being submitted to acquire an ultramicrotome, an anti-vibration
table and a knife-maker. There are four proposed projects submitted. Project one
will study the fine structure of the skink (lizard) spermatozoan and its
development. Its principle aim will be to elucidate the fine structure of the
centriolar region (between head and tail) of the lizard sperm and to describe
the process of spermatogenesis in the southern united states skinks of the genus
Eumeces. Project two is aimed at elucidating the details of hormone-receptor
binding between gonadotrophins (LH) and the mouse epididymis at the
ultrastructural level. Results so far obtained at the light microscope level
indicate a possible concentration of receptors for LH in the mouse epididymis
perhaps in the Golgi complex and endoplasmic reticulum. The actual site of
binding may be determined using electron microscope immunohistochemistry.
Project three will study fungus-host interactions between fungal endophytes of
the family Clavipitaceae (Ascomycotina) and their grass hosts with the objective
of unraveling the fine structural changes of fungal and host cells that permit
the two organisms to exist mutualistically. The fourth project will examine
several isolates of Haemophilus somnus, a bacterium that is the causative agent
of thromboembolic meningoencephalitis and certain types of reproductive failure
in cattle, for possible presence of a capsule, with the objective of discovering
its method of adherence to host cells.