* 8907386
* The Evolution of Diet-Induced Development Plasticity in HeadMorphology of Grasshoppers
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/1990,06/30/1993
* Daniel Thompson, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Standard Grant
* Tarri Joyner
* 06/30/1993
* USD 160,425.00

Grasshoppers raised on hard grass diets develop relatively larger heads and
mandibles than those raised on diets of soft herbaceous plants. This
morphological pattern results from developmental or phenotypic plasticity, a
change in the morphology expressed by a genotype in different plant
environments. The red-legged grasshopper (Melanoplus femurrubrum) is ideally
suited to studies of the evolution of adaptive phenotypic plasticity since
preliminary experiments indicate that diet-induced plasticity in head size
influences grasshopper feeding rates on different plants. The P. I. has proposed
a series of ecological genetic experiments that will test theories of the
evolution of phenotypic plasticity by measuring the heritability (genetic
variation) of plastic shifts in head size and by measuring the intensity of
natural selection on the same characters as they are expressed in two feeding
environments (grass and forb). The relationship between phenotypic plasticity
and grasshopper fitness will be estimated from measurements of growth, survival,
and reproduction of grasshoppers fed in one plant environment (grass or forb)
and then, later, shifted to a different feeding environment. The ability of
grasshoppers to develop different head sizes in different plants environments
enhances their survivorship and, hence, allows these destructive herbivorous
pests to persist in many different environments. An understanding of the
evolution of grasshopper developmental plasticity will provide basic knowledge
about the conditions under which populations are likely to evolve the ability to
occupy multiple environments and to potentially expand their distributions into
new natural and agricultural habitats.