* 8907405
* Collaborative Research:  Controls of Ecosystem Level        Functions in a Lichen-Oak Woodland
* BIO,DEB
* 11/15/1989,10/31/1993
* Thomas Nash, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 10/31/1993
* USD 242,379.00

The hypothesis that canopy lichens, acting as keystone species, can control the
conservation and retention of nutrients in forest ecosystems and affect nutrient
cycling and primary production will be tested. In blue oak woodlands, a
community that occupies 6.5% of California, biomass of the lichen, Ramalina
menziesii, can exceed 700 kg/ha in the canopy. This proposed work seeks to
demonstrate the importance of this non-nitrogen- fixing canopy epiphyte in net
primary production and nutrient cycling throughout this oak woodland ecosystem.
A replicated factorial experiment will be imposed by which canopy lichen and
lichen litterfall are manipulated at two sites, representing different degrees
of maritime influence in Monterey County, California. Manipulations of the
canopy lichen biomass will test the hypothesis that Ramalina enhances nutrient
inputs from the atmosphere. For instance, the catch of atmospheric aerosols, fog
water and gases by Ramalina may enhance the input of nutrients to the entire
woodland. Manipulations of the amount of Ramalina that is deposited as
litterfall will test the hypothesis that the decomposition of this lichen
controls the decomposition and cycling of nutrients to the oak trees. The growth
efficiency and nutrient-use efficiency of the oak trees will also be examined in
the experimental plots. The investigators will also develop a simple technique
for extrapolating results to oak woodlands of differing density and to
considerations at scales ranging to regional evaluations. The results will be
significant to understanding the role of particular species in the functional
properties of entire ecosystems, and to the understanding of canopy processes to
other aspects of ecosystem function in oak woodlands. In addition, this study
may be viewed as a case study for any lichen dominated canopy and will have
implications for the function of epiphytes in general in ecosystems. The
research project team is excellent. Institutional accommodations are quite good,
and accommodations for the work at the Hastings Natural History Reservation will
be adequate.