* 8907686
* Collaborative Research:  Hybrid Plants and Zones as 'Sinks' for Herbivores:  A Model System for Intergrating Ecology,   Genetics and Physiology of a Plant Herbivore Interaction
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/1989,12/31/1991
* Ken Paige, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* James R. Gosz
* 12/31/1991
* USD 41,610.00

Plant hybrid zones are common and often represent natural experiments in which
the genetically based defenses of plants have been mixed and are ideal for
examining the ecological and evolutionary interactions of plants and herbivores
as well as the mechanisms of resistance. This study will examine how the gall
aphid, Pemphigus betae, selects hosts and responds to narrowleaf cottonwood,
Populus angustifolia, and natural hybrids with Fremont cottonwood, P. fremontii.
Two interrelated sets of questions will be asked. The first concerning the
ecology, evolution and biogeography of this interaction will address a. over
many replicate river drainage systems are hybrid plants and zones "sinks" for
herbivores such that a few susceptible plants support most of the pest
population?, b. if a clone (i.e. a tree and its asexually derived progeny) is
susceptible to aphids, will it also be susceptible to other kinds of herbivores
such as elk and woodboring beetles ?, and, c. does the presence of extremely
susceptible clones prevent herbivores from successfully attacking resistant
clones or do susceptible plants simply serve as reservoirs from which they
attack the rest of the population? The second question, to address the
mechanisms of resistance and susceptibility asks , a. having sucessfully
developed molecular genetic techniques (RFLPs) for this system, can the genes
for resistance and/or susceptibility be marked and trees screened for resistance
in the pure and hybrid zones, b. since individual clones can be genetic mosaics
(i.e., different parts of the same tree are genetically different) what are the
patterns of mosaicism between hybrid and pure host clones and how are they
related to stressful growing conditions?, c. because individual clones can also
be developmental mosaics of resistance (i.e., different branches of the same
tree or trunks of the same clone vary in resistance as a function of age), how
do hybrids and pure hosts vary in their developmental resistance? and, d.
because physiological sink-source relationships affect the resistance traits of
individual clones, are they also important in affecting patterns of
developmental resistance within individual clones.