* 8907936
* Serial Memory
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/1989,07/31/1992
* John Wixted, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Fred Stollnitz
* 07/31/1992
* USD 90,699.00

Dr. Wixted's research project is designed to enhance our understanding of
memory in animals and to advance the comparative analysis of animal and human
memory. Specifically, this project will investigate how well pigeons can
remember a series of visual images presented in rapid succession. This procedure
is analogous to one often used in human-memory studies in which people are asked
to remember a list of words. Of primary concern is whether animals, like humans,
remember items at the beginning or end of a series better than they remember
middle items. In studies with human subjects, these "primacy" and "recency"
effects are so commonly observed that they may be regarded as lawful properties
of human short-term memory. In studies with animals, however, some researchers
have obtained a robust primacy effect while others have reported its conspicuous
absence. One explanation of these inconsistent findings appeals to the concept
of "interference." According to this view, animals become confused when given
many lists to remember in a single session because some of the items appear over
and over again on different lists. Indeed, the only study to observe a primacy
effect in birds arranged the experiment in such a way that items were never
repeated within a session. An alternative explanation for the inconsistent
findings appeals to differences between studies in temporal variables, such as
delay of reward. Dr. Wixted will independently vary interference and delay of
reward in an effort to clarify the conditions under which a primacy effect may
be observed in animals. In addition to the immediate goal of helping to resolve
apparently conflicting empirical findings, the results of Dr. Wixted's
investigation may eventually facilitate the study of short-term memory disorders
in humans by establishing the groundwork for relevant animal models.