* 8907702
* ROW:  Renormalization-Group Theory of Elasticity of         Disordered Solids
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1989,10/31/1990
* Behnaz Payandeh, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 10/31/1990
* USD 12,000.00

The purpose of this proposal for a Research Planning Grant of the ROW program is
to determine the feasibility of a new theoretical approach to study the elastic
properties of disordered solids. In this project preliminary studies will be
performed to determine whether it is feasible to apply a new analytic method
based on Wilson`s renormalization-group theory of phase transitions ?Nobel Prize
in Physics 1982! to some challenging unsolved problems of elasticity of
disordered solids, which numerical analysis and computer simulations have been
unable to solve. In these preliminary studies, the focus of attention will be on
two microscopic models of elasticity which are currently studied by many
researchers, the central-force model and the bond-bending model. There are two
fundamental unanswered questions concerning the behavior to disordered elastic
solids which will be addressed in this preliminary study: 1) What are the
elastic properties of the central-force model (1) and the bond-bending model (2)
in the neighborhood of the elasticity threshold pc? 2) Are the critical elastic
properties of the central-force model universal, i.e., independent of the nature
of the lattice? It is proposed to examine whether it is feasible to answer the
above questions 1) and 2) by using a new analytic renormalization-group approach
partly based on ideas and methods they developed in their studies of the pure
percolation model and of the conductivity of disordered solids.