* 8907318
* Acquisition of a High-Resolution Differential Scanning      Calorimeter
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/1989,05/31/1991
* Ching Hsi Huang, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Kathie L. Olsen
* 05/31/1991
* USD 35,700.00

Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) is a thermodynamic technique and as such
is powerful, yet noninvasive, in studying either the thermotropic phase behavior
of lipids or the unfolding or folding of globular proteins upon heating or
cooling. In this application, funds to purchase a high-resolution differential
scanning calorimeter are requested. This instrument must have the capability of
performing in ascending and descending thermal scans over the temperature range
of -40 to 100oC. The proposed research projects can be grouped into two
categories. In the first, the heating and cooling thermograms of various binary
lipid mixtures will be determined. The phase diagrams of these mixtures will
then be constructed based on these thermograms, and the lipid-lipid interactions
in the bilayer phase will be analyzed quantitatively. The lipid mixtures to be
investigated include unsatured phosphatidylethanolamine (PE) and
phosphatidylcholine (PC) and their headgroup derivatives with saturated mixed-
chain PC, various PC with glycospingolipids, and glycosphingolipids/cholesterol
mixtures. The second category concerns calorimetric studies involving proteins.
The stability of ubiquitins obtained from various selective mutants will be
investigated. The interactions of cytochrome b5 with various phospholipids will
also be studied. Finally, the rhodopsin unfolding in a variety of phospholipid
bilayers will be studied.