* 8907752
* Collaborative Research:  Rates of Long-term Climate and     Vegetation Change in Eastern North America and Europe
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1989,01/31/1991
* George Jacobson, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* James R. Gosz
* 01/31/1991
* USD 40,000.00

Analyses of rates of change in fossil-pollen data from eastern North America
reveal that many sites experienced major changes 10,000-14,000 years ago during
the last deglaciation and again during the last 1000 years. The major objective
of the proposed research is to determine the timing, magnitude, and geographic
patterns of the changes in climate and vegetation during the past 3000 years in
eastern North America and during the past 14,000 years in Sweden. High-frequency
pollen data from an array of sites across eastern North America will be used to
analyze in detail the apparently rapid changes occurring during the past
millennium and to sort out the climatic and post- Columbian anthropogenic
causes. Data from 40 late-glacial sites in southern Sweden will be used to
compare the temporal structure of the Scandinavian late-glacial with that of
North America. Rates of vegetation change attributable to agriculture and other
human activities (as opposed to climatic influences) will be evaluated by
contrasting Swedish sites from areas having intensive human impact iwth those
from marginal areas receiving little impact. This research will establish the
degree to which rapid vegetation changes in eastern North America and Europe are
synchronous and will thus identify probable times of major rapid changes in
atmospheric circulation. The results will also reveal the degree to which recent
vegetation is transitory and to which presettlement vegetation in North America
justifiably serves as a steady-state baseline for modern studies.