* 8907530
* Neurocontrol and Intelligent Diagnostics for Complex        Dynamical Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/01/1989,10/31/1991
* Rahmatallah Shoureshi, Purdue Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Elbert L. Marsh
* 10/31/1991
* USD 78,070.00

This project addresses the utilization of neural network concepts in the design
of control systems for complex dynamical systems. Neural networks can mimic
certain human brain characteristics, a potentially powerful feature for
autonomous control systems. These characteristics include : (1) the ability to
learn and make decisions; (2) the ability to perform object and signature
recognition under uncertain conditions and with incomplete information based on
associative memory and generalization ; and (3) a high processing speed due to
inherent parallelism and distributed computation. This research's goal is to
study the feasibility of using neural networks as a basis for the development of
true intelligent control and diagnostic systems with a high degree of robustness
and the capability of real time adaptivity, learning, and decision making. The
research focuses on system identification and neural space representation, the
objective being to develop a viable network concept which can learn the dynamic
behavior of a physical system, and derive a neural space representation of the
system. The concept , when completed, will be implemented initially analytically
on a set of simple finite order systems, i.e., a second order spring mass damper
system. This will be followed by consideration of a robot arm to study the
feasibility of applying the neural space concept to time varying systems, and
then application to a flexible beam to evaluate the potential of neural networks
in identification of flexible structures. Finally, it is proposed to study
identification of systems with nonlinear components. The intent is to follow up
this project with efforts oriented to the development of robust and adaptive
neurocontrollers, and neural based failure detection and identification schemes.