* 8907298
* REU: Collaborative Research:  Ecology of Migratory PasserineBirds on Breeding and Wintering Areas - Demographic and     Experimental Studies
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/1989,12/31/1992
* Thomas Sherry, Tulane University
* Continuing Grant
* Lindsay Fox
* 12/31/1992
* USD 183,413.00

This study is a continuation and expansion of long-term studies of population
dynamics and habitat selection by two migratory passerine bird species on their
breeding grounds, in forested parts of central New Hampshire and on wintering
sites in Jamaica. It combines experimental, observational, and demographic
approaches to test the hypothesis that populations of these species are limited
both in summer and winter. Three steps will be used in both areas: (1) a test
whether habitat selection is density dependent and/or despotic (i.e., younger
individuals or females are constrained by socially dominant older males), as
reflected in distribution patterns along habitat gradients, and by testing for
dominance behavior directly; (2) a test for consequences of dominance behavior
on age- and sex-specific reproduction and/or survival by habitat, and (3) a
determination of the importance of temporally and spatially variable food
supplies (especially a defoliating caterpillar in breeding areas) and predators
as possible ecological causes of demographic patterns observed. Finally, the
relative importance of temporally variable ecological conditions on age-
structure and abundances of these populations will be assessed. Such information
is urgently needed by conservationists, due to rapid habitat loss for these
migratory species on both breeding and wintering areas.