* 8907218
* Studies in Games and Incentives
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/1989,03/31/1992
* Joel Sobel, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Lynn A. Pollnow
* 03/31/1992
* USD 64,395.00

This ambitious project extends game theory and applies game theory to the study
of durable goods monopoly and income tax auditing. More specifically, the
project examines game theoretic equilibria that are rationalizable strategies in
a game derived from the original game by adding a strategy for a player which
allows that player to get the equilibrium value of the original game for sure.
Earlier work has shown that these equilibria can be used to unify different work
on signalling games. The goal of this project is to extend the results to more
general games. A model of dynamic monopoly with entry of new consumers is
characterized. This model seems to have stationary equilibria in which the
seller loses the ability to price discriminate as the time between offers
shrinks, and nonstationary equilibria in which the seller maintains some
monopoly power. The project develops a three-level model of tax setting and
enforcement. The government sets tax rates, penalties for noncompliance, and a
budget for the auditor. The auditor determines which reports to audit. Taxpayers
determine how much income to report. The project characterizes the linear tax
and auditing budget that maximizes a social welfare function. The resulting
characterization is used to find conditions under which it is optimal for the
auditor to be under budgeted. This exciting project makes important
contributions to game theory, industrial organization and public finance. The
research in game theory develops and generalizes a new way of examining the
robustness of the results obtained from games by adding strategies with fixed
outcomes to the original game. The work in industrial organization has already
obtained surprising evidence of the persistence of price discrimination that has
implications for government policy. The extensions should improve our
understanding of the ability of durable good monopolists to price discriminate
via periodic sales. The third part finds evidence that the middle-income
taxpayers are over-audited by the IRS. The hierarchical model of income tax
auditing used for this part of the project should provide other novel insights
in public finance.