* 8907946
* Implicit Learning in Special Populations
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1989,02/28/1993
* Arthur Reber, CUNY Brooklyn College
* Continuing Grant
* Jasmine Young
* 02/28/1993
* USD 247,727.00

This research is designed to improve our understanding of the implicit,
unconscious aspects of human thought. It is well known that people learn things
without being aware of having learned them. The most compelling examples of this
are the natural language we each learned as a child and the complex social-
cultural mores of our society. In recent years cognitive psychologists have come
to understand a good deal about this process and how it differs from the
conscious, explicit learning that takes place in the full light of awareness.
The research in this project is designed to explore several novel extensions of
this work, particularly how implicit learning emerges in special populations and
how it differs from conscious learning. Specifically, the research will examine
the degree to which these unconscious processes continue to operate in persons
with mild depression and/or anxiety, conditions which are known to interfere
with conscious learning processes. The project will also explore the manner in
which young children display the capacity for implicit learning, with the
expectation that they will be fully capable of learning about highly complex
systems so long as they are not consciously trying to learn. An additional
important question the research will examine is whether or not these implicit
processes change with age as conscious learning is known to. To this end the
research will examine children from ages four through twelve. Finally, the
project will explore the relationships between implicit learning, conscious
learning, and intelligence, as measured by standard IQ tests. The research has
implications for a number of important issues in cognitive psychology,
particularly the relationship between implicit learning and various complex
human skills which people routinely display but which lie largely outside of
awareness. Key examples are the development of intuitive judgment, the
acquisition of sophisticated skills such as those displayed in medical
diagnosis, the development of high level skills in complex games like chess, and
the capacity to adjust to cultural and organizational settings.