* 8907681
* Atmospheric Trace Gas Flux Meter Using Tunable Diode Lasers
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/1989,02/29/1992
* Mark Zahniser, Aerodyne Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 02/29/1992
* USD 224,409.00

The chemical composition of the troposphere is determined by the sources and
sinks of biogenic and anthropogenic trace gases and the intervening
photochemical transformations and mass transport processes linking them. The
recent recognition that a thorough understanding of these processes in the
natural atmosphere is necessary before the effects of man-made perturbations may
be assessed has prompted a concerted effort to study the natural troposphere.
The insight gained from this research will allow more accurate predictions of
the impact of man's activities on the environment. The objective of this Phase
II SBIR research project is the development of instrumentation to measure fluxes
of atmospheric trace gases to or from the earth's surface. The method to be
investigated is based on the well established eddy correlation technique and
would use a tunable diode laser light source combined with a multiple pass
absorption cell to detect trace species at sub-part-per-billion levels. The
instrument would be designed specifically to be interfaced with a sonic
anemometer to provide fast time response and minimal flowfield interference as
required for the eddy correlation method. In the Phase II study, final design,
development, testing, and field demonstration of the instrument will be
conducted. The final instrument will be applicable to flux measurements of trace
gases including sulfur dioxide, nitric oxide, nitrogen dioxide, nitric acid,
ozone, and hydrogen peroxide.