* 8907558
* Victims of Peer Aggression
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1989,08/31/1993
* David Perry, Florida Atlantic University
* Continuing Grant
* Jean B. Intermaggio
* 08/31/1993
* USD 224,908.00

The scientific investigation of aggressive behavior among children has focused
almost exclusively on the characteristics and backgrounds of children who enact
the aggression. In contrast, children who serve as victims of peer aggression
have rarely been studied. Recent data indicate that a small minority of
elementary school children (about 10%) serve consistently as targets of peer
attacks. These frequently victimized children possess certain characteristics,
including anxiety,submissiveness, a reluctance to fight back, and a tendency to
display obvious signs of pain and distress. This research is designed to expand
our knowledge of the causes and consequences of being victimized by aggressive
peers. A longitudinal study (beginning when children are in third grade) will
involve repeatedly measuring children on victimization and variables that may be
antecedent or consequent to victimization (e.g., style of initiating
interactions with peers, style of handling disputes with peers, loneliness,
depression, self-- esteem). Data will come from teacher-, peer-, and self-
reports. Analyses will attempt to identify the characteristics that precede and
follow a child being singled out for abuse. Other studies will involve directly
observing and comparing victimized and nonvictimized children's interactions
with peers on the playground and in the classroom. These studies are also
designed to inform us about the behavioral qualities of victimized children that
contribute to their victimization. Results should (a) provide information about
the behavioral qualities of victimized children that might be targeted in
intervention programs and (b) further our scientific understanding of aggressive
processes by informing us about the qualities of victims that aggressive
children finding provoking and reinforcing.