* 8907565
* REU: Fine Root and Soil Organic Matter Turnover in C, N &amp; P Cycling of Populus Plantations
* BIO,DEB
* 11/01/1989,10/31/1995
* Eldor Paul, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 10/31/1995
* USD 328,000.00

Information on litter turnover (leaf and fine root), plant- soil interactions,
nutrient cycling and soil organic matter dynamics is required to understand
ecosystems managed for high biomass output such as agro-forest systems. In the
first hypothesis for this project the processes regulating nutrient cycling and
soil organic matter formation are addressed. This hypothesis will be tested by
determining the contribution of leaf and fine root litters to microbial growth,
nutrient cycling and soil organic matter accumulation. A new and innovative
method of introducing tracers into young Populus trees makes it possible to
follow the fate of C, N, and P from plant residues through the soil organisms
into the active fraction of organic matter, and finally into the inorganic
nutrient pool. Isotope distribution and dilution measurements can distinguish
the allocation of C, N, and P into plant, litter (roots and leaves), and soil
pools. The incubation of previously labelled plant and soil organic residues
together with non-labelled substrates will allow us to test our second
hypothesis. This addresses the controls in N and P mineralization. Can
microorganisms specifically attack substrates to obtain N or P deficient but C
rich conditions? Answering this question is crucial in determining the capacity
of soil to provide nutrients for plant uptake via mineralization. Information
from this project will be helpful in designing new management practices that
promote self-sustaining nutrient cycles in high yield ecosystems. Populus
plantations will be used as a model high yield ecosystem. The research team
assembled for this work is excellent and well experienced. Facilities for the
research are excellent. High rates of production of interesting and useful
information may be expected.