* 8907153
* Solution Properties and Membrane Formation of New Block     Copolymers
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1989,08/31/1992
* Claude Cohen, Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* MILTON J LINEVSKY
* 08/31/1992
* USD 190,370.00

This project involves the study of the physical properties of new diblock and
triblock copolymers in dilute and semi-dilute solutions and their processing
into polymeric membranes. Emphasis will be on blocks of high incompatibility.
Physical properties relevant to the process of membrane formation will be
focussed on: 1) Determination of the interaction parameters between the segments
of different blocks in solution; 2) Physical behavior (conformation and
swelling) of diblock and triblock copolymers in "selective" solvents; 3)
Swelling and mechanical properties of block copolymer gels. Membranes will be
obtained by quenching copolymer solution films; their structure and properties
will be examined as a function of initial polymer concentration, relative size
of the blocks, and quench temperature. Low angle total intensity light
scattering, viscometry, dynamic light scattering, mechanical measurements, and
electron microscopy will be used to characterize the membranes. This project is
being funded simultaneously with a project at the University of Southern
California (USC) where a group directed by Professor Thieo E. Hogen-Esch will
collaborate with the group at Cornell directed by Professor Cohen. The group at
USC will perform the synthesis of new AB and ABA block copolymers to be used in
the physicochemical and mechanical studies on solution and gel properties of the
copolymers. The overall goal of this group project is to identify block
copolymers and processing conditions with the potential for use in the
manufacturing of a new generation of high performance membranes for chemical
processing, biotechnology, biomedical applications, and pollution control
technology.