* 8907634
* U.S.-Korea Cooperative Research: A Combined Analytical      Experimental Investigation into Material Formability
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1990,10/31/1993
* Daeyong Lee, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 10/31/1993
* USD 15,800.00

This proposal requests funds to permit Dr. Daeyong Lee, Department of Mechanical
Engineering, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute (RPI), to pursue with Dr. Dong
Nyung Lee, Department of Metallurgical Engineering, Seoul National University
(SNU), for a period of 24 months, a program of cooperative research on sheet
material formability. The research will add an international cooperative
dimension to research supported at RPI under NSF Grant No. DMC-8415309. The
principal objective of that work was to develop a computer-aided engineering
(CAE) software system which can be used by engineers at the design stage to
determine whether or not a particular thermoplastic part can be manufactured
successfully by a solid phase forming method. In the cooperative project, the
analytical results obtained at RPI and their theoretical bases will be examined
carefully at SNU in regard to validity, accuracy, and usefulness. The analytical
formulation will be modified at RPI if experimental results obtained at SNU
warrant it. This project will combine the talents of two complementary research
teams. The one, at RPI, has developed and is refining a CAD/CAE system for
predicting the forming limits in sheet materials. The other, at SNU, has the
capability for analyzing and testing the validity of the CAD/CAE system in
predicting formability limits. The product of their cooperative effort, an
accurate, valid system, will be of great value to engineers in the U.S. and
Korea. The collaborators are highly respected workers in the field of this
research. This project is relevant to the objectives of the U.S.-Korea
Cooperative Science Program which seeks to increase the level of cooperation
between U.S. and Korean scientists and engineers through the exchange of
scientific information, ideas, skills, and techniques and through collaboration
on problems of mutual benefit.