* 8907738
* Characterization of Metabolism and Excretion Patterns of    Pulpmill Effluent Components by Fish
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/1989,02/28/1991
* Richard Strange, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Russell Sveda
* 02/28/1991
* USD 36,600.00

Long and Medium Term Research: Characterization of Metabolism and Excretion
Patterns of Pulpmill Effluent Components by Fish. This award recommendation is
made under the Program for Long and Medium-Term Research at Foreign Centers of
Excellence. The program is designed to enable young U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct long-term research abroad at research institutions of
proven excellence. Awards provide opportunities for the conduct of joint
research and the utilization of unique or complementary facilities, expertise
and experimental conditions in foreign countries. The award will support a 12
month research visit by Dr. Marsha Black, University of Tennessee, with Dr. Aimo
Oikari of the University of Joensuu, Finland. The researchers will use a tiered
approach using both laboratory and field exposures to study the elimination of
two pulpmill effluent components (dehydroabietic acid and 3,4,5-
trichloroguiacol) and benzo?a!pyrene by fish via the gills, skin, kidney, and
hepatobiliary system. Compound excretion patterns and rates of metabolite
formation by trout will be quantified using an experimental chamber. Excretion
of the model compounds will be characterized with and without preexposure to
dilute pulpmill effluent or >-napthoflavone, a potent inducer of the
monooxygenase enzyme system. Following these laboratory experiments under
controlled conditions, whitefish will be caged in a lake receiving pulpmill
effluents at locations 3-15 km from the effluent discharge area. Fish removed at
specified intervals over the 6 month exposure period will be analyzed for
metabolizing enzyme activities and metabolites of dehydroabietic acid and
3,4,5-trichloroguiacol. Results from laboratory and field studies will be used
to evaluate the role of xenobiotic excretion in the adaptation of fish to
chronic low-level pollution. The award recommendation provides funds to cover,
as appropriate, international travel, local travel abroad, stipend, dependents'
allowance, if applicable, and a flat administrative allowance of $250.00 for the
U.S. home institution.