* 8907107
* US-France Cooperative Research:  Block Copolymer Compati-   bilizers for Immiscible Homopolymer Blends
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1990,03/31/1994
* Jeffrey Koberstein, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 03/31/1994
* USD 9,668.00

This award will support collaborative research between Dr. Jeffrey Koberstein,
Institute of Materials Science, University of Connecticut and Dr. Yves Gallot,
Institute Charles Sadron, Strasbourg, France. The objective of the project is to
investigate the interfacial activity of block copolymers added to immiscible
polymer blends. The modification of polymer-polymer interfaces is a problem of
great current industrial and academic interest. This interest is due in large
part to the recent recognition of the importance of polymer interphase behavior
to a broad spectrum of technologies including rubber toughening, dispersion
stability, polymer blends, adhesion, and multiplier films. Many of these
technologies employ block copolymers to accomplish this modification. At
present, however, there is little basis for the design or optimization of
interfacial agents for specific applications. The objective of the proposed
research is to provide such a basis by carrying out a systematic study of the
effects of block copolymer composition, content, and architecture on their
efficacy as interfacial agents for immiscible homopolymer blends. The success of
this proposition is contingent upon the ability to synthesize well characterized
block copolymers, to quantita- tively ascertain their interfacial activity, and
to compare these results with thermodynamic theories of interfacial properties.
The project will benefit from the complementary expertise of the US and French
groups. The French team has extensive experience in the anionic synthesis of
well- characterized block copolymers, as well as in their structure- property
relationships. The U.S. team brings expertise in the structural characterization
of block copolymers by scattering techniques, and in the measurement of polymer-
polymer interfacial tension. The latter technique has already proven successful
for the study of interfacial activity of block copolymers. When coupled with the
specimens prepared by the French team, these experiments will provide a basis of
fundamental knowledge pertaining to interfacial activity of block copolymers and
its relationship to molecular architec- ture.