* 8907081
* US-France Cooperative Research:  Probabilistic and Dynamic  Combinatorial Optimization Problems
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1990,11/30/1992
* Amedeo Odoni, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 11/30/1992
* USD 11,300.00

This award will support collaboratiave research between Dr. Amedeo Odoni,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Dr. Patrick Jaillet, Center for
Applied Mathematics, Ecole Nationale des Ponts et Chaussees, Noisy-le-Grand,
France. The topics of the proposed research are in the emerging field of
jprobabilistic combinatorial optimization problems (PCOP's and in the new field
of dynamic routing problems with queuing effects. The investigators, who have a
history of successful collaboration, will focus on two areas. The first
component consists of acontinuation of previous joint efforts in the following
three areas: 1) worst-case analysis of heuristics for PCOP's 2) multi-server and
multi-facility PCOP's and 3) routing problems with general distributions. The
second component of the research will explore new directions and will
demonstrate how the powerful concepts that have been developed to date regarding
PCOP's can be used in such contexts as the optimization of queuing systems and
the design of dynamic routing strategies. This type of connection has never been
explored previously. The project will benefit from the complementary expertise
of the two investigators. Their past efforts have already resulted in pioneering
work on probabilistic combinatorial optimization problems which have generated
international interest in this field. Results of the proposed project will have
many applications in areas of materials handling and product distribution.