* 8907673
* Systematics and Evolutionary Tempo and Mode in African      Bovidae:  Tribes Alcelaphini, Hippotragini, Reduncini
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1989,07/31/1993
* Elisabeth Vrba, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 07/31/1993
* USD 228,156.00

The African antelopes promise the most comprehensive evolutionary studies in
large mammals. Antelopes include more living and extinct species than does any
other large mammal group known over the past 20 million years. Their fossil
record is exceptional not only in terms of species-richness, but also in the
wealth of dating estimates and paleoenvironmental data associated with it. Vrba
and DeSalle are analyzing the phylogenetic relationship trees of three major
antelope groups with abundant living and fossil representatives, by studying DNA
molecules of living species, and skull characters of living and extinct species.
DNA changes between pairs of species will be compared with absolute dates for
the same lineages in the fossil record. This will allow 1) estimates of rates of
molecular change in lineages and 2) estimates of absolute dates of the origins
of new species by lineage-branching; and 3) comparison of nature of these
evolutionary events with the nature of coincident paleoenvironmental changes.
The powerful compound data set will test various, hypotheses of how evolution
occurs. One such hypothesis whether there is synchronization across phylogenies
of speciations (predicted if wide-spread climatic changes provide the common
driving force that initiates evolutionary changes in many lineages) versus
random distribution against time. The Family of humans, Hominidae, evolved over
the same time period and African areas. In fact, by far the most abundant large
mammal fossils found together with early hominid remains are the very antelope
groups under study. Thus, the nature and timing of evolutionary responses in
hominids will be compared with those of the co-evolving large mammal lineages. A
comprehension of the rich physical and biological context of human evolution is
necessary for understanding human origins.