* 8907666
* Amber:  Programming Support for Networks of Multiprocessors
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/1989,09/30/1993
* Henry Levy, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 09/30/1993
* USD 340,985.00

This research concerns the design and implementation of a programming system for
building highly parallel applications on networks of multiprocessors.
Multiprocessor based shared memory multiprocessors are becoming widely available
and promise to provide cost effective high performance computing. Multiprocessor
workstations will surely be widely available within the next year: one expects
them to be even more cost effective than their mainframe counterparts for many
applications, just as current uniprocessor workstations often are more cost
effective than uniprocessor mainframes. Simply stated, the goal of this research
is to provide a facility for programming a network of multiprocessors as if it
were a large, integrated, shared memory computer. This effort requires study of
several aspects of operating system structure. First, there is a search for
programming primitives that provide the right level of abstraction for
expressing parallel algorithms. The important tradeoff, in a system integrating
parallelism and distribution, is providing uniformity of access across the
network without sacrificing local performance. Second, one must explore
alternatives in operating system organization for increasing performance on a
single multiprocessor node. The objective here is to provide the lowest overhead
mechanisms for parallel execution so that programmers can express and utilize
medium grained parallelism. Third, one must develop tools that aid the
programmer in assessing the performance of his or her application, and in
properly optimizing it for an environment of networked multiprocessors. This
project is a natural outgrowth of a program of research in distributed and
parallel computing systems in which we have been involved for the past 8 years.
This program of research has been supported by NSF under a variety of awards; it
also has received significant support from industrial sources, particularly
Digital Equipment Corporation, whose Firefly prototype multiprocessor
workstations will be our experimental vehicle. (The DECSystems Research Center
has supplied Fireflys to Washington, Stanford, MIT, Princeton, Toronto, and
Cambridge, making these universities uniquely well equipped to conduct
experimental research on medium scale multiprocessing.) The results that we have
already obtained in our preliminary work on support for parallel computing are
in active use by many university sites and by companies such as Sequent,
Digital, Microsoft, and Tera.