* 8907582
* Mathematical Sciences: Complex Manifold Theory and Kaehler  Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1989,12/31/1992
* Yum-Tong Siu, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 12/31/1992
* USD 267,588.00

8907582 Siu The object of this project is to consider several problems in
complex differential geometry. They include analysis of functions and mappings
defined on domains in the space of several complex variables as well as studies
of the geometry of the domains and their boundaries. Work to be done will
include an effort to determine whether the limit of a family of compact complex
manifolds which are all biholomorphic images of the same irreducible Hermitian
symmetric manifold is again a manifold of this type. New techniques for
attacking this problem have been introduced recently. In addition, a complete
proof for the case of complex projective space has been givng. This work - the
global nondeformability of irreducible Hermitan syymetric manifolds of compact
type is a weakened version of one of the unresolved parts of the theory of
strong rigidity. The purpose of the theory is to show that certain compact
complex manifolds can be characterized either by topological or curvature
conditons. A second line of investigation concerns continuing research on the
higher dimensional Nevanlinna theory of value distribution of holomorphic
functions. The equidimensional case has been highly developed and is reasonably
well understood. In this work, the nonequidimensional will be considered. Past
methods do not work in this setting and newer methods of holomorphic connections
will probably have to be used instead. Results in this area have direct
connections with number theory. Additional work will be done on the construction
of bounded holomorphic functions. In one sense, the classical uniformization
theorem answers any such question in one dimension since any simply connected
Riemann surface is either equivalent to the sphere, the plane or a disc. The
same classification question concerning the universal covering space for compact
negatively curved Kahler manifolds has never been resolved. Equivalently, one
asks whether the covering space admits a large number of bounded holomorphic
functions. Except for a few special cases, no one has produced any such
functions (other than constants). The recent results of Kohn-Fefferman on Holder
estimates of projections into spaces of holomorphic functions holds out the
possibility that their method may be transplanted to manifolds and lead to a
technique for construction of the desired functions. If that becomes a reality,
the likelihood of an attack on the Corona problem in higher dimensions would
finally be realized.