* 8908869
* ROW:  Optimal Detection and Estimation with                 Communication Constraints
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/1989,12/31/1991
* Amy Reibman, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Aubrey M. Bush
* 12/31/1991
* USD 79,965.00

This is a basic research program in detection and estimation for multiple
sensors with communication constraints. Communication constraints arise
naturally whenever sensors are located at physically separated sites, or when
data must be stored before final processing. The research focuses on optimal
distributed detection when statistics are uncertain and possibly time-varying,
and on optimal quantizer design for parameter estimation. The uncertain
statistics will be modeled parametrically, either in the received signal, the
noise, or in unknown channel transition probabilities. The optimal detection
system will be adaptive, with adaptation occurring locally as well as globally.
The project will address the ability of the system to adapt to unknown
parameters and to converge asymptotically to the optimal design. Optimal
quantizer design for nonlinear parameter estimation will be examined. Quantizer
design in the context of distributed detection and estimation is fundamental
when communication links have limited capacity. Optimal quantizer design ensures
that only the most essential information for parameter estimation is shared. The
resulting optimal quantizer will differ from the Lloyd-Max quantizer because the
goal here is parameter estimation. The project will address parameter estimation
with communication constraints particularly for the multiterminal situation
where no one sensor can make a useful individual estimate of the unknown
parameter.