* 8908646
* An Empirical Study of Franchise Contracts as Signalling     Devices
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1989,01/31/1991
* Francine Lafontaine, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Lynn A. Pollnow
* 01/31/1991
* USD 12,000.00

This ROW planning grant develops a plan for the first empirical analysis of
signalling models in franchising. Franchise contracts generally involve the
payment, by the franchisee to the franchiser, of a constant proportion of the
former's sales or profits in royalties, as well as a lump-sum franchise fee, in
exchange for the franchiser's assistance and the right to use his tradename. One
implication of signalling models is that the more capable franchisers can signal
their potential profitability to franchisees by offering contracts that make a
large proportion of revenues dependent on the performance of each individual
outlet. In other word, the contract a "good" franchiser should offer would
involve a high royalty rate and a low franchise fee to the point where a "bad"
type would be unwilling to offer the same contract. A franchiser can also make
revenues more dependent on the performance of individual outlets by operating
some units directly. Another implication of signalling models is that the longer
a firm has been in business, the greater the probability of being a "good" type;
hence as time goes by, it becomes less important for firms to signal their type
through the contract that they offer. This project is worthwhile because the
results of the research will provide data and new insights on franchising. This
planning grant permits the investigator to develop and start testing a
signalling theory using survey data on an average of 1000 franchisers per year
from 1980 to 1988 inclusively. These surveys provide information on franchisers'
total number of outlets, broken down between those that are company-owned and
those that are franchised, their sector of operations, the royalty rates and
franchise fees they ask for, the number of years since they began their
operations and the number of years since they began franchising.