* 8908273
* Intelligent Assistance for Program Recognition, Design,     Optimization, & Debugging
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/1989,03/31/1992
* Richard Waters, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* John D. Gannon
* 03/31/1992
* USD 205,953.00

Research will be undertaken in four related areas: program recognition, program
design, program optimization, and program debugging. Our work in each of these
investigations is based on two theoretical principles: the assistant approach
(incremental automation) and the exploitation of cliches (using knowledge of
common engineering practice). Each investigation involves the construction of a
prototype system to provide intelligent assistance for a person performing the
task: A recognition assistant will help reconstruct the design of a program,
given only its source code. A design assistant will assist a programmer by
detecting errors and inconsistencies in his design choices and by automatically
making many straightforward implementation decisions. An optimization assistant
will help improve the performance of programs by identifying intermediate
results that can be reused. A debugging assistant will aid in the detection,
localization, and repair of errors in designs as well as completed programs.
These prototypes will be constructed using two shared technologies: a
programming-language-independent formal representation for programs and
programming knowledge (the Plan Calculus) and an automated reasoning system
(CAKE), which supports both general logical reasoning and special-purpose
decision procedures.