* 8908149
* Cataloging and Conservation of the Stanford-Meyer           Osteopathology Collection
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/1989,12/31/1990
* Spencer Rogers, San Diego Museum of Man
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 12/31/1990
* USD 12,900.00

The San Diego Museum of Man will complete the cataloging and conservation of
the Stanford-Meyer Osteopathology Collection of human skeletal remains. Prior
support for curation of these materials has been provided by the National
Science Foundation. The collection consists of human skeletal specimens
exhibiting disease, trauma, and morphological variation and includes nearly
3,500 specimens from more than 1,500 individuals. It was made in the early part
of this century by Arthur W. Meyer, M.D., of Stanford University and is
especially important because it predates the introduction of antibiotics.
Therefore, materials include evidence of diseases which are rare in present day
populations. An osteologist/paleopathologist and a forensic anthropologist will
assist in the cataloging and conservation of the materials. Descriptions will be
made of the remaining parts of the collection and databases selected for
collections management. Co-mingled specimens will be sorted and fragile
specimens conserved. These reference materials are extremely important because
they derive from known individuals, many with extensive medical records.
Therefore, control is excellent. The specimens can be used for both teaching and
research purposes and serve as a starting point for the analysis of older
materials. Because the skeletal system provides a fairly permanent record of the
diseases and insults to an individual, through the study of such specimens, it
is possible to examine the effects of such variables as nutrition, crowding, and
disease at different ages in an individual's life on such dependent factors as
growth, development, and morbidity. This research is important because it can
help us understand the normal processes of human growth and development as well
as the effects of specific diseases.