* 8908934
* Autonomic Control of Urinary Bladder and Large Intestine
* BIO,IOS
* 11/15/1989,04/30/1996
* William De Groat, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Walter Wilczynski
* 04/30/1996
* USD 603,901.00

Dr. De Groat uses a multidisciplinary approach to examine the pathways that are
involved in the reflex control of the urinary tract and large intestine. His
studies are grouped into three major categories: (1) the plasticity of synapses
following neural injury, (2) characterization of the neurotransmitters, and (3)
the role of neuropeptides in the regulation of urinary bladder activity. Past
research supported by the National Science Foundation has expanded our knowledge
of the neural control of excretory function and at the same time provided
information which has had and will continue to have a broad impact on several
areas of neuroscience. With funds provided by the Accomplishment-Based Renewal,
Dr. De Groat will continue to explore the mechanisms underlying the recovery of
bladder function following spinal and peripheral nerve root injury. One goal of
these studies is to find new pharmacological approaches particularly in regard
to peptidergic systems for the treatment of autonomic disorders related to
traumatic injury or disease. The work of Dr. De Groat is an excellent example of
where basic research to understand the central and peripheral mechanisms which
coordinate sympathetic, parasympathetic and somatic inputs to the excretory
organs may lead to new therapeutic approaches for bladder dysfunction.