* 8908456
* AIDS Disputes and Conflict Management
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1989,08/31/1993
* Jane Aiken, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Martin
* 08/31/1993
* USD 82,150.00

The AIDS epidemic is among the most critical health crises of national and
global importance. While medical science is still in the early stages of dealing
with the prevention and treatment of AIDS, social processes carry the
responsibility of coping constructively with this illness for the foreseeable
future. The legal system has a paramount role because, as the most pervasive
social institution shaping formal and informal norms, it affects the meaning of
social problems and structures responses to them. This study focuses on how aids
disputes emerge, are transformed, and managed. The emphasis of the project is on
how courts and state task forces act on contestations in society over AIDS, how
nascent disputes that never reach public notice are handled, and how the actions
of public institutions transmit messages to society about how the disease is to
be handled. To examine these issues, multiple data sets are used, including all
published AIDS court cases; deliberations and reports from 40 state task forces;
yearly samples of newspapers, mass periodicals, special interest newsletters,
and popular magazines; and in-depth field study of full-blown disputes in four
cities. Given the AIDS epidemic, the research is of great significance because
it has the goal of discovering just what happens when state and legal
institutions are presented with claims from actors involved in the AIDS health
care arena as victims or as organizations handling the needs of victims.
Theoretically, the study draws on work on legal pluralism to discover the role
of entrenched interests in disputing, on critical legal studies to examine
linguistic messages and their infusion into public discourse, and social
movements to identify how stigmatized parties resist dominant structures. Thus,
the research should advance understanding not only of a current health problem
but also the legitimation, social control, and change of disputes as a generic
phenomenon.