* 8908392
* Research Initiation Award:  Analytic Theory of              Asymmetric Rigid Bodies Subject to Arbitary Body-Fixed      Torques and Forces
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/1989,07/31/1993
* James Longuski, Purdue Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Elbert L. Marsh
* 07/31/1993
* USD 70,000.00

The intent of this project is to develop a general analytic theory of the
dynamical motion of axisymmetric rigid bodies subject to arbitrary body fixed
forces and moments. The problem has received some attention in the past by
classical dynamicists and more recently, in a restricted form, by Bodewadt.
Unfortunately,the general problem has not been solved and may be unsolvable by
current methods. Furthermore, the Bodewadt solution may be in error. The
research focuses on four topics including the Euler equations of motion, the
Eulerian angles, controlling the angular momentum vector, and the translational
acceleration equations. Each of these is further subdivided into sub topics. For
the first, attention is directed toward finding an analytical solution when the
transverse angular rates are not small, and toward the case of time varying body
fixed torques. The Eulerian angles analysis attempts to simplify existing
solutions, and to adjust the solutions to account for time varying body fixed
torques. The angular momentum study derives solutions for the angular momentum
based on solutions for the Eulerian angles. Lastly, the acceleration equations
study focuses on deriving expressions for velocity and position of the rigid
body. This research enhances the general knowledge base in analytical dynamics.
It has applications in the knowledge and control of spinning and thrusting
bodies such as spacecraft and rockets.