* 8908439
* RIA: Quantitative Analysis of Polish-Induced Surface Damage in GaAs by X-Ray Diffraction
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/1989,01/31/1992
* Richard Matyi, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Arthur R. Bergen
* 01/31/1992
* USD 48,777.00

The production of a highly polished, damage-free wafer surface is generally
acknowledged as a critical first step in the fabrication of semiconductor
devices. In the case of gallium arsenide (GaAs), however, little is known
concerning the microscopic aspects of the polishing process. A research program
is proposed that will determine the effect of wafer polishing (specifically the
chemical-mechanical polishing that is commonly used in GaAs substrate
fabrication) on the level of surface and subsurface damage in GaAs. The
principal tool to be employed in this work is x-ray diffraction performed under
conditions to maximize the diffracted intensity from the surface and subsurface
regions. Techniques such as diffraction under conditions of grazing incidence
reflection, inclined Bragg plane diffraction, and triple crystal diffraction
will be utilized for their sensitivity to both the wafer surface and to the
subtle defects that are expected to accompany a high quality chemical-mechanical
polish. The crystallographic structure of the surface layer, the strain in the
surface, and the density of defects with depth below the wafer surface will be
characterized as a function of polishing variables such as wafer rotation speed,
force on the sample, and the type and feed rate of the chemical polishing
solution. This work will result in a quantitative understanding of the factors
that govern the formation of defects during the chemical-mechanical polishing of
device-quality GaAs substrates.