* 8908512
* The Analysis of Optic Flow without Locally Smooth Velocity
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1989,02/28/1991
* George Andersen, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Jasmine Young
* 02/28/1991
* USD 69,000.00

Most current models of how people perceive the 3-D shape of moving objects are
capable of determining shape when only a single object is present. However, in
the real world we usually encounter scenes in which many objects are moving.
This research will develop a new model of the perception of the shape of objects
when several objects are moving in a scene. The research will study scenes in
which overlapping objects cannot be distinguished in a static view, but can be
distinguished when the observer or the objects are in motion. Three sets of
experiments will determine the limitations of human observers in perceiving
multiple moving objects. The first set of experiments will study people's
ability to determine the number of objects that are moving in a complex scene.
The second set of experiments will study how people identify the shapes of
objects moving in a scene. The third set of experiments will study how people
judge the amount of depth between objects in the scene. These results will
facilitate the three-stage development of the model. The first stage will use
results from the first set of experiments to derive mathematically the number of
independent objects that are moving in a computer-generated scene. The second
stage will use results from the second set of experiments to describe
mathematically the shape of small regions of each object. The third stage will
use results from the third set of experiments to specify a quantitative value of
the distance between objects in a scene. An understanding of how the visual
system determines the shape and depth of multiple moving objects will have
important implications for the design of computer-generated displays used to
train pilots, for the development of visual aids for the blind, and for the
development of robotics vision systems.