* 8908648
* RIA: Integrating Computer-Aided Design and Fault Tolerance  for Reconfigurable VLSI/WSI Architectures Design
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/1989,11/30/1991
* Sy-Yen Kuo, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Maguire
* 11/30/1991
* USD 60,000.00

The objective of this research is to provide an integrated computer- aided
design (CAD) environment for the synthesis and evaluation of reconfigurable VLSI
(very-large scale integrated) or WSI (wafer-scale integration) concurrent
architectures. With the rapid progress of VLSI technology, the chip sizes are to
increase substantially, perhaps up to the level of WSI. However, low
manufacturing yield has become a problem of increasing significance, especially
in WSI where it is unlikely to get a defect-free wafer. Redundancy techniques
are being utilized to overcome this difficulty. Substantial yield and
reliability improvement in VLSI/WSI parallel architectures can be achieved by a
proper integration of the architectural redundancy, fault diagnosis, and
reconfiguration techniques. Initial promising results have been obtained on
these issues and further investigation is being performed to enhance the
reconfigurability of classes of architectures, and performance of diagnosis and
reconfiguration algorithms. Moreover, CAD and analysis tools are being developed
to assist the computer architect in the synthesis and evaluation of alternative
highly parallel designs appropriate for yield and reliability enhancement. The
emphasis is on analysis and design of application specific reconfigurable
concurrent architectures and reconfiguration algorithms appropriate for WSI.