* 8908296
* Development of a Universally Accessible Electronic          Television News Database
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1989,01/31/1992
* Scarlett Graham, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 01/31/1992
* USD 50,000.00

The Television News Archive of Vanderbilt University will establish a
universally accessible electronic television news database, placing the
Television News Index and Abstracts on the Vanderbilt Library system's mainframe
computer, eventually to be exported to a universal database network. The Index
and Abstracts provide access to all videotaped national network news broadcasts
since August 5, 1968. They are the only means of access to all current
collections of videotaped national news in the Vanderbilt News Archive, the
Library of Congress, the National Archive, and other less comprehensive
collections. The Index and Abstracts also provide valuable media events data
that can and have been used independently without reference to videotapes. The
electronic database will greatly enhance access to the wealth of television data
contained in the Index and Abstracts and in videotaped news collections.
Television research has attained the status of a fully developed area of social
scientific inquiry, one essential to understanding contemporary society. The
potential for future growth and development of such inquiry is enormous. The
universally accessible electronic television news database will greatly enhance
the likelihood that the potential will be realized, guaranteeing easy access for
all scholars everywhere to data of fundamental importance to television
research.