* 8908905
* Dictionary of American Regional English
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1990,06/30/1994
* Frederic Cassidy, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Paul G. Chapin
* 06/30/1994
* USD 200,000.00

ABSTRACT The Dictionary of American Regional English, official dictionary of
the American Dialect Society, treats both regional and social variation among
speakers of American English. Based on an extensive program of contemporary
(1965-70) fieldwork in 1002 communities across the U.S., and an equally
extensive collection of historical and written sources, DARE includes words,
phrases, and pronunciations that vary from one part of the country to another or
from one social group to another. The Dictionary provides full historical
treatment, with pronunciations, variant forms, etymologies, geographical
distributions, social and usage labels, notes definitions, dated quatations, and
cross- references, as appropriate. A unique feature of DARE is the inclusion
(within the text) of maps showing regional distributions of words, phrases, or
forms. Volume I, containing introductory matter and the letters A-C, was
published in 1985 to the acclaim of scholars, reviewers, and the public as well.
Volume II (D-H) will appear in 1990. Three more volumes, including two more of
text and one containing the bibliography, contrastive regional and social maps,
and summary of all the data collected during the fieldwork, will complete the
project. Volumes will appear at approximately five-year intervals. DARE will not
only provide a full record of regional American English, but will alos furnish,
both in the Dictionary text and in the unused data, the resources to stimulate
much further linguistic research.