* 8908438
* Planning and Markets in China's Economic Reforms:  Theory   and Evidence
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/1989,10/31/1993
* Terry Sicular, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 10/31/1993
* USD 137,425.00

Since 1978 China's leaders have taken steps to expand the role of markets in
allocating resources. These steps were motivated by problems of misallocation
and inefficiency arising under planning. Despite general agreement within China
about the disadvantages of purely administrative allocation, however, views
regarding the extent to which markets should replace planning vary. According to
one school of thought, markets should play only a supplementary role. That is,
planning should still allocate and guide most important economic resources,
while markets serve to allocate minor, diverse products and to reallocate
planned products. Another school proposes to do away with planned allocation and
limit planning to indirect measures that influence markets. This second view
envisions an economic system akin to "market socialism" where the market, not
planning, guides resource allocation. The proposed research addresses questions
about plan and market raised by China's recent reform experience. First, it will
examine theoretically the operation of a mixed system of plan and market such as
that found in China. Using a general equilibrium- type approach, the theoretical
analysis will examine the conditions under which plan and market can coexist in
a complementary fashion, and factors that would cause either plan or market to
dominate. Such factors include transactions costs or economies, plan evasion,
monopolistic state commerce, and non-neoclassical behavior by enterprises.
Second, the research will analyze empirically plan and market for farm products
in China, testing hypotheses generated by the theoretical analysis. An important
component of the empirical work was to have been data collection, including a
multi-year panel survey of farm households in two or three localities in China.
Unfortunately, however, it is no longer feasible to conduct collaborative
research in China, following the crushing of the Chinese students in Beijing.
Accordingly, the empirical analysis will focus primarily on survey data
previously collected by the principal investigator in field work during 1987/88.
Although curtailed in scope, this research should still yield important
theoretical insights and policy- relevant findings for Chinese development. In
addition, it should shed light on the developmental paths of other centrally
planned economies.