* 8908328
* Leaf Structural Properties that Influence Internal Light    Regime and Photosynthetic Efficiency: Epidermal Lens Cells  and Internal Leaf Anatomy
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1989,01/31/1992
* Thomas Vogelmann, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Bruce L. Umminger
* 01/31/1992
* USD 173,000.00

Photosynthesis is the process whereby plants convert solar energy into chemical
energy. This process supports all life on this planet. An in depth knowledge of
how photosynthesis occurs in leaves is necessary for understanding solar energy
conversion by land plants. The project Leaf structural properties that influence
internal light regime and photosynthetic efficiency: Epidermal lens cells and
internal leaf anatomy will examine how leaf anatomy is related to the
photosynthetic performance of the whole leaf. Specific native plants have been
selected that have unique anatomical features. The purpose of the proposed
research is to make correlations between the unique leaf anatomical features,
the specialization of the photosynthetic apparatus within each leaf type, and
whole leaf photosynthetic performance. One important leaf anatomical character
that will be examined is the ability of the leaf epidermal cells to focus light
within the leaf interior via a lens mechanism. Current research has shown that
these cells can concentrate light 6-20 times above incident levels. Moreover,
this epidermal lens action appears to strongly affect light-harvesting by the
chloroplasts located within the leaf. Microscopy, gas exchange measurements and
a new fiber optic microprobe technique will be used to accomplish the objectives
of this project. The resulting information may be applied to problems that
relate to understanding the physiological basis for plant biodiversity,
increasing crop yield, and how plants may respond photosynthetically to global
climate change mediated by increased carbon dioxide concentrations.