* 8908119
* Process-Level Interactions in Agricultural Ecosystems
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1989,07/31/1991
* Alvin Smucker, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Crystal Blackshear
* 07/31/1991
* USD 249,999.00

The investigators propose to study the interactions of key nutrient cycling
processes in terrestrial ecosystems. The main objectives of this research are to
examine the effects of different temporal interactions on nutrient availability
in agricultural ecosystems and to examine the dynamics of these interactions
within the soil profile. Specific to the newly proposed research are 1) a focus
on water as a primary determinant of nutrient turnover; 2) a focus on soil pores
of biological origin as regulators of water movement in the soil profile; 3) a
focus on specific pathways of N loss from the system, and 4) a focus on
quantitative modeling. Hypotheses about interactions among processes at several
different scales will be tested. Soil lysimeters will be installed for tilled,
no-tilled, and never tilled agricultural plots. 15N will be used to examine
seasonal dynamics. Several replicated soil catenas sites will be used to address
questions related to spatial variation in N turnover for plants, microbial
biomass and inorganic N pools. Initially at these sites the PI's will track
wetting fronts, root turnover, and soil solution concentrations of biologically
important ions. Simulation modeling will be used to build a quantitative
predictive models of how these processes interact to regulate nutrient
availability to plants in a landscape perspective. The investigators are well
qualified to perform the proposed research and the facilities at the Kellogg
Center are more than adequate.