* 8908637
* Conference:  Myelination and Dysmyelination;                November 16-18, 1989; Arlington, Virginia
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/1989,07/31/1990
* Robert Skoff, New York Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Stacy Springer
* 07/31/1990
* USD 2,000.00

Myelin is a fatty substance found in the brain where it is closely associated
with the axons of neurons. The function of myelin is to speed up and facilitate
the conduction of the electrical current generated by neurons. Normal function
of the nervous system depends upon adequate myelination. This statement is based
upon the many human diseases associated with inadequate myelination. A
conference under the auspices of the New York Academy of Sciences has been
planned to bring together investigators studying the cellular and molecular
aspects of myelination. The major focus of the meeting will be the myelin
mutants, since they have provided new insights into the normal developmental
process of myelin formation. These mutants are mammals ranging from rodents to
canines, and some of them can be considered models for certain human
leukodystrophies. Within the last five years the genes for the major myelin
proteins have been cloned and sequenced, and the genetic basis for several of
the myelin mutants has been identified. Modern cellular technologies have helped
to identify the sequence of events leading to normal and/or abnormal
myelination. It is now possible to trace the pathway from an identified genetic
defect to its cellular expression in the nervous system. The intent of this
conference is to integrate the information obtained from molecular and cellular
studies about myelination into a coherent model, to identify the gaps in our
understanding of this process and to plot future directions of research in the
area of myelinogenesis.