* 8908534
* Inventory Production Smoothing:  Tests of Production-to-    Order Industries and Interindustry Comparisons
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1989,07/31/1990
* Patricia Mosser, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Lynn A. Pollnow
* 07/31/1990
* USD 21,256.00

This project consists of two related empirical studies of the behavior of
business inventories and their relation to economic fluctuations. The first
deals with the role of work-in-progress inventories in smoothing demand
fluctuations. The production smoothing properties of inventories in production-
to-order industries are tested using U.S. industry data and a linear quadratic
model. The project provides estimates of both inventory carrying costs, a final
good and total production costs and demand function parameters for durable good
manufacturing. The second part investigates differences in inventory management
across firms and industries, particularly testing for the presence of (S,s)
inventory policies in certain industries, such as retail trade, as opposed to
buffer stock models. The study uses a relatively untapped data source: the
quarterly small business survey from the National Federation of Independent
Business. The NFID data allows the project to test several simple inventory
models in time series and cross section and provide information on the aggregate
results used in previous work. This project is important because nearly all
empirical tests of models of inventories have focuses on inventories of finished
goods at manufacturing firms which produce goods "to stock". Production-to-stock
industries are those whose products are not individuals, i.e., they can be
produced before orders are received and then sold out of inventory. These
industries are the least interesting from a business cycle standpoint since
their demand and employment fluctuations are small. This project studies
inventories and production of firms which produce "to order". These firms
generally produce big ticket durable goods, such as machinery, metals,
automobiles and other transportation equipment, and they experience large
movements in demand and employment over the business cycle. The results of the
research will identify the key elements in allowing firms to adjust to demand
disturbances or business cycles.