* 8908642
* EconRI Structure and Function Assessed Through Site DirectedMutagenesis
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/1989,12/31/1989
* Herbert Boyer, University of California-San Francisco
* Standard Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 12/31/1989
* USD 50,000.00

The major long term objective of this research is to understand the detailed
molecular mechanisms by which proteins discriminate and interact with specific
DNA sequences. This problem will be approached through a detailed structural and
functional analysis of the restriction endonuclease, EcoRI. John Rosenberg, U.
of Pittsburgh, who has determined the structure of the EcoRI.DNA complex to 3A
resolution, will collaborate in this effort. The primary aim of this proposal is
a mutational analysis of EcoRI. The contribution of individual amino acids in
sequence discrimination and catalysis will be investigated. Hydrogen bonds
between the endonuclease and the major groove of the DNA ionic contacts with the
phosphodiester backbone are critical components of these functions. The
structural model will be used to target for mutagenesis amino acids which appear
to be involved in these interactions. Altered proteins will be generated by
cassette mutagenesis and mismatch oligonucleotide mutagenesis. Also selected
region will be saturated with mutations utilizing degenerate oligonucleotides.
Dr. Greene and co.workers developed a vector system so that mutants of this
potentially lethal enzyme will be purified and characterized in order to
determine the effects of individual amino acid substitutions on structure and on
various functional parameters (e.g. binding energy, site discrimination,
phosphodiester bond cleavage and editing). Crystallographic analysis of mutants
will be carried out by Dr. Rosenberg.