* 8908521
* The Impact of Corporate Capitial Structure on Research &amp;    Development:  Analysis of the Recent United States          Experience
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1989,01/31/1992
* Bronwyn Hall, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Lynn A. Pollnow
* 01/31/1992
* USD 21,632.00

This project is an empirical investigation into the effects of changes in
corporate capital structure on the long term investment strategies of firms,
motivated by an interest in the general question of whether publicly traded
corporations are the best medium for the financing of investment directed toward
long term growth of the economy. In the course of this project, a large panel
data set of manufacturing firms with data from 86 through 88 will be updated.
This augments the sample of manufacturing mergers (about 600 from 76-85) with
those which occurred during 86, 87, and 88. The project uses the new sample to
replicate and extend previous findings on the effects of mergers on R&amp;D
investment, paying particular attention to the longer term effects and to the
effects of changing leverage on the firm's strategies. Finally, the project
builds and estimates a model of the joint choice of financing and investment by
the firm which incorporates tax differences, asymmetric information, and
transactions costs. The model is used to investigate the hypothesis that R&amp;D
investment is more easily financed out of retained earnings than out of new debt
or equity (relative to other kinds of investment). If this is true, changes in
debt/equity ratios may tilt the incentives for investment away from R&amp;D. The
project contributes to our understanding of R&amp;D with better data, improved
theory and empirical studies. The original data set is an important resource for
studies of R&amp;D expenditures by U.S. manufacturing firms. The empirical
research by this project addresses an extremely timely issue, the effects of
mergers on U.S. technology. Preliminary results by the investigator raise the
disturbing possibility that certain types of mergers weaken U.S. R&amp;D
efforts.