* 8908587
* Information and Games in Industrial Organization
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1989,12/31/1992
* Jean Tirole, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 12/31/1992
* USD 150,879.00

This project consists of four parts. Three deal with industrial organization
issues. The fourth is more foundational. The first part studies politics in
government decision-making and develops an agency-theoretic approach to the
theory of regulatory capture. It explores the effect of politics on the
regulated firms' incentives and pricing, and looks at regulatory institutions
(constraints on regulatory instruments, hearings). The second part prepares a
monograph on incentives and pricing, competition, dynamics and politics of
regulation. The third part looks at the possibility of foreclosing an
unregulated market through vertical integration and examines the antitrust
implications. The fourth part constructs a general concept of Markov Perfect
Equilibrium and studies its properties. This is important because the Markov
Perfect Equilibrium is used to study many different types of economic problems.
The research on the politics of regulation is especially exciting because it
develops an original and very promising approach to government intervention in
industry. The vast majority of theoretical studies of regulation assume that the
government is a benevolent social planner who corrects inefficiencies such as
monopoly pricing and environmental externalities. Unfortunately, this is a very
unrealistic assumption. Government agencies can adopt inefficient policies
because of the pressure of special interest groups. The goal of this project is
to develop a theory of politics in regulation that captures the interplay among
the government agency, the regulated firms and the consumer groups
(environmentalists, consumers of the goods produced by the firm, and the
taxpayers). The interest groups have different costs of organization. The theory
is used to prove general theorems about the effects of different institutions on
the behavior of regulators. This project should be supported because it provides
useful insights into the politics of regulation and into industrial organization
and antitrust. The project also produces a monograph on regulation that makes
the large number of publications written for specialists in regulation economics
accessible to a wider audience. Finally, it develops a general solution concept
that should prove useful in applications of game theory to economic problems.