* 8908305
* Specialization of the Right and Left Cerebral Hemispheres
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1989,07/31/1993
* Joseph Hellige, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Jasmine Young
* 07/31/1993
* USD 217,560.00

The left and right hemispheres of the human cortex are specialized for
different cognitive functions. This research will investigate the consequences
of this specialization for information processing in neurologically normal
individuals. The left hemisphere appears to be specialized for the processing of
verbal and phonetic information; one set of studies will explore consequences of
this left-hemisphere verbal/phonetic superiority. Other studies will test the
hypothesis that the brain computes two types of spatial representations, one
(computed by the left hemisphere) that is appropriate for categorizing locations
(e.g., one stimulus is above another) and another (computed by the right
hemisphere) that is appropriate for processing information about distance (e.g.,
two stimuli are more than 2 cm apart). The research will also investigate the
manner in which unified information processing emerges from a brain consisting
of two separate but interacting hemispheres. Of particular importance is the
investigation of conditions that determine when the mode or style of processing
characteristic of one hemisphere dominates performance. The research is designed
around an experimental paradigm that allows a comparison of the style of
cognitive processing when both hemispheres are stimulated at the same time to
the styles of processing that are obtained when each individual hemisphere is
stimulated separately. Individuals differ in their patterns of hemispheric
superiority and it is likely that they also differ with respect to which
hemisphere's preferred style of processing emerges when both hemispheres are
equally stimulated. The research will investigate this by having the same
individuals participate in a number of tasks chosen to measure different aspects
of hemispheric asymmetry and interaction, to discover how performance on one
task relates to performance on others. Although the research will address basic
issues in human cognition, the outcome will have implications for a variety of
important societal concerns. For example, many educators and scientists have
held that individual differences in hemispheric asymmetry are related to a
variety of learning disabilities such as dyslexia and attentional deficit
disorder. Testing such notions has been nearly impossible because of the absence
of noninvasive behavioral techniques to separate differences in hemispheric
asymmetry from differences in the tendency to rely more on the processing style
of one hemisphere or the other. The techniques developed in this research should
make it possible to begin such testing, thus opening the door to answering a
host of questions of great immediate practical import to our society.