* 8908206
* U.S.-Nigeria Dissertation Improvement Research on Barriers  to Coastal Environmental Information Transfer:  A Case Studyin Nigeria
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/1990,02/29/1992
* NONE NONE, SUNY College of Environmental Science and Forestry
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 02/29/1992
* USD 9,770.00

This proposal requests funds to permit Mr. Christopher A. Shiyam, a Nigerian
graduate student at the State University of New York College of Environmental
Science and Forestry, to pursue dissertation research in Nigeria under the
direction of Dr. Richard C. Smardon, his faculty advisor, on the barriers to
coastal environmental information transfer in Nigeria. A study will be made in
Nigeria on coastal environmental problems, the status of the environmental
information system, a methodology for identifying barriers to information
transfer from research to policy, and information utilization by decision
makers. Guidelines for integrating coastal environmental information into the
decision-making process in Nigeria will be developed. In contrast to the
industrialized nations, Nigeria, like most other developing countries, lacks the
data and information infrastructure as well as the legal structure for the
systematic collection and use of environmental information. The absence of
information and barriers to information flow and use are impediments to
integrated resource management in Nigeria. This research is designed to
determine how scientific knowledge influences the decision-making process. A
survey will be undertaken to determine how Nigerian research staff members
perceive the role of coastal environmental information in decision making and
barriers to information flow and use. This project is relevant to the objectives
of the Science in Developing Countries Program which makes small grants that are
intended to advance the international exchange of scientific knowledge and to
contribute to the scientific infrastructure of developing countries. Developing-
country graduate students who are enrolled at U.S. universities may receive
support to engage in research on a developing-country problem. Mr. Shiyam has
served as a research officer, Forestry Research Institute of Nigeria, Jos,
Nigeria, and is highly qualified to undertake this dissertation research project
with his faculty advisor.