* 8908610
* RUI:  Chemical Communication in the Larval Eastern Tent     Caterpillar
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/1989,08/31/1993
* Francis Webster, SUNY College at Cortland
* Continuing Grant
* Fred Stollnitz
* 08/31/1993
* USD 97,592.00

The use of chemical signals (trail pheromones) to coordinate food-finding
activity has been well documented among the social insects, notably the ants and
termites. Studies now indicate that some species of gregarious caterpillars also
use trail pheromones to communicate. Very little is known of the significance of
communication among caterpillars, and only a single larval trail pheromone has
been previously identified. This collaborative study will enhance our knowledge
of chemical communication in caterpillars by focusing on both the chemical and
behavioral bases of exploratory and recruitment trail-marking in the eastern
tent caterpillars. Drs. Fitzgerald and Webster will investigate the behavioral
mechanisms that underlie trail- marking and trail-selection behavior, and will
attempt to identify and synthesize the specific chemical compounds that are used
in communication. To the extent that it is successful, this study will be the
first to determine the chemical and behavioral bases of bilevel system of trail-
based communication. The tent caterpillar was selected for study because it is
thought to utilize one of the most elaborate systems of trail-based chemical
communication found among caterpillars. In addition, tent caterpillars,
collectively, are among the most economically important of leaf-feeding insects,
causing significant damages to forest and shade trees throughout the Northern
Hemisphere. Present knowledge of these insects is too superficial to assess the
potential role of larval pheromones in ecologically-sound programs of pest
management, but the basic chemical and behavioral studies that Drs. Fitzgerald
and Webster will conduct will provide necessary background information for
exploring this possibility.