* 8908640
* Neural Substrates for Thermal Control of Ingestion
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1989,01/31/1993
* Elizabeth South, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Comer
* 01/31/1993
* USD 170,079.00

Food intake is reduced in hot ambient temperature in a variety of mammals,
including man. Thus it appears that thermosensitive mechanisms control food
intake in situations when a thermogenic activity, food intake, is counter-
productive to the maintenance of normal body temperature. The neural substrates
involved in the thermal control of food intake are poorly understood.
Preliminary findings indicate that the neurotoxin, capsaicin, damages neural
fibers involved in heat-induced reduction of food intake without altering the
ability to maintain normothermia at elevated temperature in rats. This suggests
that capsaicin acts to selectively lesion thermosensitive systems controlling
food intake. Examination of functional deficits in thermoregulation and food
intake reduction at elevated temperatures in rats treated systemically, and at
localized central and peripheral sites with capsaicin should reveal the lesion
sites responsible for the functional deficits. The specificity of capsaicin-
induced damage to thermal controls of food intake at central or peripheral sites
will be further examined using immunohistochemical and silverstain degeneration
techniques. Finally, peptides will be applied at sites that demonstrate
impairment of heat-induced reduction of food intake. This will provide a measure
of the role of specific peptides in the thermal control of food intake.