* 8908995
* Research Initiation Award: Intermolecular Reactions in      Flexible Polymer Solutions
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/1989,06/30/1992
* Ben O'Shaughnessy, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 06/30/1992
* USD 60,000.00

A large number of industrial processes involve chemical reactions between
reactive groups which are attached to high molecular weight flexible polymers.
Examples includes: (1) the production of linear chains by radical and
condensation polymerization; (2) the manufacture of rubber elastomers and gels
by cross-linking long polymer chains either chemically or through the action of
high energy radiation; and (3) reactive processing methods producing high
strength composites. While small molecule reactions also occur in these
situations, the main difficulty concerns the macromolecular reactions since the
ability of reactive species to meet is determined by the dynamical and static
properties of the polymers to which they are attached. The objective of this
research is to determine a fundamental mechanism for these processes by
calculating reaction rates for the case when two long unbranched polymers each
carrying one active group located somewhere along their respective backbones,
such that if ever the two groups are brought to within a certain distance of one
another ( the "capture radius") they will react with certain probability per
unit time. The two polymer coils must diffuse through space and then penetrate
one another significantly before reaction may proceed (typical polymer coil and
capture radius dimensions are 300 Angstroms and 10 Angstroms respectively). The
PI is planning to develop a molecular theory of reaction rates between high
molecular weight polymers in solution and to predict reactions rates as a
function of polymer molecular weight and concentration for polymers in dilute,
semi-dilute (where polymers overlap strongly giving rise to some concentration
effects) and dense solutions (melt). The reaction rates are dependent on
concentration because if the polymers are dilute in a monomeric background, the
coils diffuse relatively quickly through space but strongly repel one another on
close encounter, while if the chains are dense (in a melt) and long, such
repulsions are screened but diffusion is drastically slowed down by
entanglements. An additional outcome expected of this research is that it will
increase knowledge about the nature of an equilibrium system to which
irreversible reactions are added (polymer reactions are an example of a non-
equilibrium thermal system).