* 8908565
* RIA:  Design Strategies For Algebraic Specifications
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/1989,10/25/1990
* Sergio Antoy, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 10/25/1990
* USD 40,800.00

The lack of certain properties, such as completeness or termination, in an
algebraic specification of abstract data types is often the result of design
errors and can have significant consequences on processes, such as code
implementation or verification, which rely on the specification. To alleviate
the problem substantial efforts have been devoted to understand better these
properties and to implement tools which may guarantee the presence of some
properties or detect their absence. To date, no work has yet been published for
preventing design errors rather than correcting them. Two strageties are
suggested which, under reasonably general assumptions, can be used to produce
specifications which are complete, parsimonious, linear, and terminating. The
extent to which these strategies are applicable is not yet known. These
strategies are simple to use if the difficulties resulting from some book-
keeping they require is mechanized. A prototipical implementation improves
significantly the productivity of designing specifications and the specification
quality. The project has the following goals: Explore the range of applicability
of these strategies. In some situations, one property is not achieved, but it is
still unclear whether the property is too strong or the strategy too weak. Also,
one strategy is not the most convenient one in some situations. Investigate the
existence of other strategies. Examples show that these strategies are
sufficient for achieving desirable properties, but are not necessary. Other
strategies with similar goals and performances may exist. Implement the
available stategies. Evaluate and improve their effectiveness through their use
for designing a set of basic, general specifications.