* 8908541
* Mechanisms and Consequences of Variable Egg-laying Behavior in a Seed Beetle
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1989,07/31/1992
* Frank Messina, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Fred Stollnitz
* 07/31/1992
* USD 59,797.00

Dr. Messina's research is aimed at elucidiating the behavioral mechanisms by
which an insect chooses its food plants. Whether a particular insect will become
a serious pest or not depends on its response to a series of physical and
chemical traits associated with its potential hosts. Some insects are known to
avoid laying eggs on plants if those plants already bear eggs; chemical "marking
pheromones" are typically used by egg-laying females to distinguish between
occupied and unoccupied hosts. Several investigators have suggested that these
natural deterrents to egg-laying may eventually provide an additional tool in
pest management. Dr. Messina is investigating the behavioral sequence involved
in rejecting or accepting a host on the basis of whether or not other insects
are already present on it. The research also attempts to understand the high
degree of variation in egg-laying behavior that has been observed among separate
populations or "biotypes." Finally, the experiments will assess how egg-laying
decisions are influenced by learning or experience, which has been largely
ignored in insect studies. When combined with previous genetic and physiological
data, the experiments should provide a thorough picture of an unusually complex
invertebrate behavior. The seed beetle Callosobruchus maculatus is perhaps the
most destructive pest of cowpea and related grain legumes in several regions of
the world. It has been associated with human stores of legume seeds for at least
a few thousand years. Female beetles are known to use a variety of cues in their
host choices. The susceptibility of a legume variety is strongly affected, for
example, by the texture of the seed coat. Predicting beetle behavior and
population growth has been complicated, however, by extreme variation in several
traits among different geographic populations. Dr. Messina's research will
identify how variation in both larval and adult behavior affects the degree of
competition between individuals and, in turn, the rate of population growth. In
general, these studies provide a model system for understanding the origin and
maintenance of life- history variation among populations of a single species.