* 8908057
* Acquisition of Ultracentrifuge, Liquid Scintillation CounterAutoclave, and Water Purification System for Photosensory   Research in Microorganisms
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/1989,11/30/1991
* Edward Lipson, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Kathie L. Olsen
* 11/30/1991
* USD 58,113.00

Support is requested for a preparative ultracentrifuge, liquid scintillation
counter and an, autoclave. This equipment is urgently needed for biochemical
studies of photoresponses in two eukaryotic microorganisms, the fungus
Phycomyces blakesleeanus and the alga Chlamydomonas reinhardtii. In Phycomyces,
blue light controls several response, including phototropism, light growth
responses, carotene synthesis, and sporangiophore development. The blue-light
photoreceptors in Phycomyces and in many other plants and fungi remain to be
identified. The availablity of well characterized mutants, provides a strategy
for biochemical isolation of photoreceptors and other molecules involved in
photosensory transduction processes. In Chlamydomonas, phototaxis and carotene
synthesis employ a rhodopsin photoreceptor. This rhodopsin, however, has yet to
be purified in sufficient quantity for spectroscopic analysis. The increasing
level of biochemistry work in the two biophysics research groups requires that
appropriate equipment be available within the physics building, instead of only
in the biology building across campus. The ultracentrifuge is required for cell
fractionation, in particular membrane fractionation. The liquid scintillation
counter will be used for receptor binding studies and for tracing signaling
pathways using radioactively labeled probes. The autoclave will be used for
sterilization of rowth media and apparatus.