* 8908554
* Combining and Using Vague and Precise Information for       Decision Making
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1989,07/31/1993
* Thomas Wallsten, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Jasmine Young
* 07/31/1993
* USD 247,745.00

Previous research has suggested that conveying information about uncertainty in
linguistic form does not necessarily lead to decisions that are inferior to
those made on the basis of numerical probability estimates. This research will
build upon the earlier work by studying how a decision maker (DM) combines and
uses vague and precise information about uncertainty. Vague information
generally arises from sparse, indirect, or unreliable observations, and often is
communicated linguistically (for example, in a forecast by an intelligence
analyst that a particular event is likely to happen). Precise information is
generally the result of direct relative frequency data, and often is
communicated numerically (for example, in predicting failure rates of equipment
parts on the basis of historical data). This research will develop two new
realistic decision paradigms that allow control over the nature and degree of
information available to the DM. In all cases, DMs will choose among or bid for
lotteries involving outcomes contingent on the occurrence of uncertain events.
In one paradigm the events will consist of factual claims being true (rather
than false). The nature of the DMs' uncertainty about the claims will be
manipulated by selecting suitable factual domains. In the other paradigm the
events will consist of objects moving along tracks on a computer screen and
reaching targets (rather than being stopped by a barrier on the track). Here the
nature of the uncertainty will be manipulated by the perceptual features on the
screen and the amount of experience DMs are allowed to have with the particular
or related objects. Experiments within these paradigms will investigate, as a
function of the nature of the uncertainty, how attention is allocated to the
different components of a decision problem, how DMs combine their prior beliefs
with new information, and how they combine judgments of differential precision
and reliability. In addition to the theoretical role of this research in
understanding human decision behavior and factors that affect its optimality, it
is relevant to situations in which human DMs are required to make choices at
least in part on the basis of indirect information and considered judgments by
other people. Space exploration, nuclear power plant sitings, and the disposal
of hazardous wastes are just a few examples of such situations. Findings from
this research may allow the development of more optimal communication and
decision procedures. In addition, the research will assist in the development of
computerized decision aiding expert systems that attempt to represent human
understanding of linguistic variables and vague information.