* 8908735
* Planning and Scheduling of Multiproduct Continuous Processes
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/1989,02/28/1993
* Ignacio Grossmann, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Burka
* 02/28/1993
* USD 155,862.00

A significant part of the chemical industry has recently started to concentrate
on the manufacturing of specialized high value added products. At the same time,
there is an increasing trend towards building smaller distributed flexible
processes that are located closer to the markets of consumption. With the
increased competition and market diversification that is being experienced in
the chemical industry, there is a need for improving the planning for allocating
limited capital resources for investment and for improving the scheduling in the
manufacture of chemicals. The major concerns include not only reduction of
investment and of production costs, but also providing improved service to
customers by delivering the required products on time. Over the last few years a
substantial research effort has been devoted to various aspects of planning and
scheduling in batch processes. While planning and scheduling plays a central
role in batch processes, the same is often true of many continuous processes
that involve the manufacture of a variety of products. In these processes
uninterrupted operation takes place with possible change of feedstock or raw
material and readjustment of operating conditions for each product. Inventories
and transitions from one product to another are major issues. Important
industrial applications of continuous processes that produce multiple products
include processes for manufacturing various types of polymers (e.g.
polyesthers), chemicals (e.g. ketones), and finished products (e.g. paper). In
contrast to the area of batch processes, much less research work has been done
for scheduling and planning of these multiproduct continuous plants. The
objective of this research is to address a number of major subproblems that
arise in the scheduling and planning of multiproduct continuous plants.
Specifically the following items will be considered: 1. Development of models
and solution techniques for the scheduling of multiproduct continuous processes
consisting of one or several parallel production lines. The extension of these
models and techniques for more complex plant configurations will also be
considered, as well as their use for design studies. 2. Development of models
and solution techniques of multiperiod planning and design problems for process
networks consisting of single product and multiproduct continuous plants. 3.
Development of a strategy for the integration of planning and scheduling in
continuous multiproduct plants. A major goal in this work will be to develop new
systematic techniques to overcome major computational challenges that arise in
the modelling and solution of these problems.