* 8908030
* Tests of a Model of Question-Answering
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/1990,08/31/1994
* Lynne Reder, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Mary F. Bullock
* 08/31/1994
* USD 153,000.00

How do people know whether they can give an answer before actually searching
memory for it? This research will explore the role of "feeling of knowing" in
strategy selection: Do humans have a feeling of knowing process that operates
fast enough to indicate whether desired information is likely to be stored in
memory? Does this process affect whether people search memory for a specific
fact, resort to reasoning processes, or simply give up with an "I don't know"
response? In order to understand how the feeling of knowing process works, this
research will also investigate whether activation and priming of memory affect
feeling of knowing judgments and whether activation enhances memory retrieval
itself, or merely biases search processes. Finally, the research will address
how plausible reasoning is done when search for a fact is not the strategy of
choice. The research will develop in three stages: (a) five experiments will ask
what factors affect feeling of knowing and whether priming enhances memory
retrieval, (b) five experiments will ask how feeling of knowing affects
question-answering strategy selection, and (c) six experiments will ask what
affects plausible reasoning and whether it is done automatically during reading.
To answer these questions, the research will use a number of methodologies.
These will include a gameshow paradigm, in which people must determine rapidly
whether they can answer a question prior to attempting to answer it, a deadline
experiment, in which people must select rapidly the type of question- answering
strategy preferred to answer a specific question, a variable deadline paradigm,
in which people are trained to respond immediately after a signal that can come
at any time after the presentation of the stimulus (and the dependent measure is
thus accuracy), plausibility ratings, and simple two- alternative, choice-
reaction-time studies. A complete model of question answering and strategy
choice may suggest important improvements in data base search and query systems
for very large artificial data bases. Work that attempts to understand feeling
of knowing processes will be important for understanding clinical cases of
memory impairment that include impaired feeling of knowing processes and those
that do not.