* 8908688
* Second US-Japan Workshop on Tsunamis; November 5-7, 1990,   Hawaii
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/1990,06/30/1991
* James Lander, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Clifford J. Astill
* 06/30/1991
* USD 29,400.00

This workshop is part of the ongoing activities of the U.S.-Japan Cooperative
Program in Natural Resources (UJNR) under the Panel on Wind and Seismic Effects.
One of the areas of responsibility of this UJNR panel is to coordinate ongoing
tsunami research in Japan and the United States. Tsunamis (seismic sea waves)
pose a threat to certain coastal areas of the United States, principally to
Hawaii and Alaska, but also to the coastal areas of northern California, Oregon,
and the Caribbean. However they pose a significantly greater threat to coastal
areas of Japan, especially from earthquakes generated within the Sea of Japan.
It is very much to the benefit of tsunami researchers in Japan and the United
States to coordinate their respective research efforts. The First U.S.-Japan
Workshop on Tsunamis was held in Tsukuba, Japan on May 12-13, 1983. This second
workshop is planned for 5-6 November 1990 in Hawaii, with a visit on 7 November
to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) Pacific Tsunami
Warning Center in Ewa Beach. The focus for this workshop is on the application
of numerical techniques to tsunami hazard mitigation: participants include both
researchers and persons responsible for the implementation of tsunami hazard
mitigation. This action is to provide support for this workshop.