* 8908281
* Mathematical Sciences: Operator Algebras and Their          Applications
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1989,06/30/1993
* Edward Effros, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* Kevin Clancey
* 06/30/1993
* USD 366,885.00

Professors Effros, Popa, and Takesaki will continue their investigations into
operator algebra theory and its applications. Effros will focus on matricial
norms and orderings. This is expected to lead to new approaches to Fourier
analysis on non- abelian groups and to the structure theory of non-injective von
Neumann algebras. Popa will work on the structure of factors, index theory for
subfactors, amenability, and rigidity. Takesaki will study group actions on
injective factors, and explore the relationship between modular theory for von
Neumann algebras and Connes' cyclic cohomology. The Hilbert space operators that
lie at the heart of this project may be thought of as a species of enriched
numbers. They obey the same laws of arithmetic as numbers with two notable
exceptions, namely that the result of multiplication depends on the order in
which the factors are taken, and not every nonzero operator has an inverse.
Mathematical analysis knows only two number systems, the real and complex, but
there is an immense variety of operator algebras. Situations unsuitable for
numerical representation can often be represented in some fashion by operator
algebras, thanks to the greater degree of flexibility available with the latter.
The price for this is that understanding the structure and classification of
operator algebras requires considerable effort, as for instance the work to be
undertaken in this project.