* 8908652
* Incineration -- A Fundamental Study of the Combustion       Characteristics of Selected Solid Organic Municipal Wastes  with Emphasis to Plastics
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/1989,11/30/1991
* Yiannis Levendis, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* MILTON J LINEVSKY
* 11/30/1991
* USD 65,764.00

The results of this study will help in the development and critical evaluation
of models for the thermal destruction of solid organic wastes and will be used
in the design and optimization of incinerators. The first part of this study
involves the production of polymer particles of optimal properties which can be
used for the development and critical evaluation of models of transport
processes in the oxidation of the solid compounds. The particles will be
produced spherical in shape and monodisperse by atomization of partially
polymerized liquid precursors. In the second part of this study, the solid
particles will be burned in devices such as an externally heated laminar flow
reactor and a thermogravimetric analyzer. Time resolved measurements of the
particle properties, gas composition, volatilization periods, and particle
temperature will be conducted. The emphasis will be in investigating the
temperature-time behavior of the solids under pyrolytic or oxidative
atmospheres. By studying well characterized particles the intrinsic kinetics of
combustion can be evaluated accurately. The proposed investigation is a
fundamental study dealing with the combustion characteristics of plastics and
other organic solid hazardous wastes, like adhesives and paints, that end up in
the municipal waste streams. This work is based upon the development of polymers
synthesized in the laboratory and tailored for the study of individual chemical
and physical processes. The polymers will be similar to those used in the
plastics industry (Polystyrene, acrylic, highly chlorinated hydrocarbons etc.)
both thermoplastics and thermosets, in pure compound form or mixtures thereof.