* 8908073
* The Macroeconomics of the Interwar Period
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1989,01/31/1992
* Ben Bernanke, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 01/31/1992
* USD 94,204.00

Despite an outpouring of work by historians (including economic historians) and
others on the subject of the Great Depression, macroeconomists have written
surprisingly little on it since Temin (1976) versus Friedman and Schwartz (1963)
debate of some years ago. During the hiatus, the macroeconomic issues raised by
the events of the 1930s (such as the real effects of stock market volatility,
bank failures, domestic and international debt problems, and protectionist
pressures) have become more rather than less pressing. At the same time a stream
of innovative research in macroeconomics has eroded the earlier mainstream
consensus and reduced our confidence in received explanations of the Great
Depression. This proposal requests funding for the first two years of a longer-
term project to make a detailed and integrated analysis of the interwar period
(1919-1941). The initial focus is on the development of a catalogue of sources
of interwar data based on a review of primary and secondary historical
materials. Attention shifts next to the study of two sets of substantive
questions. First, what was the role of the apparent breakdown of the financial
intermediation process in the initiation and propagation of the Depression ? The
sources of problems and responses to crisis both of financial intermediaries
(banks, savings and loans) and of private debtors, will be considered, using
panel data wherever possible. Second, what were the determinants of aggregate
supply during the interwar period ? Principal issues to be considered here
include the persistence of unemployment, the role of the New Deal in the 1933-37
recovery, and the somewhat anomalous behavior during this period of real wages
and productivity. This research should contribute significantly toward improving
our understanding of the Great Depression era. Equally important, is the
demonstration which it promises, of the value of this period as a "laboratory"
for testing modern views about macroeconomic theory and policy.