* 8908362
* Structure and Function of Invertebrate Respiratory Proteins
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1989,07/31/1993
* Nora Terwilliger, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing grant
* Sharon Emerson
* 07/31/1993
* USD 207,701.00

The purpose of this grant is to study the developmental changes that occur in
structure and function of hemocyanin, the blue, copper containing respiratory
protein that is found dissolved in the blood of arthropods and molluscs.
Respiratory proteins, hemocyanins, hemoglobins and hemerythrins, are excellent
models for unique insights into the structure of oxygen transport molecules and
how the molecules combine reversibly with oxygen. A dramatic change in
hemocyanin subunit composition and oxygen binding properties occurs during
development from late larval stage, or megalopa, to adult in the locally
abundant Dungeness crab, Cancer magister. Hemocyanin expression in the
unfertilized egg or oocyte, the fertilized embryo, and the newly hatched larval
stage or zoea, will be analyzed to determine when changes in hemocyanin
expression occur. Where and how the hemocyanin molecules are synthesized will be
determined in the crab. Larval Dungeness crabs are active swimmers in the well
oxygenated surface waters of estuaries and open ocean whereas the adult crab is
found buried or walking along the less oxygenated muddy sandy bottom of
estuaries and the nearshore. Accordingly, experiments in both laboratory and
field will ask how a stage specific hemocyanin might be of help to the crab at a
particular time in its life cycle and how the protein enables the animal to
respond to environmental stresses such as temperature, salinity and low oxygen.
Metabolic studies will also be done to see whether the functional properties of
larval hemocyanin are related to the physiological demands of the larva versus
the adult. These studies will provide models to explore the relationship between
a protein's structure and its functional properties, a central question in
understanding how protein molecules work. Information on the site and manner of
hemocyanin synthesis will help to increase our knowledge of other medically
important copper containing proteins such as cytochrome oxidase. The
relationship of respiratory proteins to one another and to other families of
proteins is of great interest to the field of evolutionary biology. In addition,
the Dungeness crab is a commercially important fishery in the Pacific Northwest.
Information about the crab's development and the role hemocyanin plays in its
tolerance to various environmental conditions will enhance management of the
natural fishery as well as efforts to develop a viable Dungeness crab
aquaculture industry.