* 8908167
* Mathematical Sciences: Partial Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/1989,05/31/1992
* C. Robin Graham, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 05/31/1992
* USD 39,566.00

Work will continue on research projects involving the interplay of mathematical
analysis, geometry and algebra. Questions arising in conformal and biholomorphic
geometry and Fuchsian partial differential equations will be the focus of the
research. The first project is a continuing collaboration aimed at the
construction of all scalar invariants of a conformal or Cauchy- Riemann
manifold. A complete solution for odd dimensions in the conformal case appears
to be accessible at this time. The problem has been reduced to a purely
algebraic problem in invariant theory. A partial solution in even dimensions has
also been found. The ultimate goal of this work is to give an explicit invariant
description of the asymptotic expansion of the Bergman kernel of a smooth
bounded strictly pseudoconvex domain in complex n-dimensional space. A related
project involves the application of representation-theoretic methods to
parabolic invariant theory. The objective is the same as above except that an
alternate approach is to be analyzed using Verma modules which have the same
structure as the space of jets of a conformal structure. A formulation of the
problem in terms of Verma modules brings more structure and tools to bear as
well as providing a large class of test problems on which to develop methods.
The third project concerns the study of existence, uniqueness and regularity of
Fuchsian differential equations described by Einstein metrics and harmonic maps
on conformally compact manifolds. These equations are given by nonlinear systems
of elliptic type which degenerate at the manifold boundary. As a first goal,
work will be done in finding conformally compact metrics having constant
negative Ricci curvature, with the conformal class specified in advance. This
would extend the model case of the hyperbolic metric of constant negative
curvature defined on a ball. Here, the conformal class is the standard metric of
the sphere.//