* 8908240
* Response of Coastal Plants to Salt Water Intrusion
* BIO,DEB
* 10/15/1989,09/30/1993
* Leonel Sternberg, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory J. McCants
* 09/30/1993
* USD 241,889.00

Southern Florida's relatively shallow freshwater table in a porous substrate,
(oolitic limestone), is particularly susceptible to ocean water intrusion. Other
than gross effects, little is known about more subtle effects and processes
responsible for this intrusion. It is well known that pumping of ground water to
supply expanding urban areas and canal building have contributed to intrusion
problems. Several questions about salt water intrusion remain to be answered,
however. For example, Is there a seasonality of intrusion; dry season versus wet
season? If ocean levels are rising because of global climatic changes, is this
effect already detectable in coastal plant communities of southern Florida? What
about the effect of salt water intrusion in plant communities; will this mean an
increase in exotic pest plants? The proposed research addresses such questions.
The results of this research will answer many basic scientific questions about
how plants react to periodic and chronic salt water stress. The research will
rely heavily on stable isotope analysis of plant biomass. Recently much has been
learned about biological systems with this technique. Stable isotope analysis
will shed light on the history of salt water intrusion in plant communities. In
addition, stable isotope techniques can be used to integrate hydrological and
ecophysiological concepts in the study of salt water intrusion. The potential
applications of this research are quite clear. Much of the salt water intrusion
in southern Florida is caused by water management projects. This research can
aid in predicting more precisely the effects of water management strategies. As
an example; if ocean water intrusion is seasonal, then an appropriate strategy
would be limitation of freshwater pumping during the dry season. Further, the
experimental techniques to be used here will permit the detection of salt water
intrusion in plant communities before irreversible changes occur.