* 8908699
* Information Integration Across Eye Movements
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1989,01/31/1993
* David Irwin, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jasmine Young
* 01/31/1993
* USD 177,465.00

The visual world contains more information than we can perceive in a single
glance. To compensate for this state of affairs, we make eye and head movements
to look at objects of interest, and we gradually construct a mental
representation of the environment from these successive views. Our eyes scan the
world by means of rapid movements, called saccades, that are separated by brief
periods of time, called fixations, during which the eyes are still. One might
logically expect this pattern of eye movement activity to produce a terribly
disruptive pattern of visual input for perception, a sequence of stationary,
clear images of the world, alternating with violent sweeps of information during
the saccades. Our perceptual experience, of course, does not correspond to such
an alternating sequence at all. Rather, it consists of clear, continuous,
panoramic views of large sections of the visual environment, with objects
remaining stable in space. This mismatch between the nature of the visual input
and the nature of our phenomenal experience is one of the great mysteries in the
study of perception, a mystery that is still largely unsolved. This research
project will investigate the characteristics of the memory or memories
responsible for integrating information across eye movements to yield the
coherent perception of the visual world that we ordinarily experience. In
particular, the research will focus on the capacity, time-course, and
representational format of these memories. People will view visual displays
while their eye movements are monitored. When an eye movement is detected, the
visual display will disappear and the observer's memory for that display will be
assessed. For example, the observer may indicate whether a second display is
identical to or different from the first display, or may attempt to report some
particular information that was present in the display. These responses will
reveal what aspects of the original view are stored in memory and maintained
across an eye movement. By varying the amount and the visual characteristics of
the information in the display and by varying the timing and the nature of the
memory test following the eye movement, the research will reveal how much
information is retained across eye movements, how long it persists in memory,
and how detailed is its memory representation. The perception of a stable and
continuous visual environment across changes in eye position has puzzled and
intrigued scientists for over a century. The research will allow us to make
progress in solving this puzzle. In addition, the research will provide
important information about spatial representation and spatial cognition in
general, with possible relevance to the study of reading and to the study of
oculomotor disorders that are sometimes accompanied by perceptual instability.