* 8908692
* Molecular Basis of Ion Channel Gating
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/1989,07/31/1993
* David Cafiso, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 07/31/1993
* USD 188,700.00

The transport of ions, such as sodium and potassium, across cell membranes is a
critically important process for all living systems. This transport is necessary
for life; for example, it is directly involved in the transmission of signals
along nerves and the production of metabolic energy. Ion transport is
facilitated and controlled by protein structures, called ion- channels, that
reside in the cell membrane. While these ion- channels can be identified, their
structures are not well understood at a molecular level. These ion-channels can
be "gated" open by small molecules called neurotransmitters or by changes in
electric fields that occur in the cell membrane. At present, the structural
changes that open ion-channels are not characterized. The objective of the
research project is to advance the understanding of ion-channels. A membrane
ion-channel that is opened by the neurotransmitter acetylcholine, called the
acetylcholine receptor, will be studied. This channel proves to be an ideal
system for chemical/physical study because it can be obtained in large
quantities. Using powerful new chemical and physical techniques, the molecular
structure of the acetylcholine receptor and the mechanism by which it opens ion
channels will be examined. Since electric fields also can open ion-channels, the
effects of electric fields on proteins in cell membranes will be studied. Small
proteins will be designed and produced so as to investigate interactions between
proteins and electric fields in membranes.