* 8908822
* Cellular Interactions During CNS Maturation
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1989,07/31/1992
* Robert Miller, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Platt
* 07/31/1992
* USD 223,045.00

During development, axons grow long distances in the central nervous system to
contact their specific targets, while in the adult, there is little axon growth
following a lesion and functional recovery is limited. Immature astrocytes have
been proposed to be the cellular substrate for axon growth during development,
and after a lesion to the adult CNS, "reactive" mature astrocytes are a major
cellular component of glial scars that have been proposed to block axon growth.
These observations suggest that the capacity of astrocytes to support and direct
growth alters during CNS maturation. The molecular basis underlying the ability
of astrocytes to support axon growth during development, and its modulation
during astrocyte maturation is unknown. This study is designed to determine if
changes in the interactions both between astrocytes and neurons; as well as
between astrocytes and astrocytes, are responsible for the inhibition of neurite
outgrowth by astrocytes after maturation. Dr. Miller will identify molecules
involved in the following changes observed when astrocytes mature: (1) Neurite
outgrowth is reduced on mature astrocytes, (2) Neurons have decreased adhesion
to mature astrocytes, and (3) Astrocyte/astrocyte adhesion increases in mature
astrocytes. In addition, neurite growth will be compared in a 3-dimensional
matrix of immature or mature astrocytes, and the perturbation of cell
interactions involving astrocyte/neuron and astrocyte/astrocyte adhesion in this
system will be determined. These studies will provide new information on the
regulation of axon outgrowth by astrocytes of the developing and adult CNS.