* 8908601
* Neurogenesis of Functionally Specific Spinal Neurons
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1989,08/31/1992
* John Beal, LSU Health Sciences Center -Shreveport
* Standard Grant
* Steven C. McLoon
* 08/31/1992
* USD 129,000.00

This project is part of a long-term study to determine the sequence and pattern
of development of spinal neurons from the neuroblast stage to the adult. The
objective of the research is to determine the relationship between a neuron's
time of origin and its ultimate functional properties. The specific aim is to
determine the birth dates (time of final cell division) of various types of
neurons in the upper lumbar spinal cord defined by their 1) axon projection, and
2) neurotransmitter. To accomplish this aim, two sets of experiments have been
devised which combine tritiated thymidine autoradiography (for birth date
determination) on the same tissue sections with tract tracing and
immunohistochemical techniques. The first experiment will employ tract tracing
techniques using Fluoro-Gold, Rhodamine microspheres and/or HRP in conjunction
with tritiated thymidine autoradiography to determine the relationship between a
neuron's projection (i.e., ascending tract, long propriospinal , short
propriospinal, etc.) and its time of origin. The second experiment will employ
tritiated thymidine autoradiography and immunohistochemistry to determine the
relationship of a neuron's time of origin with its neurotransmitter substance.
From the data produced, distribution maps of the spinal gray matter will be made
which show the location, relative number, and distribution of neurons
characterized according to their time of origin, size, shape, axon projection,
and neurotransmitter. This study is unique in that it is the first comprehensive
examination of neurogenesis in a single CNS center which will demonstrate the
proliferative period of specific types of neurons defined by functional
parameters. This research is clinically significant because it will provide a
more complete understanding of the neuronal organization of an area directly
involved in the transmission of sensory information including pain, and it is
important because it will examine local neuronal interactions. Determining the
chronological order of developing neurons is a first step in approaching the
problem of how neurons interact during development. The results of this research
will be important when choosing appropriate embryonic stages for intraspinal
transplants in spinal cord regeneration experiments and will be of value when
studying the interruptive effects that various teratogens have on the
proliferation and maturation of specific types of neurons.