* 8908082
* RIA: Handwritten Word Recognition Using First and Second    Order Hidden Markov Model
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/1989,01/31/1992
* Amlan Kundu, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 01/31/1992
* USD 56,740.00

A hidden Markov model (HMM) is a doubly stochastic process with an underlying
stochastic process that is not observable, i.e., states are hidden, but can only
be observed through another set of stochastic processes that produce the
observable sequence of symbols. In this work, the handwritten script recognition
problem is modeled in the framework of HMM. For English text, which is the focus
of the present research, the states are identified with the letters of the
alphabet, and the optimum symbols are generated by means of experimental study.
Fifteen features (some old, some new) are used for this task. Both the first and
second order hidden Markov models are used for the recognition task. Using the
existing statistical knowledge of the English language as in Cryptography etc.,
the calculation scheme of the model parameters are immensely simplified for the
first order model. Extending these results and through an exhaustive dictionary
search, probabilities of the second order model are calculated. Viterbi
algorithm is used to recognize the single best optimal state sequence, i.e.,
sequence of letters consisting the word. The modification of the recognition
algorithm to accommodate context information is also researched. Finally,
experimental results for the first and second order models are provided.