* 8908786
* Research Initiation:  A Symbolic - Numeric Approach to      Machine Tool Supervision
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/1989,07/31/1991
* Jose Principe, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 07/31/1991
* USD 69,223.00

Supervision of machine tools will be investigated from the perspective of a
fault detect system. Recognition of faults mean that the system is able to make
predictions and compare predicted with measured values. The comparison cannot be
strict, the noise can cause false or missed conditions. A deeply coupled,
numeric/symbolic model that incorporates heuristic and physical knowledge and is
implemented in a multiprocessor architecture will be used. Real-time signal
processing algorithms being developed will be implemented in digital signal
processing chips, and will be validated with real data. Another aspect of this
research deals with improvements on symbolic processing speed and a decision
making strategy to service alarms within a maximum response time. For the
inference mechanism, a neural network will be developed and evaluated, bringing
distributed parallel processing to the most time consuming aspect of inference.
In order to maximize the system reaction time interrupt driven specialists will
be implemented. This will focus the symbolic reasoning and create belief levels
in the alarm by integrating multiple sensor information. As an end result, a
self-contained computer system capable of real-time knowledge-based supervision
will be available for demonstrations.