* 8908586
* RIA: VLSI Architecture Designs for High-Speed Signal and    Image Processing
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/1989,01/31/1992
* Keshab Parhi, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Maguire
* 01/31/1992
* USD 70,000.00

This project develops algorithms and architectures for high-speed
implementations of digital signal and image processing applications. Based on
previous results on lookahead, decomposition, and incremental computation
techniques for hardware-efficient implementation of high- speed linear recursive
and adaptive digital filters, a method is developed to transform these
algorithms into equivalent forms, which can operate at sample rates beyond the
inherent limits in the original algorithms. Extensions are being carried out on
these techniques to nonlinear recursions, such as dynamic programming, quantizer
loops, adaptive differential pulse code modulation, and adaptive decision
feedback equalization. Implementations for these algorithms in bit- serial,
nibble-serial, and bit-parallel architectures are currently under study. The
computational needs in many real-time signal and image processing algorithms can
only be met by dedicated implementations. Success of dedicated designs require
appropriate choice of algorithms architectures, and implementation
methodologies. A complete examination of the algorithm and architecture
approaches, as studied in this project, will provide the application-specific
designer a wide design space, which can be exploited to obtain more efficient
implementations. This research will impact future integrated design environments
for VLSI implementations of dedicated signal and image processing applications.