* 8908619
* Molecular and Cytogenetic Study of the Structure of Human   Chromosome 9 in Human-CHO Somatic Cell Hybrids Using        Exogenous Dominant Selectable Markers: ROW Planning Grant
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1989,01/31/1991
* HonFong Mark, Rhode Island Hospital
* Standard Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 01/31/1991
* USD 12,000.00

This research will yield important information concerning the physical map of
human chromosome 9. It will allow evaluation of the randomness of retroviral
integrations into this chromosome. The cell lines produced by the research will
be extremely useful in mapping the human genome. The determination of a physical
map requires the ability to isolate regions of analyzable size and currently
available hybrids are not adequate for this type of analysis. The incorporation
of a selectable marker into the human chromosome means that the radiation
hybrids containing fragments of this chromosome should be "cleaner" than those
hybrids created without being able to select for the fragment of interest. One
of the goals of this research is to see whether these hybrids are really
superior and to evaluate the efficacy of using retroviral vectors to multiply
mark a chromosome. Hybrids which have been fully characterized will yield
important information on biological organization, structure and control of this
portion of the genome. Comparisons with homologous regions in other species will
yield important information on evolution in eukaryotic organisms. The approach
adopted for chromosome 9 can be applied to any other human chromosome, or
chromosomes of any other species so that the ROW Research Planning grant has
considerable generality.