* 8908497
* Causal Quantum Theory: Internal vs. External Reasons for Its Rejection
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1989,12/31/1992
* James Cushing, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Ronald J. Overmann
* 12/31/1992
* USD 30,000.00

Quantum mechanics has been one of the most significant and arguably the most
profound of fundamental developments in physical theory in this century. Quantum
mechanics has affected virtually every branch of physics, other basic sciences
including chemistry and biophysics, and modern technology. It has literally
helped to revolutionize the world in which we live and the way in which we view
or understand that world. At the most fundamental level, our conception of the
universe has been transformed from the deterministic world of classical physics
to an indeterministic one. This picture arises not directly from the equations
or formalism of quantum mechanics proper, but from the standard or "Copenhagen
interpretation of quantum mechanics. There does, however, exist a causal
interpretation of quantum mechanics that is claimed to be as empirically
adequate as the generally accepted orthodox one. Such a theory requires
considerably less drastic departures from or revisions of the epistemology and
ontology of the classical physics community. Under this research grant,
Professor Cushing will be examining why this causal approach to quantum
mechanics has not been accepted. The reasons for the rejection of causal quantum
mechanics involves both substantive, scientific reasons "internal" to the
science itself as well as "external" sociological reasons. In this study,
Professor Cushing will be determining both the internal and external factors
which have led to the rejection of a causal quantum mechanics.