* 8908020
* Accomplishment-based Renewal of Market Structure and        Cyclical Fluctuations in Output, Employment, Prices
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1989,01/31/1993
* Robert Hall, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 01/31/1993
* USD 140,808.00

This is an accomplishment-based renewal of an extremely productive research
program on the microeconomic sources of macroeconomic volatility. Under the
previous grant the investigator demonstrated that fluctuations in productivity
are induced by changes in product demand and factor supplies, rather than
technology shocks. This result challenges a key assumption of real business
cycle theory, an important school of thought in macroeconomics. This result has
stimulated empirical and theoretical work by the investigator and others on
demand driven business cycles. Renewed support permits the investigator to
pursue this research agenda. The investigator also developed an innovative and
powerful test of the assumption of a competitive industry. If an industry is
competitive, then the Solow productivity residual (the difference between the
rate of growth of output and the weighted growths of inputs) should be invariant
to exogenous shifts in product demand and factor productivity. Under the
previous grant the investigator was able to reject the invariance proposition
for a large number of U.S. industries. This project explores what kind of
equilibrium prevails in these industries. Preliminary research suggests that
inputs and outputs behave as if the technology had increasing returns of scale.
Future research examines evidence of externalities in industrial organization
or, more specifically, whether one firm's efficiency rises when the firms it
deals with have higher levels of activity. The investigator develops a new
methodology for testing for the presence of increasing returns and thick-market
externalities. Specifically, econometric methods are developed for testing for
spontaneous noise in major aggregate economic variables. The presence of
spontaneous movements in output is evidence of economies with increasing returns
and thick-market externalities. This research makes significant contributions to
our understanding of macroeconomic fluctuations and industrial organization. The
research on economies with increasing returns is especially important because
most empirical and theoretical work in industrial organization assumes
competition with constant-returns-to-scale. Evidence of significant
externalities within U.S. industries would also suggest that R&amp;D
expenditures are more important than previously believed.