* 8908827
* RUI:  Communication and Predator Defense by Ground-         Transmitted Vibrations
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/1989,12/31/1991
* Janet Randall, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* Fred Stollnitz
* 12/31/1991
* USD 98,450.00

This research examines the mechanisms and functions of a unique form of
communication, never before studied in detail. Dr. Randall is investigating how
a nocturnal desert rodent, the banner-tailed kangaroo rat, communicates its
identity to other kangaroo rats and protects itself from predators by drumming
its hind feet on the ground, creating vibrations that are transmitted both
through the ground and through the air. She and her students will (1) describe
the basic patterns in the foot- drumming signal and how these identify
individual animals, (2) study how the signal is transmitted through the desert
soil and air, (3) describe the changes in behavior of rats in response to a
foot-drumming signal, (4) study foot-drumming as a defense against snake
predators, and (5) analyze differences in the signals produced in relation to
the age and health of individual rats, to differences in the number of
neighbors' signals, and in contexts of territorial defense, predator defense,
and mating competition. This research will enrich our general understanding of
how communication is related to the social organization of small, nocturnal
mammals. It will contribute to knowledge of how small animals defend themselves
against their predators, and of how animal social organizations have adapted to
a desert environment. An understanding of the interactions that occur in the web
of life in a desert will be valuable in management and conservation decisions
about the fragile desert ecosystems of the southwestern United States.