* 8908193
* Engineering Research Equipment Grant:  Studies of Single    Particles Using an Electrodynamic Balance
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/1989,05/31/1992
* Susan Larson, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Edward H. Bryan
* 05/31/1992
* USD 59,968.00

This award is to provide support for purchase of equipment to construct an
electrodynamic balance system for investigation of the interaction of dispersed
single particles and a gaseous environment. In particular, the apparatus will be
used in studies of ambient and model aerosols and in experimental simulations of
processes that separate and remove contaminants from gas streams. The
electrodynamic balance facility will enable researchers to characterize the
optical properties, chemical composition, and kinetics of ambient and model
aerosol particles. This project will involve determining the distribution of
chemical species within individual aerosol particles, the accuracy of light
scattering calculations, the index of refraction of single particles,
hygroscopic properties of single particles, and the kinetics of aerosol particle
evaporation. The particle balance also will be used to investigate the thermal
decomposition of hazardous contaminants, the adsorption of organics and heavy
metals onto particles, the surface area of particles, and the validity of
numerical models that describe the removal of gaseous contaminants by particles.
The proposal leading to this award was submitted in response to NSF 87- 68,
Engineering Research Equipment Grants. The results of this research
investigation are expected to describe the fundamental mechanisms by which
potentially harmful contaminants may be prevented from entering the atmosphere.