* 8908402
* Dynamic Models of Bounded Rationally
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/1989,12/31/1992
* David Kreps, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 12/31/1992
* USD 109,469.00

Economic theory is frequently criticized for assuming that economic agents are
always rational. But economic theories based on more realistic assumptions about
the way individuals decide have not been very productive. The results from these
"realistic" theories are sensitive to specific assumptions about the decision
rules used by agents. This project promises to bridge the gap between
traditional rational choice economic models and models based on more realistic
decision rules. In this project adaptive, heuristic decision rules emerge from
individually rational behavior under imperfect information. Behavior predicted
by the models of dynamic choice developed in this project conform to observed
behavior, but the results are rigorously derived from general assumptions and
yield useful insights. There are two parts to this project. In the first, models
are studied in which individuals play a game repeatedly, learning and
experimenting as they go. A wide class of behavioral rules are shown to yield
convergence to Nash equilibria. Restrictions on individual behavior are related
to various Nash equilibrium refinements. This is important because Nash
equilibria and Nash refinements are mathematically tractable. This part of the
project could provide economic theorists with powerful mathematical tools for
studying dynamic models of bounded rationality. In the second part, models are
developed in which individuals have a general preference for flexibility because
they know there are future contingencies they cannot foresee. Dynamic game
theory and contract theory are used to study individual choice where the desire
for flexibility changes with circumstances. This project should be supported
because of its contributions to economic theory and decision theory.
Methodologically the project should provide economists with new approaches to
modelling dynamic choice in a changing economy. Substantively, the applications
of the investigator's approaches to economic problems, especially his work in
the first part of the project on models of experimentation and learning, should
provide important new insights into a wide range of economic issues.