* 8908128
* Mechanisms of Transport in the Golgi Apparatus
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/1989,06/30/1993
* Becca Fleischer, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Maryanna P. Henkart
* 06/30/1993
* USD 295,269.00

The overall aim of this research is to understand the molecular mechanisms by
which substrates gain access to the glycosyltransferases during terminal
glycosylation of secreted glycoproteins in the Golgi apparatus. Studies from
several laboratories, including this one, have demonstrated that specific
carrier proteins are involved in transporting nucleotide sugars into the Golgi
lumen and nucleotide products of the transferases out of the lumen. The specific
goals of the project are to: (1) identify the proteins responsible for UDP-
galactose and UMP transport across Golgi membranes; (2) isolate and characterize
the transport proteins; and (3) determine how the transporters are oriented in
the membrane, and how they are distributed relative to galactosyltransferases.
Perhaps the most striking thing about living cells is the very high degree of
order and organization which is required for life processes to occur. The cell
is compartmentalized into specific regions which carry out specific functions,
and this compartmentalization allows for a high degree of regulation of those
functions with minimal interference from other cellular functions. Some of these
"compartments" consist of membrane- enclosed intracellular organelles, within
which specific biochemical reactions occur. In the case of post-translational
processing of "secretory" proteins (including membrane proteins and lysosomal
proteins, the biosyntheses of which also utilize the "secretory pathway"), late
post-translational modification by the addition of terminal sugars (and other
substituents) takes place within the lumen of the Golgi apparatus, a complex
collection of membrane-bound biosynthetic compartments to which the nascent
proteins are transported. The sugar transferase reactions require the
participation of the membrane-bound transferase enzymes, the nascent
glycoprotein, and the nucleotide-linked "activated" sugar substrates. The
activated nucleotide sugars are not biosynthesized within the Golgi lumen, but
elsewhere in the cell (usually in the cytoplasm). These compounds do not readily
cross biological membranes. Similarly, the resulting reaction product of the
transferase reaction, free nucleotide, also does not cross membranes readily.
Yet, it is critical for the nucleotide sugars to enter the lumen, and also
critical for the reaction products (which would inhibit the reaction if allowed
to acumulate) to exit from the site of the reaction. By focusing on the
transport and compartmentalized utilization of a particular nucleotide sugar,
UDP-galactose, his research will increase our understanding of how this
delicate, yet critical, compartmentalization works in the living cell.