* 8908272
* Economics of State and Local Government:  Sources and Uses  of Funds in the Western States, 1790-1980
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1989,12/31/1991
* John Legler, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 12/31/1991
* USD 178,894.00

One of the remaining gaps in the quantitative record of U.S. economic history is
detailed information on the fiscal activities of state and local governments.
Annual time series on federal revenues and expenditures are available from 1789
on, but similar information on state and local governments is sparse,
particularly before 1900. This project closes the statistical gap for nineteen
western states by developing for each state annual time-series estimates of
state revenues and expenditures and decennial estimates for local revenues and
expenditures, supplemented by a series on large cities. These series indicate
overall levels of fiscal activity and the sources and uses of funds. State
documents, published and unpublished, furnish the basis for complete state level
estimates. Local government estimates are based on a sampling procedure. This
project should be funded because it creates a unique and invaluable database for
U.S. economic history and public finance. The first two stages of the work
covered states from the Atlantic seaboard to the Mississippi. This grant
completes the database for the entire United States. The data is publicly
available through the Interuniversity Consortium for Political and Social
Research. The project also produces a series of papers summarizing the fiscal
history of states in each region of the country and studies on questions of
public finance and the role of government in the 19th century.