* 8908894
* Research Initiation:  Fluid Flow and Heat Flow Modeling of  Continuous Casting Processes
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/1989,02/29/1992
* Brian Thomas, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* F. Hank Grant
* 02/29/1992
* USD 65,000.00

This project will develop and apply three dimensional mathematical models of
fluid flow and heat flow in the mold region of continuous casting processes. The
models will be extended from previous work developing two dimensional finite-
element models, which incorporate the turbulence equations, and separate meshes
for the nozzle and mold cavity. The models will be validated through comparisons
with experimental measurements conducted using water models of continuous slab
casting molds at Inland Steel and ARMCO, Inc., which are being funded
separately. By applying these models to investigate the influence of individual
process variables, the mechanisms of defect formation can be better understood
and improvements made to the steel slab casting process. Fundamental issues
important to the numerical calculation of turbulent fluid flow and the
accompanying heat transfer will also be investigated in this project. These
include mesh refinement, convergence schemes, turbulence parameters, boundary
conditions, and incorporation of two-phase flow and buoyancy. This work will
help extend the current accuracy, range of application and state-of-the-art of
mathematical fluid flow modeling. Once developed, the models will be extended to
other casting processes, particularly the "near-net-shape" steel casting
processes of continuous thin-slab, single-, and twin-roll casters. This project
will help in the design of these new processes, and could have a tremendous
impact on the future competitiveness of the American steel industry.