* 8908226
* Coordination Problems and the Design of Institutions
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1989,12/31/1991
* Jeffrey Banks, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 12/31/1991
* USD 48,922.00

Recent theoretical research has convincingly established that cooperative
behavior can be maintained among selfish, rational individuals simply through
the processes of repeated interaction and appropriate mutual expectations. That
research provides the basis for a theory of social cohesion in groups of all
kinds, and provides tools for analyzing conditions under which cooperation,
altruism, stability, etc., are likely to continue or to decay. The theory makes
no provision for formal mechanisms of communication, coordination or enforcement
in groups or organizations. Several fundamental questions remain unanswered
concerning the creation and maintenance of social cohesion, however. In
particular, the previous research demonstrates that there are generally many
patterns of behavior and expectations under which cooperation could be
maintained, but these patterns are likely to be incompatible: if one person's
expectations conform to one such pattern, and another's expectations conform to
another pattern, then they may fail to achieve cooperation at all. For
spontaneous cooperation to arise, individuals must have corresponding
expectations about the appropriate behavior. To explain how social cohesion gets
started, and to understand how it is maintained under changing conditions,
requires that we understand how people overcome this problem of coordination.
The current research investigation aims to extend the theory of cooperation
among rational individuals to explain how problems of coordination can be
solved. In particular, the researchers will mathematically model various
communication processes, using the same general approach as previous models have
taken toward cooperation. They will then evaluate the ability of these processes
to promote coordination, taking full account of the existence of uncertainty and
private information, and of the mutually recognized opportunity for individuals
to manipulate, conceal, or misrepresent through communication. In their most
general form, such communication processes amount tosocial institutions - -
norms, traditions, constitutions, and leadership institutions, to name just a
few examples. The expectation is that rational behavior within these processes
can explain the ability (or failure) of social institutions to maintain
cooperation or cohesion in all kinds of settings. Once developed, the theory
will allow a specification of an experimental design for testing hypotheses
about complex cooperation and the design of institutions in the laboratory, and
to specify statistical models for the testing of hypotheses about existing
social, economic, and political organizaitons. If successful, the theory will
have important implications for our understanding of may forms of social
organization, including the structure of economic markets and regulation, the
design of constitutions, and the structure of political agencies.