* 8908696
* Coordination and Operation of Two-Sided Matching Markets:   Theory and Evidence
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1989,12/31/1992
* Alvin Roth, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Lynn A. Pollnow
* 12/31/1992
* USD 192,066.00

This project consists of two distinct but related lines of investigation. The
first is a largely empirical investigation of the ways in which various entry
level job markets for elite professionals are organized. The motivation for the
investigation is provided by preliminary evidence that markets in which both
workers and firms are highly heterogeneous may have some important features in
common with one another, and may in general behave quite differently, and
require different kinds of analysis, than markets involving fairly homogeneous
firms and workers. Specifically, the project analyzes the American market for
interns and residents, several parallel markets for beginning physicians which
operate in the different regions of the National Health Service in the United
Kingdom; the system by which French university professors obtain positions; the
market for graduates of the University of Tokyo; and aspects of the markets for
graduates of top American law and business schools. The second line of research
is primarily theoretical, and consists of three parts. The first part explores
why a variety of related two-sided matching models have similar properties,
although they require different assumptions. The second part develops matching
models with incomplete information that are more appropriate for real world
problems. The third part consists of modelling and exploring the phenomena
uncovered in the ongoing empirical investigations. This ambitious project should
be supported because of the insights it will provide in the performance of such
important labor markets as those for physicians, lawyers and business school
graduates. The research will also improve matching theory. This is valuable
because many different economic problems can be represented as matching
problems.