* 8908131
* REU:  Natural Selection and Seasonal Polyphenism in a       Complex Phenotype
* BIO,DEB
* 10/15/1989,03/31/1993
* Joel Kingsolver, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 03/31/1993
* USD 240,546.00

Most features of animals of interest to evolutionary biologists involve complex
traits: Sets or systems of interrelated aspects of the animal. For example
composed of a system of interrelated bones. Most complex traits are influenced
by the environment in which they develop (called phenotypic plasticity); thus
for example the development of the human hand may be influenced by the
nutritional history of the individual. Despite the importance of such complex
traits, little is known quantitatively of how natural selection acts on complex
traits in wild populations, or of consequences of phenotypic plasticity for
selection on such traits. The proposed research will study natural selection and
phenotypic plasticity of one complex trait: The wing pigmentation pattern of the
butterfly, Pieris occidentalis. Using a series of field experiments in wild
populations, the research will: (1) measure natural selection on different
aspects of wing pigment pattern, and how such selections may vary seasonally;
(2) determine whether selection is the result of the effects of pigment pattern
on body temperature regulation or on camouflage from potential predators; and
(3) measure the selective consequences of phenotypic plasticity in wing pigment
pattern. These experiments will provide the first detailed case study of the
mechanisms and seasonal variation in natural selection for a complex,
phenotypically-plastic trait.