* 8908963
* ROW: Generic Relationships in North American Astereae (Compositae) Using Chloroplast DNA Restriction Site Mapping
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1989,12/31/1990
* Meredith Lane, University of Kansas Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Penelope L. Firth
* 12/31/1990
* USD 37,976.00

Evolutionary relationships among the 135 genera of sunflowers of the tribe
Astereae, an ecologically important group especially in the American West, are
poorly known. What discussion of this topic there has been in the literature has
concentrated mostly on possible modes of change in chromosome numbers within the
tribe, but even that issue remains unresolved. Dr. Meredith Lane, under a Career
Advancement Award, will work in the laboratory of Dr. Robert Jansen at
University of Connecticut to learn the powerful new techniques of chloroplast
DNA restriction site mapping. She will use these methods to study 33 genera in
the complex, to obtain comparative data. These data will be used in a computer-
aided phylogenetic analysis and compared to a similar analysis of morphological
data. Such a phylogeney will help resolve the question of the mode of chromosome
number evolution in the Astereae and will clarify intergeneric taxonomic
relationships. A number of specific questions about the taxonomic status of
several problematic genera such as Lessingia and Benitoa, and Chrysothamnus and
Ericameria can be answered using the comparative DNA information. Work will also
begin on the large genus Haplopappus and its relatives. Dr. Jansen's laboratory
is a very active one, and collaborative interactions with other systematists
will enhance possiblities for future research by Dr. Lane.