* 8908391
* Modification of the Catalytic Action of Cyclodextrin        Glucanotransferase by Genetic Site-Directed Mutagenesis
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/1989,12/31/1991
* Bernard Tao, Purdue Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Fred G. Heineken
* 12/31/1991
* USD 76,044.00

Glucosylases are ubiquitous in nature and form the basis for several industrial
processes. Therefore, greater understanding of the catalytic structure of these
biocatalysts has both scientific and commercial importance. The objective of
this work is to provide information about the structural- functional
relationships of these biocatalysts to enable the engineering of biocatalyst
performance and specificity. The model system to be investigated is cyclodextrin
glucanotransferase (CGTase). CGTase and other glucosylases (e.g. alpha amylase,
glucoamylase and alpha glucosidase) share regions of primary sequence homology,
which have been implicated as the catalytic site for these enzymes. However,
whereas all these enzymes promote the hydrolysis of alpha 1,4- glucans, only
CGTase promotes significant reformation of glycosidic linkages. This study will
examine the effects of changing specific amino acids within the CGTase catalytic
site that are not homologous with corresponding residues in alpha amylase. The
goals of performing such substitutions are to: 1) ascertain if these residues
are the determinants of the re- ligation catalysis and , 2) determine if
biocatalyst product specificity can be altered. Mutations will be created by
genetic site-directed mutagenesis techniques and transformed into E. coli.
Mutant biocatalysts will be characterized by their catalytic activity and
product specificity on maltodextrins, starch and beta cyclodextrins.