* 8908142
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1989,12/31/1990
* Donald Puchala, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli Jr.
* 12/31/1990
* USD 6,600.00

This Doctoral Dissertation Research Support is for a historical investigation of
the effect that direct foreign investment has on the vitality and integration of
a dependent economy. The major theoretical question of interest, which has been
derived from dependency theory, is the degree to which direct foreign investment
serves to block the integration of local economic actors in the dependent
economy and thus distort its development. Although dependency theory argues that
this is often the case, conventional theories suggest that direct foreign
investment actually spurs the growth of the dependent economy by producing a
"multiplier effect" so that growth in the leading sectors receiving the foreign
investment spills over throughout the rest of the economy via the creation of
new commercial ties in the local economy. This is what economists sometimes
refer to as the creation of "forward and backward linkages" in the dependent
economy. The research is designed to provide a thorough investigation of these
issues by analyzing statistically 40 years of data about Puerto Rico from the
mid 1940s to the 1980s, drawn from four different levels of analysis: the
aggregate economy as a whole, the eight basic economic sectors, selected
industries, and selected individual firms. The sectoral, industry, and firm data
sets, each of which contain up to forty years of data, will each form a pooled
time-series data set. These will be analyzed so that comparisons can be drawn
between sectors, industries and firms that exhibit relatively greater amounts of
direct foreign investment, and those with smaller amounts. Results from each of
these levels will then be compared as a cross check on each other. The
importance of this research lies in its potential to clarify the nature of the
effect that direct foreign investment has on dependent economies. In particular,
this study draws attention to two key relationships: the link between the level
of direct foreign investment and the strength of commercial ties linking
businesses in the local economy, and the relationship between the strength of
these commercial ties and developmental outcomes in the dependent economy, such
as unemployment, capital formation, and capital repatriation. Focusing on these
relationships is important since forward and backward linkages play a key role
in shaping economic development in dependent economies. If the Puerto Rican case
shows that direct foreign investment actually serves to weaken the commercial
ties among local businesses, and if this in turn can be linked to the levels of
unemployment and capital formation, then an important part of the process that
lies behind what is vaguely termed "dependency" will have been uncovered.