* 8909038
* Collaborative Research: Above- and Belowground Response of  Coniferous Ecosystems to Tree-Fall Gaps
* BIO,DEB
* 11/01/1989,04/30/1993
* Thomas Spies, Oregon State University
* Continuing grant
* None
* 04/30/1993
* USD 198,078.00

A collaborative research project will be conducted by the University of
Washington, Yale University, and Oregon State University for an experimental
study of ecosystem responses to tree-fall gaps and spatial and temporal
relationship between above- and belowground gaps. It is hypothesized that
mechanisms of community and ecosystem responses to gaps can only be understood
if both above- and belowground structures and resources are considered. An
experiment to determine the size of aboveground gap needed to form a belowground
gap in mature and old-growth coniferous forests will be imposed. The
investigators will also measure how above-and belowground structural changes are
reflected in resource availability and loss and in vegetative response. To
examine the hypotheses, the team will create tree- fall gaps of ranging from
small to large in five sizes (0, 2, 8 and 16 and 32 trees removed) in reach of
two stand developmental stages: mature (understory reinitiation), and old
growth. Above and belowground sampling will be conducted to provide an estimate
of the mean of the gap and will consist of root biomass (separated into tree,
shrub and herb components), N leaching below the rooting zone, and soil
temperature and moisture, light level determinations, shrub and herb biomass,
seed germination and monitoring of advanced regeneration. In the old-growth
stands, above-and belowground resources (plus net N mineralization) and
vegetative biomass will be sampled more intensively to provide not only an
estimate of the gap mean but of the within-gap spatial patterns. In addition,
trenching experiments will be established in the old-growth stands to test the
relative importance of above- and belowground resources on tree establishment
and growth and develop predictive models of plant response to resources. The
three-institution project team is excellent. Research sites and facilities are
first rate. Results should be important to both the fundamental understanding of
forest ecology and to forest resource management.