* 8909189
* RIA:  Communication and Synchronization in Parallel         Computation
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1989,12/31/1992
* Doddaballapur Jayasimha, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Forbes D. Lewis
* 12/31/1992
* USD 59,949.00

It is well known that parallel processing in general, and shared memory
multiprocessing in particular, offers a promising future to achieve high
computational speeds. A number of researchers have recognized, however, that as
the number of processing elements (PEs) in the multiprocessor increase, the
communication and synchronization overheads required among subtasks of a
parallel algorithm can reduce the speedup, and, consequently, defeat the very
purpose of parallel processing. They argue that for effective parallel algorithm
analysis, communication and synchronization complexity measures should be used
as performance criteria in addition to the usual parallel time complexity
measure. As a first step to support this argument, they have developed
communication and synchronization measures for parallel algorithms. A parallel
algorithm on a shared memory multiprocessor is modeled by a directed acyclic
graph (DAG) with vertices corresponding to computed values and edges to
dependencies. The DAGs of many practical numerical algorithms result in regular
structures which are suitable to graph- theoretic and combinatorial analyses.
They have used the communication measure to prove a trade-off result between
computation time and communication for a triangular solver algorithm. With this
trade-off result, they can precisely capture the intuitive notion of,
"communication increases as the computation time decreases." In the proposed
project, they wish to continue the research in several ways as detailed in the
project description. They can succinctly state an important goal: given an
algorithm, they should be able to state the time, communication, and
synchronization requirements, and any resulting trade-offs as a function of the
size of the problem, the number of PEs, and the architecture.