* 8909421
* Cohort Replacement and Social Change:  A Systematic Analysisof Recent Trends in the U.S.
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/1989,06/30/1992
* Glenn Firebaugh, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Shelton White
* 06/30/1992
* USD 79,413.00

This study proposes to examine the generational factors that affect social
changes in attitudes, opinions, and values. Policy makers and social observers
often assume that social change within the larger society necessarily stems from
changes in the values, attitudes and opinions of individuals. But there is
another possibility: change could stem from cohort replacement, that is, the
replacement of older birth cohorts (for example, those born in the 1890s) with
later ones (for example, those born in the 1960s). In fact, there are good
reasons to believe that cohort replacement has been an important source of
recent change in U.S. public opinion on such diverse issues as racial
segregation, the proper roles for women, and whether or not government officials
can be trusted. Yet that possibility has not been systematically examined. In an
attempt to determine cohort replacement's contribution to recent social change
in the U.S., this research uses annual and bicennial survey data on social and
political attitudes in the U.S. collected over the last 25-30 years. A wide span
of important and controversial issues will be examined, including political
attitudes, religious beliefs and practices, neighborhood, and so on), attitudes
about abortion, and attitudes about women's roles. The results will be useful to
policymakers as well as to social scientists, because knowledge about cohort
replacement effects can help us determine the likely direction of future social
change. For example, if opposition to school integration is found predominantly
among the older cohorts, then that opposition should subside as those cohorts
die off.