* 8909361
* Studies in Aggregate Economics
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1989,07/31/1992
* Edward Prescott, University of Minnesota Saint Paul
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/1992
* USD 86,202.00

A promising development in economics is the development and use of computational
experiments. This entails computing the equilibrium process for a well specified
model economy. These methods have been used to address various economic
questions such as the dead weight loss associated with various tax schemes or
the quantitative contributions of various stochastic disturbances to the
business cycle. But previously, the application of these methods has typically
used a representative agent or deterministic economy. Some heterogeneous agent
economies are known to behave as if there were a single standing household. For
addressing some questions, however, the justification for the use of a standing
agent abstract is dictated purely by computational considerations. Recent
findings that show that standing agent economies underestimate the cost of
inflation by a factor of three, and this suggests that for most issues in
monetary economics, heterogeneous agent economies are needed. The investigator
has developed practical computational methods for analyzing multi-agent
economies, and one part of this project will apply these methods to study such
economies with explicit stochastic monetary policy rules. This analysis will
provide a better understanding of the relationship between the monetary and real
sectors. The second part of the project will exploit recent developments in
general equilibrium theory to develop a way to measure the output of the
financial intermediation sector. These methods entail the hedonic pricing of
complex contracts. Using these same theoretical advances, an analysis of
economies, in which both the number of workers operating each plant and the
number of hours each plant is operated can be varied, will be conducted.
Preliminary results indicate this is an important consideration for business
cycle accounting. Finally, an empirical study to determine the nature of
productivity and output movements at the industry level will be undertaken. The
key feature of this analysis is that human capital is in part firm specific. The
question being addressed is whether procyclical productivity movements are an
artifact of abstracting from this feature and not the result of exogenous
technological change. This question is another important issue in business cycle
accounting.