* 8909718
* Engineering Research Equipment Grant:  Microwave Prober
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1989,01/31/1991
* Sigfrid Yngvesson, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence S. Goldberg
* 01/31/1991
* USD 20,150.00

This Engineering Research Equipment Grant will support purchase of a Cascade
microwave probe station. This prober is designed for use in conjunction with a
microwave network analyzer and provides a precise, convenient microwave
connection between the analyzer ports and the surface of a semiconductor
substrate. This equipment will be used for the microwave measurement and
characterization of novel microwave, millimeter wave and optoelectronic
semiconductor devices and circuits. The prober would fill a gap in what are
otherwise well-equipped laboratory facilities. The department has several HP
8510 systems available for research and instruction. It has also developed
semiconductor processing facilities for the fabrication of state-of- the-art
high speed devices. These facilities include an OMCVD system for compound
semiconductor growth, an ion reactive etcher, an e-beam evaporator and a sub-
micron mask aligner. The microwave prober would enhance the ability to use the
extensive microwave instrumentation to characterize the devices which are built.
Seven faculty are involved with projects which could make use of the probe
station. These projects range from millimeter wave imaging arrays to resonant
tunneling diode oscillators and optoelectronic devices. The availability of a
probe station would impact the efficiency and quality of the research done on
all these topics.