* 8909030
* Potential Role of Phosphoinostitides in the Actions of      Nerve Growth Factor
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1989,08/31/1993
* Margarita Contreras, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Platt
* 08/31/1993
* USD 150,000.00

Nerve growth factor (NGF) is essential for development and survival of
sympathetic and sensory neurons in the peripheral nervous system. In PC12 cells,
NGF stimulates the differentiation of the cells into sympathetic-like neurons.
Previous studies have shown that NGF stimulates the hydrolysis of
phosphoinositides in PC12 cells by a phospholipase C-mediated reaction. This
hydrolytic reaction occurs with a time course and dose-dependence that is
consistent with the hypothesis that phosphoinositides may play a role in the
mechanism of action of NGF. To analyze the role of phosphoinositide hydrolysis
in the actions of NGF, the research plan is divided into three sections: 1) The
effect of NGF on the formation of inositol phosphates, and DAG, and release of
arachidonic acid will be examined to determine the identity of potential second
messengers in the action of NGF. 2) To explore the role of phosphoinositide
hydrolysis in differentiation of PC12 cells, the metabolism of phosphoinositides
induced by fibroblast growth factor, another differentiating factor, or by NGF
in NGF-primed cells will be examined. 3) The phosphoinositide metabolism in
adrenal chromaffin cells from neonatal rats will be assessed to determine
whether NGF-induced phosphoinositide hydrolysis occurs in NGF- sensitive
nonneoplastic cells.