* 8909329
* Engineering Research Initiation Grant:  Optimization of     Switched Reluctance Motor Drives (REU Supplement)
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/1989,11/30/1991
* David Taylor, Georgia Tech Research Corporation - GA Tech Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Vijay Vittal
* 11/30/1991
* USD 71,974.00

The objectives of this project are 1) to improve the commutation strategy of
switched reluctance motor (SRM) controllers in order to minimize the amplitude
and the rate of change of stator currents; and 2) to determine the most suitable
SRM flux and torque characteristics for use with controllers based on the
linearizing and decoupling transformation (LDT). The proposed research involves
the extension of methods recently developed by the principal investigator in the
area of SRM control. The approach involves a two stage design process: first, an
inner feedback loop "transforms" the multiple-input nonlinear SRM dynamics into
those of a single-input linear system; second, an outer feedback loop is
designed for the specific control task using well-known linear techniques. The
first phase of research will be performed from the viewpoint f control design.
The objective will be to optimize the existing LDT algorithm in order to make
the best use of power electronic technology. The second phase of the research,
performed from the viewpoint of machine design, will determine the best SRM
specifications for use with the LDT algorithm. Hence, the result of the latter
work will be a "target machine" to be an SRM design objective. The research will
be based on mathematical optimization theory, and will involve detailed
simulation studies as well as laboratory experimentation.