* 8909052
* Regulation of Photoreceptor Sensitivity:  Biochemical       Mechanisms
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1989,07/31/1993
* Barbara-Anne Battelle, University of Florida
* Continuing grant
* Christopher Platt
* 07/31/1993
* USD 271,443.00

The retina of the eye contains photoreceptors, and in many organisms the
sensitivity of the retina to light can change. The horseshoe crab, Limulus, is
an animal that has been used for many years as a model for vision because it has
particularly large compound eyes, with large cells that are relatively
accessible for physiological and biochemical studies. In Limulus, retinal
sensitivity is regulated by two factors, light itself, which decreases the
sensitivity, and nerves coming from the brain to the eye, called efferent
innervation, which increase the sensitivity of the eye to light. This project
addresses the largely unknown biochemical mechanisms initiated by light and by
efferent innervation in Limulus photoreceptors, and explores their interactions
at the intracellular level. In particular, changes produced in intracellular
calcium ion concentration profoundly influence photoreceptor sensitivity.
Internal calcium may exert its effects by calcium regulation of enzyme
processes, such as protein kinase activity and protein phosphorylation.
Biochemical tools are used to isolate and characterize one of the interesting
calcium-activated kinases (known as CaCAM-PK) that also may remain active even
in the absence of further calcium elevation. This property means this kinase can
be a kind of molecular activating switch. Another protein kinase studied depends
on calcium and phospholipid, and acts on photoreceptor proteins. These studies
will contribute significantly to our knowledge of how the sensitivity of
photoreceptors is regulated, and also how calcium influences the function of
cells in general.