* 8909253
* Efficient Exploitation of Concurrency Using Graph           Decomposition
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/1989,08/31/1992
* Carolyn McCreary, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Forbes D. Lewis
* 08/31/1992
* USD 67,564.00

The goal of the proposed work is to develop techniques to support the serial to
parallel conversion of algorithms in such a way as to create parallel algorithms
that minimize completion time. The techniques are based on a graph decomposition
scheme that efficiently exploits possibilities for parallelism in the sequential
algorithms and identifies concurrent activities for scheduling on available
processors. Communication costs between processors impact heavily on the
execution time of parallel programs. Algorithm degradation can be severe due to
communication costs both in terms of resource utilization and waiting delay. A
higher degree of concurrency necessarily requires a greater communication cost.
The graph decomposition method for determining the parallel equivalent algorithm
attempts to find the balance between these two conflicting criteria. It is based
on both processor execution costs and interprocessor communication costs and is
designed to yield fast execution. As in previous approaches to this problem, a
program is represented by a DAG (directed acyclic graph) where nodes represent
code segments and edges represent data flow. The concept that make the graph
decomposition approach unique is that the data flow graph is partitioned into a
hierarchy of subgraphs called clans. Clan capture necessary ordering operations
and extract opportunities for concurrency while reducing communication costs.
Using this structure, the optimal size code segments that create a degree of
concurrency which is optimal when communication costs are considered is
determined.