* 8909520
* Economic Exchange When Enforcement Is Limited
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1989,12/31/1991
* Mordechai Perry, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Lynn A. Pollnow
* 12/31/1991
* USD 72,871.00

A fundamental problem in economics (and other fields) is how parties divide
surplus that may be available through exchange, joint production, or other
potentially beneficial transactions. While much attention has been given to this
problem recently, it has typically been assumed in the literature, explicitly or
implicitly, that agents can credibly commit themselves to a path of action or
that they can write enforceable contracts. This is the case, for example, in the
large literature on the bargaining problem and contract theory. Very little
attention has been given to the case where, for some reason, commitment or
enforcement is not possible. This project seeks to understand the nature of
transactions under such conditions. Absent enforcement technology, agents must
seek an agreement that is self enforcing, i.e., such that it is in the best
interest of each agent to execute his part of the agreement even if there is no
way to force him to do so. The project studies self enforcing procedures in two
classes of problems. One is the execution of joint projects, where agents can
free ride on the contributions of others. Another is the relation between two
parties such as an employer and worker, where surplus can be generated if the
worker works and the employer pays him. The aim is to characterize the set of
self enforcing procedures, to discuss their properties and particularly to
determine how the lack of enforcement affects the social welfare associated with
the exchange. Finally, the project studies the way agents choose a procedure for
reaching agreements when enforcement is limited. This project is very important
because so many significant economic problems can be studies using the results
from this research. For example, the research on joint projects could be used to
study how the costs of an R&D venture, a public project, or a joint research
paper are divided among different partners. In this example one partner may be
unwilling to complete his part before the other partner or partners make some
contribution if it is difficult to enforce a contract among the partners.
Partners would choose procedures whereby the task is divided into small parts,
and these parts are completed sequentially. The results for this research could
be applicable to areas outside economics. For example, the execution of the Camp
David peace treaty between Israel and Egypt was designed to take the form of
sequential, alternating steps because the parties were aware of the enforcement
problems.