* 8909335
* Force Feedback Control for Dextrous Robot Masters Using     Shape Memory Metals
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/1989,06/30/1992
* Grigore Burdea, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Elbert L. Marsh
* 06/30/1992
* USD 69,429.00

This project addresses the development of a force feedback control scheme for
dexterous robot masters in telemanipulation systems. Robot telemanipulation may
be viewed as the remote control of partially intelligent machines where
continuous on line monitoring and control of a robot slave device is provided by
a master under operator control. Such systems are designed to protect humans
from potentially dangerous environments, i.e., radiation chambers, outer space
or munitions dumps. The coupling between master and slave may be either
mechanical or electrical. When, as in most modern systems, the linkage is
electrical, performance degrades due to less natural control. Performance
improvement is possible with a master which is more natural to control. A
dexterous or multifingered replica of the human hand is such a system. However,
current designs provide no force feedback. This research tests the use of Shape
Memory Metals (SMM) actuators to bring force feedback to the operator fingers.
It comprises several tasks including mathematical modeling and experimental
testing of different types of SMM actuators, building a prototype dexterous
master, designing the interface between the master and the control computer,
integrating the master with the host computer, and integrating the master/host
computer with the remote robot. This research advances engineering knowledge of
dexterous force feedback and has numerous applications in space, military,
energy, and medical sectors. It could improve efficiency of telemanipulation
systems and expand their capabilities to address more complex tasks.