* 8909722
* "Colloidal Fouling of Porous Membrane Filters:  The Effect  of Particle Size and Stability
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/1989,12/31/1991
* Mark Wiesner, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Edward H. Bryan
* 12/31/1991
* USD 70,000.00

The objective of this project is to determine the role of colloid particle size
and stability on performance of membranes used in water and wastewater treatment
process. While models for particle transport in membrane modules have been
developed which treat transport mechanisms individually, no model has yet been
proposed which combines these mechanisms nor has the interaction between these
mechanisms been evaluated experimentally to produce an complete picture of the
conditions under which colloids may reduce the flux across membranes. Particle
transport by Brownian diffusion, shear-induced, and lateral migration in a flat
plate membrane module will be studies using pressure field-flow fractionation
techniques. By this method, a pulse of particles is introduced at the inlet to a
porous channel. The particle concentration response in the outlet of this
idealized membrane module is monitored over time using UV absorbance and checked
against electrical sensing zone and photon correlation measurements. The
retention time of particles in the channel can be compared with the retention
time calculated assuming a single mode of back-transport. Particle size and
permeation rate through the membrane will be varied to produce conditions that
favor transport by each of these mechanisms. The effect of electrokinetic
interactions on back-transport will be evaluated by performing identical
experiments with charged and uncharged particles. The proposal leading to this
award was submitted in response to NSF 88-99, Research Initiation Awards. The
proposed work may lead to improvements in the Engineering design of membrane and
process using membranes for treatment of water and wastewater used industrially
and municipally.