* 8909745
* Mathematical Sciences: Gaussian Processes and the Geometry  of Normed Spaces
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1989,05/31/1991
* Yehoram Gordon, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* William Y. Velez
* 05/31/1991
* USD 24,200.00

Professor Gordon's project involves a mixture of Banach space theory and
probability theory. He will be mainly concerned with finite-dimensional geometry
in Banach spaces and in quasi- normed spaces. Probabilistic inequalities figure
in both the methods to be used and in the applications that are envisioned. The
problems addressed by Professor Gordon's research have to do with keeping track
of several random variables simultaneously. A random variable, one of the
fundamental notions of probability theory, is a real-valued function on a space
equipped with a probability measure, or less formally the numerical result of
performing an experiment whose outcome is uncertain. One can put n random
variables together to form an n- dimensional random vector. Probabilistically,
its behavior will depend not only on the individual components, but on their
interaction with one another. Various notions of distance in n- dimensional
space give rise to various geometries in which the random vector can move; an
advantageous choice of ambient geometry can yield interesting probabilistic
information about the random vector. Further, random vectors can be used to
explore the geometry. This sort of interaction between linear analysis and
probability theory, currently quite lively, is at the heart of Professor
Gordon's research.