* 8909940
* Evaluation of Rate Parameters during Heterogeneous Catalysisin Supercritical Fluids
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/1989,06/30/1993
* Martin Abraham, University of Tulsa
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 06/30/1993
* USD 74,757.00

The unique properties of a fluid near its critical point can be utilized to
alter principle reaction pathways within a reacting system. The unusual solvent
properties of a supercritical fluid (SCF) can facilitate reactions which cannot
be achieved in traditional solvents. This happens because the supercritical
solvent provides an environment where mass transfer limitations are eliminated
due to the solvent's physical properties, which lie intermediate between a gas
and a liquid. Thus, the high solvent density relative to a gas combined with
high solute diffusivity relative to diffusivity in a liquid, create an
environment where high concentrations of solute can dissolve in the solution and
yet severe mass transfer limitations are absent. The goal of this research
project are to investigate the effect of SCF solvents on the rate processes
which control the overall rate of a catalytic reaction. Specifically, the PI
will attempt to measure the rate of adsorption, the rate intraparticle
diffusion, and the adsorptive capacity of the catalyst under supercritical
conditions. He will use chromatographic techniques to measure the desired rate
parameters under a variety of experimental conditions and consider the overall
effect of the SCF on the reaction pathways by measuring conversion and product
selectivity. An application of this technology is in the area of hazardous waste
remediation through combined SCF extraction of organics from the porous soil and
solvent regeneration by oxidation. In lieu of this potential use of such
systems, this work will involve the vanadium pentoxide (V2O5) catalyzed
oxidation of 1,4-dichlorobenzene (a model compound for many hazardous materials)
in both supercritical water and supercritical nitrous oxide (N2O).