* 8909474
* Conference on "Measuring Social and Economic Inequality" to be held in Luxembourg, Beligium, Summer of 1989
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1989,02/28/1991
* Susan Mayer, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Shelton White
* 02/28/1991
* USD 9,815.00

Collaboration between European and American social scientists, each familiar
with their own societies and with research data on common topics, provide vital
opportunities for an improved, comparative understanding of outstanding
theoretical and empirical problems. One such problem addressed here, by such
means, is the common but increasingly indefensible reliance on income measures
of poverty and inequality. Studies of material well-being (reflecting the
consumption of goods and services) or subjective well-being suggest somewhat
modest correlations between these and income inequality. Another is the possibly
discouraging effects of income equality on social and political participation. A
third is the possible effects of the strength of the coupling between different
types of inequality (wealth, income, material goods, subjective well-being) on
crime and social unrest. Progress on these questions necessitates analyses of
cross-national data by researchers able to share their knowledge of these
nations in the sensitive interpretation of results. By means of the three modest
commissions of papers to be jointly authored and presented by American and
European social scientists at a summer conference, this grant will help
facilitate valuable studies of various measures of social inequality, their
causes and consequences.