* 8909060
* Chemistry and Applications to Catalysis of Phosphine        Complexes of the Platinum Group Elements
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/1989,11/30/1994
* Richard Eisenberg, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Paul H. Smith
* 11/30/1994
* USD 568,210.00

In this project in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry
Program Dr. Richard Eisenberg will take advantage of a new phenomenon recently
discovered in his laboratory, para hydrogen induced polarization, in the study
the mechanisms of a variety of organometallic reactions. This phenomenon leads
to greatly enhanced nuclear magnetic resonance signals, with the promise of
significant improvements in one ofthe most important tools used in the study of
metal-hydrogen interactions. The focus of the project is the chemistry of
platinum group complexes. For the complexes under study most of the ligands are
bridging and non-bridging di(tertiary phosphine) groups, with some hydride
ligands as well. A major thrust of the project is para hydrogen induced
polarization (PHIP) in which unusual NMR enhancements result when hydrogenation
and hydrogen addition reactions are performed using para enriched dihydrogen.
Observation of PHIP provides definitive evidence of a reaction mechanism
involving pairwise transfer of dihydrogen. The specific studies to be performed
will: a) analyze PHIP for its kinetic significance; b) use PHIP to observe
catalytically significant hydrides and intermediates: c) examine asymmetric
hydrogenation and cluster hydrogenolysis reactions using para enriched
dihydrogen; and d) use PHIP to enhance NMR signals in P-31 and C-13 NMR
spectroscopy. A second thrust focuses on metal complex-promoted reactions of
silanes with the principal objective of catalyzing Si-Si bond formation. One
series of studies will investigate the reactions of primary silanes with
binuclear complexes leading initially to complexes with bis(silylene) bridges.
Subsequent coupling of SiRH units will be probed through coordination control of
the metal centers, by redox-promoted reactions, and by photolyses. Removal of
dihydrogen generated in dehydrogenative coupling of silanes will be done by
hydrogenating an appropriate olefin. In a related series of studies mononuclear
bis- and tris(silyl) complexes will be examined with regard to Si-H vs Si-Si
reductive elimination. Other reactions of silyl complexes such as hydrosilation
will be studied also.