* 8909981
* Research Initiation Award: The Redox State, Composition, andStructure of Reactive Oxide Surfaces: W/M/D Supplement
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/1989,02/29/1992
* S. Ted Oyama, Clarkson University
* Standard Grant
* Farley Fisher
* 02/29/1992
* USD 74,000.00

This is an attempt to develop a method for determining the oxidation state of
surface layers of metal-oxide catalysts during a catalytic reaction. Up to now,
such data have been unobtainable except under very unrealistic conditions. The
method combines transient kinetics at atmospheric or near- atmospheric pressures
with spectroscopy (especially Auger electron spectroscopy) under ultrahigh
vacuum. Two types of oxides are studied: thick (micron-sized) films of one-and
two-componement oxides on polycrystalline gold, and thin (nanometer-sized) films
of spinels grown epitaxially on single crystals of gold. Raman spectroscopy and
low-energy electron diffraction are used to characterize the films. Ethanol is
used as a chemical probe; both acid-base and redox reactions are followed. Metal
oxides are technologically important materials because of their strength,
stability, and varied optical, electric, and magnetic properties. In the
fabrication of oxides, as well as in many of their applications, surface
properties are important. The materials studied in this project are typical of
many multicomponent systems used in industrial applications. This investigation
of the relationships between atomic structure, composition, oxidation state, and
surface chemical reactivity therefore has wide applicability, especially for
materials design using the principles of molecular architecture.