* 8909948
* Emulsion Pathways to Composite Polymeric Membranes for      Separation Processes
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/1989,07/31/1994
* Eli Ruckenstein, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Jeffrey Foltz
* 07/31/1994
* USD 306,314.00

In this project the investigator proposes a systematic evaluation of a new-type
of membrane to be used in separations processes. The principal novel aspect of
the proposed work is formation of the membrane by polymerization of two
monomers, mutually insoluble, one dispersed inside the other, after the
dispersion has been pressed between glass plates. When very high volume
fractions of the dispersed phase monomer are used the emulsion consists of
polyhedra of the dispersed phase monomer separated by thin lamella of the
continuous phase monomer. The principal application which is to be made of this
new type membrane is to separate one solvent from its solution in another
solvent, though other applications are certainly possible. The dispersed polymer
is chosen so that it is readily soluble in the solvent one wishes to remove from
a mixture of solvents, but is insoluble in the solvent one wishes to retain. The
continuous phase polymer, however, is insoluble in both solvents. The very thin
lamella of the continuous phase offer a very low mass transfer resistance. The
dispersed phase polymer, once saturated in the solvent to be removed, gives both
high selectivity and liquid-like diffusion coefficients, so that very high
fluxes should be obtainable. Two examples have been presented. In one, toluene
is separated from cyclohexane using a membrane with polystyrene as the
polymerized dispersed phase and polyacrylamide as the polymerized continuous
phase. In the second, water is separated from ethanol using a composite membrane
in which polyacrylamide is the polymerized dispersed phase and polystyrene is
the polymerized continuous phase. In both examples the new membranes give fluxes
and separation factors comparable to the best that has been achieved with any
other type of membrane. This is highly novel and innovative work with great
potential for introducing a whole new generation of membranes.