* 8909439
* Brain Mechanisms of Thirst
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1989,11/30/1993
* Neil Rowland, University of Florida
* Continuing grant
* Fred Stollnitz
* 11/30/1993
* USD 148,329.00

The concept of "homeostasis" (the idea that the body tends to balance various
factors to maintain a stable internal state) is a key part of most current
explanations of ingestive behavior, in particular water and salt intake.
However, a number of observations, including Dr. Rowland's own, suggest that
this is too simple a view of the mechanism and organization of ingestive
behaviors. This research project will critically examine the homeostatic model
in several new ways, including the use of a sham-drinking rat preparation in
which ingested fluids are lost through a tube from the stomach out of the
animal. Dr. Rowland and others have shown that water deprivation increases sham
drinking more than normal drinking. Surprisingly, however, Dr. Rowland has been
unable to produce this greater increase in sham drinking with the presumed
elementary thirst stimuli, hypovolemia (low blood volume) and hyperosmolarity
(high concentration of chemicals dissolved in the blood). The first experiment
will use different routes of administration of salt at different times of day in
order to assess the generality of the surprising finding. Dr. Rowland will also
examine the microstructure (bursts and pauses) of drinking and attempt to assess
the role of very-short-term feedback loops on oral satiety that may override
physiologic thirst signals (and thus be independent of the controls of fluid
homeostasis). While such oral satiety factors have been suspected for many
years, they have never been analyzed convincingly. The second and third
experiments will deal with oral versus systemic factors in the control of salt
intake, again using sham ingestion as an experimental tool to separate oral from
systemic (pre- and post-ingestional) factors. At least two different strains of
rats will be studied because of genetic differences in salt preference. Dr.
Rowland hopes to be able to assess, from microstructural analysis of sham
drinking, the mechanisms by which this genetic difference affects behavior. Dr.
Rowland's studies place a new theoretical importance on oral factors as primary
mechanisms in maintaining fluid balance and have wider implications for the
interplay between systemic states and environmental stimuli in the control of
behavior.