* 8909416
* Conference on Regulation of Extravascular Fibrinolysis in   Nervous System Development and Disease; July 2-8, 1989;     Acqua fredda di Maratea, Italy
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1989,07/31/1990
* Barry Festoff, University of Kansas Medical Center
* Standard Grant
* Paul B. Farel
* 07/31/1990
* USD 2,000.00

The last decade has seen a dramatic explosion in the studies of thrombogenesis
and fibrinolysis. These processes involve cascades of enzymes acting on
precursor zymogens, thus allowing for multi-level, post-translational
regulation. Regulation also occurs at the transciptional and translational
levels and in the precise bonds which these proteolytic enzymes recognize and
cleave. Post-translational regulation also occurs by specific inhibitors, the
serpins, with precise active sites, regulated by hormones, modulators, and other
molecules. Cell surface receptors for thrombin and the plasminogen activators
(PAs) have been found, allowing for another dimension for regulation. Roles for
these molecules in cell migration and tissue remodelling are expanding. In
metastasis, inflammation and physiological processes such as ovulation,
proteases and inhibitors are being actively studied. Recent information suggests
important roles in the nervous systems. At this time, it is necessary to bring
leaders in this emerging field together to communicate the still nascent state
of knowledge about such intriguing molecules in the development, maintenance,
plasticity and degeneration of the nervous system. The key for this advanced
research workshop is the term "extravascular." These molecules are gene products
of neuron and glia cells. The evidence on which this workshop is based is four-
fold: (1) presence and release of urokinase (uPA) and tissue PA (tPA) at tips of
nerve growth cones, (2) identity of glia-derived nexin and protease nexin (PNI),
(3) localization of PNI at neuromuscular synapses, (4) detection of serpin and
Kunitz inhibitor sequences in B-amyloid cloned from neuritic plaques of victims
of Alzheimer's disease.