* 8909252
* An Investigation into the Use of Intelligent Systems to     Monitor Machinery
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/1989,09/30/1990
* Patricia Davies, Purdue Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Senior Program Assistant
* 09/30/1990
* USD 12,000.00

This award is for support to investigate the current use of intelligent systems
to monitor the health of machinery and other systems. This support is in the
form of a research assistantship for a graduate student. An intelligent system
is one that is capable of making limited decisions based on the analysis of
current information it is receiving and also perhaps based on historical data
that it has access to. In recent years there has been a rapid growth in the
research effort in the area of expert and knowledge based systems, the latest
component of this research being the design and use of neural networks. The
principal investigator is doing research on monitoring the condition of valves
in high pressure water pumps. The aim of the research is to identify parameters
in vibration signals taken on the pump that are sensitive to the valve
conditions. Measurements are being taken regularly on several similar pumps at
the plant and will be taken over a period of twelve to eighteen months. These
measurements will give a history of the vibration signals as the valves
deteriorate and also allow comparison between similar pumps. Within two years
most of the pumps will need some kind of maintenance overhaul. The types of
parameters that will be investigated will be signal power in particular
frequency bands, signal statistics, and shape characteristics of the forcing
signal at the valve seat, estimating using deconvolution techniques. Having
identified these parameters the next stage would be to build some portable
device that could pick up the vibration signals from the pumps and rate the
condition of the valves. This device could then be used by an unskilled operator
to monitor the valve condition.