* 8909596
* US-France (INRIA) Cooperative Research Robot World          Representation, Interpretation, and Control
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/1989,07/31/1992
* Edward Riseman, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 07/31/1992
* USD 42,368.00

This award will support a U.S.-French collaborative research program focused on
two highly important problems in robotics: indoor mobile robots and dexterous
manipulation. The researchers involved in this joint project are Thomas
Henderson, University of Utah, Ed Riseman, University of Massachusetts and
Oliver Faugeras, French National Institute for Information Science and
Automation (INRIA) - Sophia Antipolis. The proposed collaborative effort will
permit the investigation of a new approach for the specification of robot
behavior and control. The development of complex systems for robot control and
the discovery of the principles of their organization require a multifaceted
research effort whose components are comprised of significant and robust modules
based on proven theory. The three involved research teams each have made
significant theoretical and engineering contributions in the area of behavior-
based robot control. The University of Utah provides expertise in logical
sensors and deterministic synchronous Finite State Automata; the University of
Massachusetts provides expertise in programming languages and environments,
robot control land low-level vision, and INRIA provides expertise in motion
analysis, 3D representation and implementation testbeds. The group in France is
one of the strongest European groups working on robot vision. This joint project
will be focused on research on logical behaviors which characterize techniques
for the satisfaction of imposed relations (i.e. tasks) in a semantic network
representing the robot's world. The results of this collaborative effort should
make a significant contribution to our understanding of mobile robot behavior.