* 8909410
* Enhancement of Film Condensation Using a Porous Coating:  A Theoretical and Experimental Investigation
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/1989,11/30/1991
* Kevin Renken, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* mary chen
* 11/30/1991
* USD 76,998.00

An investigation of the enhancement of heat transfer in film condensation with
the use of a highly conductive and permeable porous coating on a solid
impermeable surface is to be made. A preliminary simple film condensation model
will be expanded to develop a more complex model for predicting the condensation
rate. Heat transfer rates for horizontal and inclined plates and tubes will be
reported. The advanced model will incorporate matching conditions at the
liquid/vapor interface which will account for the effects of vapor drag, forced
convection and relative permeability. The main results of the theoretical
research will be to document the dependence of the film thickness, velocity and
temperature distributions, and local heat transfer coefficient on the porous
matrix parameters and to compare these results to (i) the classical analysis of
Nusselt and (ii) other advanced methods of enhanced film condensation (e.g.,
integral or fluted fin surfaces). The experimental part of the investigation
will focus on the acquisition of film condensation heat transfer data from a
porous coated surface and on photographic observations of the condensation
process over a wide range of experimental conditions. Measurements of the heat
transfer coefficient will be obtained by condensing Freon-113 on an inclined
porous coated plate. Verification of the theoretical film condensation model,
which predicts a considerable heat transfer coefficient, is anticipated by the
experimental results.