* 8909749
* RIA: The Application Oriented Fault Tolerance Paradigm for  Multicomputer Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/1989,11/30/1991
* Bruce McMillin, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Maguire
* 11/30/1991
* USD 58,022.00

This project focuses on identifying problem classes applicable to the
Application Oriented Paradigm, a new class of fault-tolerance design method. In
this approach, the applications programmer is presented with a Reliable Parallel
Processing Model, which functionally consists of an application level constraint
predicate for constraining and detecting faulty behavior, a configuration
control layer for operation in the presence of failed components, and a
distributed diagnostic basis. The applications programmer must only be concerned
with the generation of an abstraction of each individual program's salient
reliability features. This task is performed in concert with each phase of the
Software Life Cycle beginning with the specification phase. The methodology is
applied to the design of parallel software for massively parallel multicomputer
networks, which can function in the presence of both hardware and software
errors. Issues addressed include system issues and configuration control,
application applicability, automated constraint predicate generation, and fault
detection and recovery. Fault tolerance is of paramount importance in large
distributed multicomputers. The design of a systematic method for developing
reliable control systems in massively parallel multicomputer networks in the
presence of both hardware and software error is very important. This research
develops a systematic method and demonstrates its applicability on applications
in the design of massively parallel systems. Support is strongly recommended