* 8909201
* Modeling Representation in District-Based Electoral Systems
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1989,12/31/1991
* Gary King, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 12/31/1991
* USD 78,429.00

This research deals with a critical, but inadequately studied, feature of
representative democracy in the United States: the election of members of the
U.S. Congress, state legislatures, and numerous city councils and county
legislatures in district-based electoral systems. Indeed, all but two democratic
nations elect national legislatures in single member or multimember geographic-
based districts. This project is aimed at assessing the consequences of
district-based representation. The most obvious consequence in American
elections is political gerrymandering, where one party attempts to redraw the
district lines so that the underlying electoral system favors one political
party over the other. Redistricting can also increase or decrease the electoral
responsiveness of an electoral system - - the degree to which the division of
parties in a legislature responds to changes in voter preferences.
Unfortunately, although numerous scholars have assessed the impact of
redistricting on a political system through simple means, it is difficult to
determine its effect on the more fundamental aspects of American politics such
as partisan bias and electoral responsiveness by casual inspection of voting
results. Indeed, even the Supreme Court has recognized this difficult
methodological problem. In Davis v. Bandemer (106 S.Ct. 2797. 1986), the court
declared political gerrymandering justiceable for the first time. However, the
justices could agree on neither the acceptable measures of political
gerrymandering nor the requisite standards for democratic representation. This
investigation will enable the investigator to continue the substantial program
of research he has begun in this area. The general strategy is to contribute to
political science research by developing a series of mathematical and
statistical models of district-based representation. The research began at the
most aggregated level, the nationwide translation of votes into seats, and
mapped broad patterns in American electoral systems. This research now moves
toward progressively more micro-levels to find what political phenomena give
rise to these broad patterns. These levels of analysis include the district-
level translation from votes to seats, a district level model with incumbents
and challengers analytically removed, a model of drawing district lines around
geographically located voters, and, finally, studying the geographic
distribution of partisans and individual voting behavior.