* 8909856
* Coordination Issues in Industrial Organization
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/1989,07/31/1992
* Kyle Bagwell, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/1992
* USD 40,406.00

Issues of coordination are important to consumers and firms. Consumers may wish
to coordinate on their selection of which firm to patronize, especially if
economies of scale characterize the production technology. Incumbent firms may
recognize gains from coordination in the deterrence of entry. In particular if
incumbent firms have superior information (as compared to a potential entrant)
about the profitability of entry, then their ability to coordinate the selection
of signals (prices, for example) become quite important. Most previous work has
ignored the issue of coordination, by assuming that consumers act in a simple
fashion and that a single incumbent firm attempts to deter entry. First, this
project develops and extends a new theory of non.informative advertising, in
which apparently wasteful advertisements are used to coordinate consumer
purchases when economies of scale exist and price information is difficult to
communicate. The analysis provides insight into observed retail advertisements,
existing empirical puzzles, and a new game.theoretic methodology. The project
also explores empirically the extent to which non.price advertising lowers
prices. Second, consumers lacking precise price information may nevertheless
restrain monopoly pricing by boycotting firms that have previously exercised
monopoly power. The ability of consumers to credibility coordinate a boycott
will be shown to depend on the direction of scale economies. This work draws a
heretofore unexplored connection between scale economies and monopoly power.
Finally, the project examines coordination among firms. When an entrant uses
firms' prices as signals of the profitability of entry, incumbent firms will
wish to coordinate the selection of signals. The inability to coordinate will
result in signaling equilibria that involve no distortion in price. This
analysis reverses previous single incumbent predictions and constitutes a
methodological advance into multiple.signal.sender models. This is an exciting
project that provides new insights into a wide range of substantive issues in
industrial organization as well as improving our understanding of the way firms
and consumers coordinate their actions in markets. The project contributes
substantively and methodological to our understanding of retail advertising,
consumer boycotts as a means of restraining monopoly power and entry deterrence
by multiple firms in a given industry.