* 8909173
* Behavioral Actions of Neuropeptides
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/1989,07/31/1993
* Frank Moore, Oregon State University
* Continuing grant
* Kathie L. Olsen
* 07/31/1993
* USD 213,300.00

Stress, aggression, and reproduction are examples of behaviors that are
affected by steroid hormones. Recently, it has become clear that another class
of hormones, called neuropeptides, have major effects on behaviors. Dr. Moore
will investigate the mechanisms by which steroid hormones and neuropeptides
interact in the brain to regulate behavior. He will employ modern anatomical and
molecular techniques to determine the effects of gonadal steroid hormones on the
neuropeptide, arginine vasotocin, in a simple amphibian model system. By
quantifying vasotocin receptors in neurons, measuring vasotocin concentrations
in behaviorally important brain areas, and determining the activity of vasotocin
genes in individual brain cells, Dr. Moore will determine whether seasonal
changes or sexual differences in the vasotocinergic system are associated with
the behavioral state and whether gonadal steroid hormones that maintain
reproductive behaviors influence this neuropeptide system. These studies are
possible because of the reduced structural complexity of the amphibian brain in
combination with their distinct stereotyped responses to neuroendocrine
manipulations. Insights gained with this model system will lay the groundwork in
understanding of the functional relationship between steroid hormones and
neuropeptides in animals with much greater complexity.