* 8909360
* Words and Concepts
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1989,08/31/1992
* Barbara Malt, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Jasmine Young
* 08/31/1992
* USD 75,000.00

Simple concepts such as mother, ball, and red are the building blocks of human
thought. What sort of knowledge is involved in acquiring and having concepts
like these? This question has been pursued vigorously in recent years, but there
is still no satisfactory answer. Part of the reason may be that many of the
existing studies have looked only at knowledge of concrete objects such as birds
and chairs. However, a wide range of other concepts, such as those concerning
kin relations, social status, emotions, colors, and physical states, are equally
important to human thought. The data available on these other concepts suggests
that current theories of concepts may be limited in several important ways. This
research will address these limitations by asking three related questions about
the nature of concepts: (1) What sorts of knowledge are involved in having
concepts from diverse domains such as kin, emotion, and color? (2) What implicit
beliefs do people have about what it means to have knowledge in the different
domains, and how do those beliefs affect the way that they use words for
concepts in these domains? (3) How do concepts held by experts in various fields
differ from "ordinary" concepts, if they do at all? The research will address
these issues through a combination of laboratory studies on the nature of
everyday concepts, observational studies on how words for certain concepts are
used in daily conversation, and interview studies of experts on the nature of
their specialized concepts. Answers to the three questions will help pinpoint
limitations of the traditional theories and will provide the basis for a more
complete account of what it means to have these concepts. The study of concepts
has provided the foundation for many applications in the health and mental
health fields, including research on the nature of diagnostic categories in
psychiatry and other branches of medicine, the nature of concepts used in
related fields such as biology, and the acquisition of concepts by normal and
mentally retarded children. The results of this project will lead to improved
theories that can provide more effective applications in these areas. The
results will also be useful in designing computer systems that store information
in ways compatible with what the human user knows, so that the human user can
have easy and productive interactions with the computer.