* 8909732
* Intelligent Low-level Control of Multiple Manipulator       Robotic Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/1989,07/31/1990
* Ping Hsu, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Elbert L. Marsh
* 07/31/1990
* USD 45,081.00

This research focuses on two tasks, completely decentralized control of
cooperating multiple robots sharing the same workload, and control of robots in
space. Typically for cooperating robots, each robot is controlled by its own
control module in a parallel manner. However, there is a real time communication
channel, comprising a common bus structure, between modules to enable
coordination between control modules. For this configuration, the robots are
said to be centralized. Unfortunately, for some conditions, i.e., when the
robots are made by different manufacturers or when the controllers are located
far apart, providing a common bus is not possible. It then becomes necessary to
completely decentralize the control scheme, that is , have them operate
independently of each other. This project investigates a method for achieving
that goal. The conjecture is that each robot can accurately estimate the action
of the other by sensing the motion of the object being handled, and by sensing
the interaction force between itself and the object. This hypothesis will be
tested as the first task in this project. In the second task, the intent is to
deal with the problem associated with the dynamics effects associated with
interaction between a robot and the space system which it is in contact with.
The research goal is to devise a scheme whereby both the robot and space system
remain stationary in the large during interactions between the two.