* 8909825
* Learning Mappings Between Spatial Dimensions
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1989,01/31/1994
* Felice Bedford, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Jasmine Young
* 01/31/1994
* USD 134,122.00

Nearly all perceptual judgments can be reached by the use of more than one
sensory system. For instance, the location of an object can be determined
visually, or alternatively, it can be determined without vision by using
feedback, known as proprioceptive information, from the arm and hand groping for
the object. Coordination of information from these different sources is
necessary in order for people to perceive a coherent world. This research will
lead to a much more complete understanding of that integration by determining
how new mappings are acquired between spatial dimensions defined in different
sensory systems. The specific dimensions which the research will use are spatial
positions proceeding from left to right localized visually and those same
positions localized proprioceptively. The research will employ a new technique,
using a variable prism under computer control and a single light-emitting diode
worn on the finger; this technique will allow the experimenter to divide the
continuum of visual space into discrete locations and manipulate each location
individually. The research will address two questions: First, is there a
specific mathematical function that describes the relation between the
dimensions, so that the process of learning a new mapping can be described by
changing the values of the parameters of the function? Or does learning proceed
by the formation of a list of independent associations between individual
locations? Second, what are the constraints on this learning process? For
example, is it constrained such that only linear relations can be learned? Two
complementary strategies will address these issues. The first is the assessment
of the influence of incomplete information. Only a small subset of a mapping,
consisting of only a few new pairs of visual-proprioceptive locations, will be
presented. The type of interpolation and extrapolation that occurs to untrained
locations should reveal the internal constraints imposed by the system. The
second is the reaction to the assessment of complete information. Presentation
of a variety of complete mappings will reveal what mappings, if any, are
unlearnable; the type of deviation from the imposed mapping will also reveal
internal structure.