* 8909200
* REU:  Genetic Variability in Bryophyte Populations
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1989,09/30/1990
* Robin Kimmerer, Centre College of Kentucky
* Standard Grant
* Gregory J. McCants
* 09/30/1990
* USD 15,957.00

The evolutionary significance of sex is a central problem in evolutionary
ecology. There has been a proliferation of models which predict the relative
benefits of sexual vs. asexual reproduction but few empirical tests exist. The
goal of this research is to provide just such a test, using the forest
bryophyte, Tetraphis pellucida. Bryophytes are ideal systems in which to test
hypotheses concerning the effectiveness of sexual or asexual reproduction in
different environments since they exhibit a high degree of habitat specificity
and wide array of reproductive modes. It has been demonstrated that levels of
genetic variability in some asexual species are equivalent to those of sexual
species. Asexual reproduction does not necessarily yield reduced genetic
variability, especially in those organisms in which the germ line is not
isolated from somatic mutation. The traditional view that sex enhances fitness
through the creation of genetic diversity may be inappropriate in bryophytes.
The long-term goal of this research is to examine the possibility that somatic
non-germ cell mutation, as a source of genetic variability, may equal or exceed
that of sexual recombination in mosses. Certain background information is
required prior to such an investigation. This Research Planning Grant would
permit Dr. Kimmerer to complete preliminary studies and to develop methods which
would support the long-term goal. The activities proposed here constitute
essential preparation for a major research effort.