* 8909851
* US-Austria Cooperative Research:  Electronic Structure and  Energetics of Surfaces and Alloys
* O/D,OISE
* 12/15/1989,11/30/1992
* Arthur Freeman, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 11/30/1992
* USD 15,750.00

This award supports Professor Arthur J. Freeman of Northwestern University to
continue an ongoing joint study of the electronic structure of solid materials
with Professors Adolf Neckel and Raimund Podloucky of the Department of Physical
Chemistry of the University of Vienna and Professor Peter Weinberger, Institute
of Technical Electrochemistry, Technical University of Vienna. The collaborating
electronic structure theory groups at these universities have been actively
involved in the development of highly sophisticated, fully self consistent local
density computer codes for the calculation of the electronic structures of bulk
solids, surfaces and alloys. They have also been calculating from first
principles spin polarized photocur- rents which are of special interest to a
recently established NSF- funded Materials Research Group (MRG) on the Magnetic
Properties of Materials. The Northwestern group brings extensive experience in
the calculation of the electronic structure of thin films and the two Austrian
groups offer capabilities to perform calculations of the intensity of angle
resolved photoemission and inverse photoemission. They will use these
computational methods to investigate jointly a wide range of phenomena,
including the magnetic properties of surfaces, interfaces, chemisorbed
overlayers on surfaces, and the spin polarized photocurrents of interest to the
experimental members of the MRG. They are also interested in pursuing studies of
the role of oxygen disorder in the properties of the new high temperature
superconductors. The new Materials Research Group is centered on an experimental
program to use advanced spin-sensitive spectroscopic techniques and advanced
state of the art electronic structure calculations in a coordinated program of
research on magnetism and magnetic materials. A key factor in the ability of the
Northwestern group to calculate spin-polarized photocurrents has been the
Austrian-US exchange program. It has permitted the development of software for
exploiting the powerful thin film capabilities developed at Northwestern and has
also contributed to research on photoemission from high temperature
superconductors.