* 8909159
* Neural Mechanisms of Olfactory Responses to Salamander      Courtship Pheromones
* BIO,IOS
* 11/15/1989,10/31/1990
* Lynne Houck, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Kathie L. Olsen
* 10/31/1990
* USD 56,000.00

Pheromones are a chemical substance produced by one individual that conveys
information to other individuals of the same species. This form of chemical
communication can evoke neural effects that produce immediate behavioral
responses or act through the endocrine and reproductive systems to cause delayed
physiological responses. While much of this work has been carried out using
invertebrates, pheromones are important signals in other species, including
humans. Dr. Houck has generated a wealth of information about the
behavioral/social changes in females exposed to pheromones released by males.
With this Career Advancement Award, she will extend her behavioral work by
determining how individual cells in the brain respond to these pheromones. By
learning sophisticated neurophysiological techniques, Dr. Houck will examine the
mechanisms by which natural odors are perceived and determine whether pheromones
released from certain individuals are more effective in eliciting a
physiological response from females. Her approach combines the study of
physiological reactions with an evolution interpretation of chemical cues that
affect behavioral responses. Pheromonal research is playing an important role in
the noninvasive control of various pest populations that destroy crops in
America. In addition, advances made by these types of studies are being used to
identify the subtle cues signalling the approach of ovulation in domestic stock,
thus allowing more precise timing of artificial insemination, resulting in
greatly increased breeding efficiency.