* 8909373
* Determination of Neuronal Morphology by Extracellular       Matrix
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1989,12/31/1993
* Dennis Higgins, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing grant
* Christopher Platt
* 12/31/1993
* USD 229,479.00

Extracellular matrix (ECM) molecules such as laminin and fibronectin stimulate
the growth of neuronal processes. The biochemical characterization of these
molecules has yielded substantial information about the amino acid sequences
which promote neuritic growth and the receptors which mediate this response.
However, a fundamental question remains unanswered: what is the nature of the
processes which form in the presence of laminin or fibronectin; are they axons
or dendrites? To address this issue, Dr. Higgins is currently determining how
chronic (1-4 week) exposure to ECM components affects the morphological
development of embryonic rat sympathetic neurons in tissue culture. A
combination of techniques (intracellular dye injection, immunocytochemistry,
electron microscopy) is being used to distinguish axons from dendrites. His
preliminary experiments indicate that: 1) laminin promotes only axonal growth in
sympathetic neurons; and 2) a basement membrane extract causes the extension of
dendrites. These data suggest that axons and dendrites have different growth
requirements and that ECM molecules may play a role in determining the shape of
sympathetic neurons. This research project will use the same bioassay to
determine: 1) are there other neurite-promoting factors which act like laminin
in selectively stimulating axonal growth; and 2) what is the identity of the
dendrite-program molecule? They will also test the hypothesis that process-
specific interactions occur because axons and dendrites have different types of
ECM receptors on their surfaces. Such data will help to more clearly define the
role of ECM in the morphogenesis of the nervous system.