* 8909155
* In Situ Detection of Tropospheric OH, H02, NO2, and NO by   Laser Induced Fluorescene in Detection Chambers at Reduced  Pressures
* GEO,AGS
* 04/15/1990,09/30/1993
* William Brune, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Jarvis L. Moyers
* 09/30/1993
* USD 371,321.00

A detailed understanding of many photochemical processes in the troposphere
requires simultaneous measurements of the abundances of oxidants and the oxides
of nitrogen. The goal of this research is to develop capabilities for nearly
simultaneous measurements of key oxygen containing free radicals and oxides of
nitrogen in the atmosphere with high specificity and sensitivity using a
spectroscopic technique. Ambient samples are drawn through nozzles into two
separate detection chambers -- one for OH/HO2, pumped to 0.01 atmosphere; one
for NO2/NO, pumped to (0.01-1) atmosphere -- where the radicals are detected by
laser induced fluorescence. A high repetition rate (10 kHz) copper vapor laser
pumps two dye lasers -- one frequency doubled to the 282 nm or 309 nm
transitions of OH, the other operated at the 585 nm transitions of NO2.
Resonantly scattered photons are detected by high efficiency optics and
photomultiplier tubes and are distinguished from background signals by tuning
the dye lasers on and off molecular resonances. HO2 and NO are detected by
chemical conversion with NO and O3 to OH and NO2 respectively. The estimated
detection limit (S/N ratio - 2) for OH/HO2 is .005 pptv (1.3 x 107 cm-3) in ten
seconds. This detection system will be used primarily for ground-based field
measurements, but also in some requisite laboratory photochemical studies, and
as a development tool for detection with other light sources and for other
species.