* 8909408
* Research Initiation Award:  Robust Control Synthesis for      Distributed Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/1989,06/30/1990
* N. Eva Wu, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 06/30/1990
* USD 31,818.00

This research is intended to develop computational methods for control synthesis
of linear multivariable distributed parameter systems (systems governed by
partial and functional differential equations). Because of their distributive
structure, these systems are more vulnerable to outside disturbances, and system
models are more difficult to accurately identify. H-infinity criterion is to be
used to achieve robust designs such as seeking controllers to stabilize a given
system with imprecisely known model, or to reduce its sensitivity with respect
to disturbances. Emphasis of the research will be placed on the development of
appropriate approximation schemes that will lead to explicit control design
procedures. Such schemes must be robust from system theoretical as well as
numerical points of view. Attention will be focused on the computational
feasibility of design methods and practical realizability of resulting
controllers. Within the optimization framework, the research is to evolve as an
extension of robust controller synthesis for lumped systems to that for
distributed parameter systems. Subsequently, optimal controller design
techniques which enforce good performance in the presence of uncertainties will
be developed by using more sophisticated feedback configurations. Based on the
results of the proposed research, one will be able to design controllers to
achieve tight engineering specifications through totally digital implementation
of control algorithms.