* 8909574
* Marine Organism Culture Facility
* NONE,NONE
* 01/15/1990,06/30/1992
* F. John Vernberg, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 06/30/1992
* USD 210,000.00

This award provides funds to aid in purchase of equipment needed for large scale
culture of marine organisms at the Columbia campus of the University of South
Carolina. Although the University has already developed a strong program in
marine biology, its researchers depend heavily on facilities at the Baruch
Institute, which is on the coast at some distance from Columbia. The equipment
will permit large scale culture of marine microorganisms and the culture and
maintenance of marine animals. Key to both units is the installation of a large,
recirculating seawater system that will use seawater brought from the coast by
truck. The capacity and flexibility of the proposed system will permit it to
satisfy current and future needs, and will permit other faculty, who do not now
study marine organisms, to initiate such studies without major disruption to
their current research programs. Experimental studies in marine biology have
always struggled with a basic problem, the need for fresh seawater for the
culture and maintenance of marine animals, plants and microorganisms. Although
artificial substitutes for seawater now exist, their cost precludes their use on
a large scale. Thus much marine biology has been done in specialized oceanside
research laboratories which are often at considerable distance from the campuses
whose faculty use them and are often used intensively only during the summer.
This has tended to isolate marine biologists from other biologists, and has
hindered the transfer of modern techniques, especially those of molecular
biology, from other areas of biology. One solution to this problem is to truck
large amounts of seawater to a university which is near, but not on the ocean,
so that marine organisms can be grown "on site" is sufficient quantity for year
round research programs. This solution also facilitates multi-investigator,
multidisciplinary research programs that involve skilled researchers from non-
marine disciplines. Such collaborations will be key to the development of new
approaches to the study of marine organisms, and to the use of such organisms in
biotechnology.