* 8909400
* Effects of Flocculation on Direct Filtration
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/1989,02/29/1992
* John Tobiason, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Edward H. Bryan
* 02/29/1992
* USD 59,955.00

This objective of this project is to determine the effects of chemical addition
and flocculation on the performance of deep-bed granular media filters that are
utilized to remove particles from dilute aqueous suspensions. The effects of
variations in the duration and intensity of mixing in flocculation and of
coagulant type and dose on particle deposition and head loss development will be
studied using a continuous flow direct filtration apparatus. The study is
focussed on the effects of changes in particle size distributions on filtration,
comparison of effects between coagulants, and sensitivity to changes in chemical
conditions. Measurements of electrophoretic mobility, particle size
distributions, light scattering phenomena, particle removal, and head loss
development will be made. The removal of particles from water is a primary
objective of engineered treatment processes because many waterborne pollutants
of concern to human health are particles or are associated with particles. These
pollutants include viruses, bacteria, Giardia lamblia cysts, adsorbed heavy
metals and synthetic organics. Recent federal regulations that stipulate removal
requirements for microbiological particles and a more stringent turbidity
standard will result in a requirement of new or improved filtration facilities
for many water supplies. An improved mechanistic understanding of the effects of
chemical addition and flocculation on filtration performance should lead to more
rational and cost-optimal designs for new facilities and better operation and
control of existing filtration systems.