* 8909603
* ROW:  Phylogenetic Analysis of the Developmental DNA        Elimination Events within the Tetrahymena pyriformis SpeciesComplex
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1989,02/29/1992
* Piroska Huvos, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Standard Grant
* Penelope L. Firth
* 02/29/1992
* USD 12,000.00

In this Research Opportunities for Women Planning Grant Dr. Piroska Huvos,
working at Southern Illinois University, will carry out preliminary genetic
experiments to determine the functional and evolutionary significance of DNA
elimination during the cell cycle of ciliate protozoans. These protozoans have
an unusual genetic and developmental system in which genes are transmitted from
sexual-generation to sexual-generation by a structure termed the micronucleus. A
second nucleus, the macronucleus, derives from the micronucleus and functions as
a special organelle for transcribing and translating genetic information into
cellular development. The full gene complement is transmitted by the
micronuclei, but DNA is systematically eliminated from macronuclei during cell
development. Dr. Huvos will determine the function of DNA elimination through a
comparative study of the chromosomal sites where breakage and rejoining occurs
during DNA elimination and by determination of whether the same DNA sequences
are eliminated in different species. The comparative study will be made on
several species of the well known protozoan genus Tetrahymena. The conservation
of breakage sites and the DNA sequences eliminated in many species would support
the theory that these sites and sequences are integral parts of the genetic
system for sexual reproduction. This study will lead to a better understanding
of the phenomenon of genetic recombination, which is nearly universal among
higher organisms.