* 8909479
* The Impact of Comparable Worth on Public Sector Labor       Demand, Vacancies, Applications and Turnover
* SBE,SES
* 01/15/1990,12/31/1992
* Peter Orazem, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Martin
* 12/31/1992
* USD 89,702.00

Comparable worth pay plans have been implemented in at least seven states for
government workers and are being considered in several other states. While there
have been a few descriptive studies conducted in order to help states decide
whether to adopt the legislation, little or no empirical work has been done on
the impact of comparable worth on turnover, job vacancies, applications, and
wage rates. The objective of this study is to analyze the impact of comparable
worth legislation on employment in state government. Focusing on Iowa during the
period from 1980-1989, data from annual payroll tapes and state tabulations by
job class will be supplemented with budget information by subdivision of
government to determine the consequences of the legislation on employment,
applications, and turnover of female and male state government workers. New
hire, separations, and job transfers will be examined by sex, job, and division.
Trends, particularly in relation to gender and occupation, will be analyzed and
special attention will be paid to how political and economic forces modify the
implementation of pay proposals. It is very important to assess the impact of
comparable worth laws on female employment and sex segmentation among jobs. Not
only will this research enable states to make better decisions concerning
comparable worth legislation, but also it should provide insights into the role
which wages play in helping public agencies recruit and retain employees in
general and female employees in particular. Much of the criticism of comparable
worth rests on claims about the effects it will have on total employment and the
absolute level of employment. This study presents an opportunity to evaluate the
validity of this criticism. It also permits studying the actual impact and
implementation of law in a compelling arena of public policy.