* 8909143
* Acquisition of a Field-Emission Scanning Electron           Microscope
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/1989,08/31/1991
* Charles Lyman, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* None
* 08/31/1991
* USD 196,106.00

Funds are requested in partial support of the purchase of a field-emission gun
scanning electron microscope (SEM) primarily for high resolution imaging of
metals, ceramics, polymers, and composite materials. The resolution capability
of the new instrument at 30KV(&lt;2nm) will be 5 times better than conventional
SEMs using thermionic guns. At the same time the current in the electron beam
will be 100x greater than a conventional SEM leading to better electron image
contrast. Exceptional performance at low accelerating voltages (1kv) will
provide surface images of uncoated polymers and ceramics with 10nm resolution
and without detectable electron beam damage. X-ray emission spectroscopy at low
voltages using these high currents will provide a substantial improvement in
light element detection. Thus, a light element x-ray detector is also requested.
Over the last 15 years, Lehigh University has maintained a leadership position
in SEM research and in the education of SEM users. Over 25 faculty and over 50
graduate students currently use our 15 year-old research SEM. Since enhanced
image resolution is the major advantage of the proposed field-emission SEM, all
of these users will benefit from the new machine, and some will clearly be able
to perform experiments never before possible.