* 8909887
* REU:  Parasite Communities in the Wyoming Ground            Squirrel
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/1989,12/31/1991
* Nancy Stanton, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Lindsay Fox
* 12/31/1991
* USD 57,348.00

Over the last few years the controversy about competition as a major
determinant of community structure has made a variable contribution to the
ecological literature. Empirical work in natural communities which provides
unambiguous data to support either of the arguments is uncommon. The
experiments, field and lab, which are proposed will demonstrate the existence or
absence of competition within a guild of parasites. Results will show if it is
possible for several species to occupy the "same niche" at the same time. In
addition, sufficient data will be gathered on host parasite interactions to
determine if the relationship is parasitic or commensal. This proposal will test
the hypothesis that: (1) the Wyoming ground squirrel (Spermophilus elegans
elegans)-Coccidia (Eimeria) association is the product of a long coevolutionary
history and that the "parasites" are really commensals with animal effects on
host fitness, (2) the parasites elicit no immune response in the host, and (3)
there is no niche partitioning among parasite species with the host. It is
proposed that these parasites have evolved to use ephermeral resources, the
quickly regenerating cells of the intestinal epithelium, and they are the
epitome of fugitive species. The proposal will test the lack of community-level
controls on "fugitive" species using a model system of ground squirrels and
their parasites. This is the first long-term experimental study on host-parasite
interactions of this duration or with such a large sample size in a natural
population.