* 8909418
* The Effect of Organic Contaminants on the Capillary Pressure-Saturation Relationship of Aquifers
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1989,09/01/1989
* Avery Demond, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Edward H. Bryan
* 09/01/1989
* USD 0.00

The objective of this research project is to develop a methodology to predict
the range of capillary pressure- saturation relationships for contaminated
aquifers. This method will be based on the use of independently derived scaling
parameters so that if the relationship is known for one system, the relationship
for another can be obtained using this procedure. Since the interfacial tension
and the contact angle of the system affects the capillary pressure
relationships, this dependence needs to be examined. The study will encompass
measurements of four types of capillary pressure curves, primary drainage,
spontaneous imbibition, forced imbibition and secondary drainage, as well as
measurements of interfacial tension and contact angles. The proposal leading to
this award was submitted in response to NSF 88-99, Research Initiation Awards.
The project is expected to result in improved ability to predict movement of
contaminants in aqifers. Currently, there are few capillary pressure
measurements available for two-phase systems at hazardous waste sites. This lack
of data hampers efforts to use models to describe the relevant processes and to
design effective remediation strategies at these sites. This research would help
alleviate that problem and reduce the need to make capillary pressure
measurements for each contaminant and each soil type that may be present at
waste sites.