* 8909153
* Research Initiation Award:  Dynamics and Stability of       Multi-Flexible/Rigid-Body Systems Using Geometrically-Exact Theories:  Formulation & Computation
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1989,07/31/1992
* Loc Vu-Quoc, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Elbert L. Marsh
* 07/31/1992
* USD 69,830.00

This research is a response to the need for the development of a unified
formulation for the dynamics of multi flexible/rigid body systems, and for the
development of computational methods for efficient integration of the equations
of motion of such systems. This unification of multibody dynamics formulations
is founded upon the concept of geometrically exact structural theories, theories
which are nonlinear in character and where the geometry of deformation is
exactly described and deformation can be large. The claim is made that the
geometrically exact structure formulation can be used to treat closed loop
chains with flexible links and avoid the difficulties imposed by non holonomic
constraints when traditional methods are employed. To pave the way to the above
stated goal, this project explores several specific topics related to flexible
multibody systems. These include 1) development of a unified formulation for
multi body systems using geometrically exact structural models; 2) study of the
accuracy and stability characteristics of component digital/algebraic equations;
3) formulation of geometrically exact models for beams with prismatic joints; 4)
incorporation of gyro elastic material into the geometrically exact beam model;
5) study of the implementation of cell to cell mapping to evaluate the stability
of geometrically exact models in a parallel computing environment. This research
is broad in scope, fundamental in nature, and interdisciplinary in content. Its
successful completion will have a measurable impact on the unification goal
alluded to earlier. Tools developed herein can be used to assess the dynamic
response and stability of multi flexible/rigid body systems which are prevalent
in robotics, machine design, high speed ground transportation vehicles, aircraft
and spacecraft technologies.