* 8909036
* A New Approach to Aggregation with Applications to ImperfectCompetition, Majority Voting, and the Distribution of Income
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/1989,12/31/1991
* Andrew Caplin, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 12/31/1991
* USD 93,848.00

The Prekopa-Borell theorems are recent mathematical discoveries in aggregation
theory. This project uses these theorems to extend and unify diverse branches of
economics. The project applies aggregation theory to social choice, imperfect
competition, the distribution of income in a multi-sector labor market, the
self-selection of individuals into local jurisdictions providing different
levels of local public goods (the Tiebout hypothesis), the first-order approach
to Principal- Agent problems, and verification of the Law of Demand. The
research on social choice is especially exciting. The project formulates a
mathematical definition of social consensus and demonstrates using the Prekopa-
Borell theorems that the outcome most-preferred by the mean voter cannot be
defeated if a sufficiently large super-majority (64%) is required. This is in
the spirit of the famous median-voter theorem that the most- preferred outcome
of the median voter always beats any alternative. The median-voter theorem
breaks down in an election with more than one issue at stake. The results
obtained under this project hold for multi-issue elections. This is a very
important result because it makes it possible to develop a positive theory of
social choice based on investigations of mean- voters. It is much easier to
study a representative voter than investigate the behavior of all voters. This
work is extended to environments in which individuals select into groups that
then vote on some set of issues, e.g., corporate shareholders, residents of
local governments, etc.. The project determines whether the self-selection in
such environments reduces the size of the super-majority required for the
existence of an unbeatable proposal.