* 8909933
* PRF/M:  Chloroplast DNA Studies in Heliotropium sect.       Orthostachys
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1989,09/30/1990
* Michael Frohlich, Individual Award
* Fellowship Award
* Penelope L. Firth
* 09/30/1990
* USD 48,808.00

Within the plant family Boraginaceae, Heliotropium, plus Tournefortia and
Heliotropium (section Orthostachys) exhibit great variation in many features of
general biological interest, including habitat preference, physiognomy,
photosynthetic carbon fixation system, breeding system and many morphological
features. Previous studies of morphology suggest that unexpected evolutionary
changes may have occurred; in particular, C4 photosynthesis may have been lost
in one or two species and the "Axillaria" growth habit, in which the plant
consists mostly of scorpioid cymes with bracts fulfilling the functions of
leaves, may have evolved more than once within the group. Additional data are
needed to test these conjectures. Dr. Michael W. Frohlich, of Union College in
Schenectady, New York, will conduct a molecular systematic study of selected
species of Heliotropium (section Orthostachys) to test the conclusions he
derived from morphological studies by examining chloroplast restriction fragment
length polymorphisms. This study could confirm the evolutionary changes that
seem to have occurred in this genus. The research will be performed primarily at
Cornell University's Bailey Hortorium, over the course of 13 months of Mid-
Career Fellowship in Environmental Biology tenure beginning in August 1989.