* 8909995
* Research Initiation:  Ultra-Precision Machining of Glass    Components
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/15/1989,11/30/1991
* Thomas Bifano, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 11/30/1991
* USD 80,000.00

This project is to advance the technology of high-precision grinding of glass,
known as "ductile regime grinding", with the specific aim of eliminating surface
fracture and subsurface damage. With this new technology, many materials that
have previously been difficult to machine to accurate shapes because of their
brittleness can now be machined to mirror finishes in a single grinding
operation. This improved material-removal process is made possible by
controlling the grinding infeed to rates below 100 nanometers per grinding wheel
revolution. This process adapts the ductile-regime, and even the new technology
described above cannot completely eliminate surface fracture during the grinding
of glass. It is proposed that by introducing a diamond polishing slurry between
the grinding wheel and the workpiece, high precision optical-quality glass
components could be produced for the first time with a single machining
operation. An additional benefit resulting from the introduction of a polishing
slurry into the grinding zone is that it will permit ultra-precision grinding of
large (greater than 1 meter) optical components, an application that has
previously been considered to be impossible because of the rapid dulling of the
diamond grinding wheel in the machining of glass. In this application, the
combined grinding/polishing approach has considerable merit: by continually
dressing the wheel, the loose abrasive solves the problem of grinding wheel
dulling. At the same time, the precise control of tool position offered by
grinding overcomes the inherent contour inaccuracies that are encountered in
polishing operations.