* 8909620
* Active Touch:  Vibrissal Tactile Discrimination in the Rat
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/1989,12/31/1992
* Daniel Simons, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Platt
* 12/31/1992
* USD 179,964.00

Sensory input often can be enhanced by specific behaviors for looking,
listening, sniffing or feeling. Rodents have large facial whiskers, the
vibrissae, that are used to investigate objects by touch. Studies on anatomy and
physiology of the rodent vibrissal system have examined cellular mechanisms of
both sensory integration and the role of experience during development,
particularly in relation to the somatosensory cortex of the brain. Sensory
capabilities of the vibrissae themselves usually have been inferred from gross
deficits seen after whisker removal, but little is known about how well these
hairs can detect or discriminate various natural stimuli. This project uses a
novel approach to determine how the vibrissae are used in behavior to make
sophisticated tactile discriminations. Blindfolded animals will be trained to
distinguish between surfaces of calibrated roughness; there is evidence that the
rodents can discriminate with vibrissae at least as well as primates using
fingertips. Video-based analysis will quantify amplitude, frequency, speed, and
relations of whisker movements and head movements. The role of sensory input
during development will be tested by trimming rows of whiskers of neonatal rats
until they are 45 days old, then allowing whisker growth. This manipulation is
known to produce abnormalities in the somatosensory cortex of the brain, and
expected to produce discrimination deficits in the adults. Behavioral strategies
will be compared between normal and neonatally deprived animals, to see how
whisker movements are used to discriminate, and whether new strategies are
learned. Finally, the whiskers will be studied as they interact with the
surface, and the time patterns of whisking will be compared to the timing of
excitation and inhibition seen in nerve cells in the somatosensory cortex. These
novel studies will fill a critical gap in our knowledge relating brain function
to tactile behavior; results will have a high impact not only on somatosensory
science, but on sensory science and neurobiology, and on studies of learning and
behavior.