* 8909358
* Conference on Perspectives on Phrase Structure to be held inJuly, 1989 in Conjunction with the Linguistic Society of    America Summer Institute
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/1989,11/30/1989
* Margaret Speas, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Paul G. Chapin
* 11/30/1989
* USD 8,631.00

ABSTRACT A two day conference on phrase structure will be held at the beginning
of July 1989 in conjunction with the Linguistic Society of America Summer
Institute, to be hosted by the University of Arizona, Tucson. The aim of the
conference is to explore the view that rules governing phrase structure are not
stipulatory but are generalizations, derived from underlying principles. The
conference will bring together people who have been working in this area, and
will provide a forum for the interchange of ideas which should result in a
clearer understanding of the issues and a focussing of research. Particular
attention will be devoted to questions about the nature of categorial structure,
and cross-categorial generaliza- tions and differentiations, and to those
properties of phrase structure which appear not to be projections of the
thematic properties of heads. Exploration of this topic will contribute toward
understanding the degree to which rules governing prhase structure can be
considered an autonomous component in the mod- ular theory of syntax, as well as
toward an understanding of the rule system itself. An edited collection of
papers resulting from the conference will be published. The conference focuses
on a related set of questions which are at the heart of linguistic theory,
dealing with the funda- mental organization of grammatical systems. The
participants in the conference are leading theoreticians who have been working
recently on the topics to be discussed. The conference can be expected to
provide valuable direction to their work, and also make a substantive
contribution to the field in the publication of the conference papers.