* 8909513
* RIA: Coupling Numerical and Symbolic Methods for Automatic  Multi-Channel Signal Interpretation
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/1989,12/31/1991
* Benoit Dawant, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 12/31/1991
* USD 65,008.00

The proposed research is directed towards developing a methodology that will
ease the modelling and the implementation of multi-channel signal interpretation
problems. An object-oriented approach is followed and the system is organized
around two separate but collaborating knowledge bases. The first involves the
heuristics and the subjective knowledge commonly utilized by expert
interpreters, the second uses the more qualitative knowledge utilized by a
signal processing specialist. The collaboration between the two knowledge bases
are handled by a coupling mechanism. The proposed system permits the modelling
of interpretation problems in terms of events and relations between events, and
provides a series of operators to express and represent spatio-temporal and
contextual information. This research is a first attempt at separating domain-
dependent and domain-independent (signal processing) knowledge, thus improving
generality, reusability, and facilitating the collaboration of the two types of
expertise typically required for the development of automatic signal
interpretation systems. Specifically, it advances the understanding of the
theory of deep coupled systems where numerical and symbolic methods are combined
to improve overall system performance, and addresses the problem of control flow
and accumulation of evidence for spatio-temporal reasoning. To demonstrate the
generality of the approach, the system is tested on two different applications
taken from the medical domain: the interpretation of recordings of the cerebral
activity (EEG) and of muscular activity (EMG).