* 8909898
* International Productivity, Risk Sharing, Savings and       Investment
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1989,07/31/1992
* Patrick Kehoe, University of Minnesota Saint Paul
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/1992
* USD 113,023.00

The purpose of this project is to analyze three related issues in international
macroeconomics that bear on the fluctuations and long term interdependence of
developed economies. The first issue concerns the international transmission of
the business cycle. The analysis builds on previous research in which
international fluctuations were driven by changes in international productivity.
This aspect of the project will involve measuring productivity changes more
accurately, which will help to shed light on the nature of productivity changes
and their impact on the business cycle. The second issue concerns a striking
anomaly within the existing theoretical framework: the economy produces
substantially larger correlations between consumption movements than is
evidenced by the data from the major industrialized countries. Several
extensions of the theory will be explored including the role of tariffs and
insurance markets to account for this discrepancy between theory and data. The
third issue concerns the close connection between rates of saving and investment
observed in industrial countries: that those that save the most typically invest
the most as well. At present, most theory predicts that there should be little
relation between the two and their close connection is considered one of the
outstanding puzzles in international economics. This project is important
because it will provide a better understanding of the way the business cycle
among the major industrialized countries are linked and may suggest ways to
dampen these cycles.