* 8909971
* RIA:  Semiconductor Quantum Wave Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/1989,07/31/1992
* Elias Glytsis, Georgia Tech Research Corporation - GA Tech Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 07/31/1992
* USD 60,000.00

Quantum interference effects have been experimentally observed in
semiconductors. Electron waves in semiconductors possess many common
characteristics with the electromagnetic waves in dielectrics. Two separate
analogies are necessary for amplitude and phase effects in relating electron to
electromagnetic waves. These analogies can be exploited for designing electron-
wave devices that are analogous to optical wave devices. For these devices to
work, their dimensions should be smaller than the electron coherence length.
Quantum interference bandpass electron filters, emitter/filters and, electron-
wave slab waveguides have recently been proposed. The objective of the research
in this Research Initiation Award is to analyze theoretically the potential
performance of these structures. Included in this research would be: (a)
Modeling of the quantum-mechanical electron waves and electron-wave
semiconductor waveguides including the: analysis of the effective mass
anisotropy calculation of the waveguide density of energy states, and current
flow distributions in the substrate, film, and cove regions. (b) Design of
lowpass, highpass, and bandpass electron filters, emitter/filters, and
waveguides. (c) Analysis of electron diffraction gratings, electron
beamsplitters, electron modulators, switches, and deflectors. (d) The
possibility of designing integrated guided-electron wave devices that are
analogous to integrated optics devices. Applications of the proposed research
include the areas of supercomputers, high speed communications, electron
spectroscopy, and other.