* 8909480
* Workshop on Desertification:  A Landscape-Ecosystem         Perspective, La Serena, Chile, October, 1989
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/1989,11/30/1991
* Walter Whitford, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 11/30/1991
* USD 19,431.00

This award supports an international workshop on desertification to be held in
La Serena, Chile at the University of La Serena in October, 1989. The U.S.
organizer is Walter Whitford of New Mexico State University and the Chilean
organizer is Julio R. Gutierrez of the University of La Serena. The participants
include eight U.S. scientists who represent the areas of plant and animal
ecology, microbial and physiological ecology, soil science, system modeling and
nutrition. In addition, six Chilean and two Brazilians will attend. Their fields
are similar except for some representation of remote sensing, biometeorology,
climatology and geomorphology. The workshop will consist of prepared papers and
oral presentations resulting in published papers in spanish and english. All
workshop participants will benefit by broadening their knowledge and perceptions
of ecosystem ecology and arid ecosystems in particular. The Chilean scientists
have generally had experience in U.S. deserts; this workshop will afford the
U.S. scientists the opportunity to become familiar with southern desert systems.
Also, the Chileans will be introduced to new conceptual frameworks and
simulation models. In this way and through the initiation of graduate student
training, this workshop is a good example of the fulfillment of the goals of the
Science in Developing Countries program.