* 8909566
* Cognitive and Linguistic Bases for Mathematical Development
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/1990,01/31/1993
* Kevin Miller, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Jasmine Young
* 01/31/1993
* USD 239,996.00

All mathematical ideas must be expressed in some notation, and the most basic
notation of all is the system of number names a language uses. When children
learn to count, they must develop basic mathematical concepts at the same time
that they figure out the rules of the particular system of number names they are
learning. Because languages vary in the way they represent numbers, it is
possible to study how linguistic and cultural variation affects the development
of mathematical competence. This research will study relations between the
linguistic structure of number-naming systems and children's developing mastery
of counting and basic arithmetic. The research will produce a model of
children's representation of number and how it is affected by the structure of
number-naming systems by looking at how children learn to count in Chinese and
English. Some experiments will examine the origins of counting in very young
children (2.5 years old), to see whether this fundamental mathematical skill
varies before the point where the number systems begin to differ. Also included
will be a longitudinal study of counting, to describe whether impasses and
plateaus in learning to count differ across the two countries. Other experiments
will examine how specific features of the number systems affect children's
acquisition of particular concepts. For example, Chinese forms ordinal numbers
(such as first, second, third, etc.( by using a regular prefix (di') in front of
the cardinal number, in contrast to the irregular system of ordinal numbers that
English has (first, second, third, fourth, etc.). The research will examine the
role this linguistic structure plays in children's learning the conceptual
distinction between ordinal and cardinal numbers. Finally, the research will
include a study on the development of mental arithmetic in Chinese and American
children. Previous research shows that Chinese children outperform their
American peers on a variety of mathematical skills. This research should allow
the precise description of which aspects of arithmetic skill account for these
substantial differences. The poor performance of American children on a wide
array of mathematical tasks makes understanding the basis for the advantages
Chinese children show a question of obvious practical significance. These
questions are of basic scientific interest as well, because an adequate model of
the development of mathematical competence must be able to account for the
performance of both groups of children. Understanding the cognitive bases for
large differences between American and Chinese children is an essential step in
figuring out what the implications of these differences are for understanding
and promoting cognitive development.