* 8909104
* Research Initiation: Net - Shape Manufacture of PolyethyleneTeraphthalate Foam Parts
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/1989,05/31/1992
* Vipin Kumar, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* F. Hank Grant
* 05/31/1992
* USD 74,811.00

Microcellular foam refers to plastics with closed cells on the order of 10
micrometer in diameter. A remarkable new foam material has recently been
produced by using carbon dioxide to foam a physic known as PET. The resulting
foam possesses high strength, stiffness, and toughness, and may open the way for
use of microcellular foams in load-bearing applications. The goal of this
research is to synthesize a novel manufacturing process to produce microcellular
PET parts, by defining the conditions under which the polymer must be processed.
Deformation in the foaming cycle will be integrated such that three dimensional
parts may be produced while preserving the fragile microstructure. The basic
idea is to seek a processing strategy that uncouples the deformation process
from the cell nucleation and the polymer crystallization processes. The unique
role of carbon dioxide in inducing crystallization in PET during the foaming
process will be studied using the electron microscopy techniques. Differential
Thermal Analysis will be used to determine the extent of crystallization as a
function of gas concentration. The extent of coupling between the process
functional requirements will be studied experimentally. Finally, an uncoupled
process that will allow independent control of microstructure (average cell size
and density), degree of crystallinity in the foam, and the part geometry, will
be synthesized.