* 8909595
* International Conference on the Physics of Electronic and   Atomic Collisions, New York, NY, July 26-August 1, 1989,    Award in U.S. and Indian Currencies
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/1989,05/31/1990
* William Lichten, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 05/31/1990
* USD 27,250.00

Description: This project supports participation by ten Indian scientists in the
16th International Conference on the Physics of Electronic and Atomic Collisions
(ICPEAC) to be held in New York City July 26-August 1, 1989. The Co-chairmen of
the local committee are Drs. M. S. Lubell (CUNY City College), T. B. Lucatorto
(NIST) and N. H. Tolk (Vanderbilt University). The conference focus is on
interactions involving ions, atoms, simple molecules, electrons, positrons and
photons. In addition, topics in plasma and swarm phenomena, spectroscopy,
surface physics, and the processes involving the structure of the nucleus are
included as advances in those fields relate to the main areas of the conference.
In addition to the standard scientific program, there will be a short session on
International Science to be held at the United Nations. The Indian participants
will be selected, from over 30 scientists who have submitted papers for the
conference, by an Indian selection committee along with the U.S. organizers.
Scope: The physics of electronic and atomic collision is important to Indian
science since it does not require large costly installations such as particle
accelerators. Thus, Indian scientists have been active in the field and their
participation will be beneficial to the conference and certainly very helpful to
them through the direct contact with scientists from other countries.