* 8910902
* U.S.-China Cooperative Research:  Preparation and Propertiesof Layered Organic Derivatives of Group IV Metals
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1989,08/31/1992
* Abraham Clearfield, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Tonya Butler
* 08/31/1992
* USD 18,884.00

This proposal on "Preparation and Properties of Layered Organic Derivatives of
Group IV Metals" between Dr. Abraham Clearfield of Texas A&amp;M University and
Professor Guang-Zhi Peng of the Qinghai Institute of Salt Lake of the Chinese
Academy of Sciences (CAS) is jointly sponsored by NSF and CAS. The researchers
propose to combine synthetic capabilities of the Qinghai Institute with
characterization techniques available at Texas A&amp;M (solid state NMR, mass
spectrometry, thermal analysis, surface analysis, electron microscopy and
diffraction methods) to investigate the synthesis and behavior of organic
derivatives of layered group IV phosphates, especially and their synthesis of
novel phosphonic acids and organic phosphates and their subsequent reaction with
IV cations. These reactions lead to the formation of layered metal phosphonates
and phosphates in which the organic moiety resides in the interlamellar space.
When diphosphonic acids are used, the organic group bridges across layers and
acts as pillars holding the layers in place. The researchers will attempt to
prepare mixed derivatives so as to space the pillars and produce pores of
relatively uniform size, and to functionalize the organic groups with
carboxylate, sulphonate and amino groups to impart ion exchange and complexing
power to the derivatives. Catalyically active species will also be immobilized
on the layered compounds. This research should be applicable to photochemistry,
separations procedures, catalysis, ion exchange and ion sieving. The subject
compounds can also be precursors to the synthesis of novel interlayered
phosphates and oxides.