* 8910702
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Geography                 and Regional Science
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/1989,08/31/1990
* Guntram Herb, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 08/31/1990
* USD 7,850.00

As media of communications, maps can relate more than just factual geographic
information. They also can be constructed to convey a wide range of other
messages, including ideas meant to persuade viewers to adopt specific political
views. Such constructions usually are subtle modifications in emphasis rather
than products containing inaccurate information. This doctoral dissertation
research project will examine the ways in which maps produced in Germany between
1919 and 1945 were designed to convey political messages. Through careful
examination of maps and related materials, the investigators will attempt to
answer the following questions: What individuals and groups were involved in the
creation of politically persuasive maps, and what were the roles of governmental
agencies in contrast to private organizations and academic groups? For which
audiences were these maps constructed? What was the scope of the political
messages included in these maps? How did these maps influence public opinion?
Research to answer these questions will include inspection of materials in
archives in the United States and in Germany. This research will shed light on
the specific ways in which maps were used as means of political communication by
a variety of groups in Germany between the two world wars, thereby providing
improved understandings of the processes operating in that nation during a
critical period in world history. More importantly, the project will elucidate
the general ways in which maps have been produced, disseminated, and received as
media of political persuasion, thereby complementing understanding gained of the
propagandizing processes of other media. This project also will provide an
excellent opportunity for a promising graduate student to expand and refine his
basic research skills.