* 8910869
* Assembly and Maintenance of the Axonal Cytoskelton in       Cultured Neurons
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1989,02/28/1993
* Thomas Shea, McLean Hospital
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 02/28/1993
* USD 161,440.00

Within all cells a complex array of fiber-like protein assemblies form a
scaffold for the support and organization of the cell and its components; this
scaffold is referred to as the cytoskeleton. The cytoskeleton of cells of the
brain is especially complex; each brain cell (neuron) is composed of two
distinct regions, and each of these regions has unique components which are
partitioned into that region alone. While significant progress has been made in
recent years towards understanding the composition of the axonal cytoskeleton,
factors governing its initial assembly, as well as the attainment of
cytoskeletal stability, remain less well documented due to the inherent
difficulties of studying these processes in the intact brain. To surmount these
difficulties, a model system involving neurons in cell culture has been
developed for manipulating the formative events in the brain that occur during
development and maturation. These cells multiply continuously in culture and
thus provide a virtually unlimited source for experimentation. Following defined
chemical treatments, these cells cease multiplying and elaborate long axon-like
processes that contain most if not all of the proteins comprising the axonal
cytoskeleton of the brain. Exploitation of this model system by both established
and newly- developed molecular biological, biochemical, immunological and
electron microscopic analyses to examine the sequence of events accompanying the
assembly of the axonal cytoskeleton will be investigated. The results obtained
from these analyses will elucidate events critical for mediating axonal
outgrowth, and stabilization, required for orderly development and maintenance
of the nervous system.