* 8910821
* Natural Products Chemistry of Marine Molluscs
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/1989,05/31/1992
* D. John Faulkner, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* George M. Rubottom
* 05/31/1992
* USD 194,210.00

Synthetic Organic Chemistry Program is supporting the research of Dr. John D.
Faulkner of the Ocean Research Division of the Scripps Institution of
Oceanography, a part of the University of San Diego. Dr. Faulkner will be
studying the nature of the compounds used by marine organisms in controlling
their interactions with one another. In particular he will be studying the
Mollusca phylum. This will improve understanding of the impact of man's
activities on the marine biosphere. The observations of marine biologists and
ecologists have implicated chemical messengers as an important means of
communication in the marine environment. Many soft-bodied marine animals rely
upon chemical defense mechanisms for their survival. Within the phylum Mollusca
there exists a wide range of defensive strategies. The majority of molluscs are
protected by hard shells into which the animal can retreat. At the other end of
the range, the dorid nudibranchs have a dietary-derived chemical defense
mechanism that has compensated for the loss of the shell. Molluscs living in the
intertidal zone require a shell for protection against physical damage but may
also have a chemical defense against predators. This research will continue on
the structural elucidation of marine natural products from marine molluscs,
particularly those from unusual environments and relatively unstudied locations.
There is strong support for the hypothesis that nudibranchs concentrate only the
most effective chemical deterrents from dietary sources. In addition, they may
modify dietary metabolites to obtain deterrents with increased feeding
inhibitory activity or, in a few instances, perform de novo synthesis of feeding
inhibitors. This research will characterize the structure of the novel feeding
inhibitors from nudibranchs and to investigate structure-activity relationships.
The detection and selective acquisition of chemicals from dietary sources, their
storage and functions will be investigated. Molluscs that have a shell and
produce a chemical secretion will be further studied with the goal of defining
the relative importance of physical and chemical defenses to marine molluscs. In
particular, specimens of Bullomorphs and Lamellariids in addition to the
Siphnoariids will be examined further.