* 8910253
* Developing Country Debt:  Defaults and Credit Terms-- ROW   Planning Grant
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1989,01/31/1991
* Sule Ozler, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Lynn A. Pollnow
* 01/31/1991
* USD 11,979.00

This is a ROW Planning Grant to develop a more complete picture of the evolution
of commercial bank lending to developing countries. More specifically, the
project focuses on the effect of a country's nonpayment of debt on its
subsequent credit terms in the new loans issued and its subsequent credit terms
in debt reschedulings. The investigator constructs a model that focuses on
borrowers' reputation to study interest rate dynamics after defaults. This is a
significant contribution because existing models of borrower reputation assume
that a defaulter is never able to borrow again in capital markets which is not
true. In this project the investigator extends data bases employed in previous
research to construct the data base necessary to investigate empirically the
behavior of interest rates following defaults in the Eurocurrency credit
markets. Creating a more comprehensive data base on the recent era of defaults
is very valuable because past empirical work has been concentrated on earlier
episodes of default by borrower nations. Preliminary work by the investigator on
partial data demonstrates that the recent defaults have had a different impact
on the credit of borrower nations than earlier episodes. Better data will permit
a systematic investigation of the reasons why recent defaults have had different
effects on the capital markets than in the past. This planning grant should be
supported because it improves the theory and the data on the timely and
important issue of developing country debt. The work completed under this
project will lay the foundation for empirical studies by the investigator of the
many unresolved questions in this area.