* 8910042
* Cellular and Molecular Mechanisms of Taste Reception
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1989,02/28/1993
* Diego Restrepo, Monell Chemical Senses Center
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Platt
* 02/28/1993
* USD 303,080.00

Taste reception begins when stimulus chemicals, called tastants, interact with
the exposed membrane of specialized receptor cells. Transduction is the term for
the sequence of events that follow binding of a stimulus to the cellular
receptor sites, triggering electrophysiological events in the cell that then
lead to sending a nerve signal to the brain. In the vertebrates, this
transduction occurs in special chemosensory cells in the taste buds. This
project will examine how the interaction between the stimulus and the receptor
membrane leads to the electrophysiological changes in the receptor cell. The
cell membrane has channels that allow the flow of certain charged ions in and
out. During stimulation, some of these channels open and close, with specific
time courses and dependence on the electrical gradient across the membrane.
Taste cells are found by the thousands all over the body of catfish, making them
easy to isolate in large numbers for study, and these catfish taste cells have
known classes of receptors for certain amino acids. This project will use
physiological and pharmacological techniques on isolated catfish taste cells to
characterize the ionic channels and currents in their membranes, and to
determine how the binding of specific amino acids activate those channels. In
addition, the role of particular proteins for activating internal compounds
called second messenger molecules will be examined. Results from this novel
model system will be very important to chemosensory science, and these studies
are also likely to be helpful in studying synaptic mechanisms in neuroscience,
in how receptor sites on nerve cells in the brain act during neurotransmission.