* 8910560
* Measurement of Electron Concentrations in Low Frequency     Glow Discharges by High-Frequency (4-15MHz) Impedance       Analysis: Research Initiation Award
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/1989,05/31/1992
* Brian Thompson, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 05/31/1992
* USD 64,625.00

Radio-frequency plasmas are used for a variety of processes including uses in
the semiconductor industry for plasma deposition and plasma etching. The plasma
can be viewed as the combination of at least three processes: (1) a voltage is
applied to one electrode while another one is grounded creating an electric
field between the electrodes; (2) the electric field accelerates electrons to
very high energies (1 to 20 eV); (3) at those high energies, electrons react
with neutrally charged molecules to form more electrons, ions, free radical
species, and excited molecules. (4) the free radicals react with each other,
other gas phase molecules, or with the molecules on solid surfaces of the
reactor; and (5) ions are accelerated through the plasma sheathes to produce
high energy bombardment (up to several hundred eV) of the solid surfaces which
influence the surface reactions occurring there. At the present time the
development and control of most etch and deposition processes is mainly governed
by empirical approaches that examine the final effect created (such as etching
rate, uniformity across a wafer, etch directionally, etc.) as a function of the
process conditions (power, pressure, gas composition, frequency) for a
particular reactor. A more fundamental understanding of a particular process
would speed up the development process (especially of new orsubstantially
different plasma processes) and aid in understanding the control of these
processes. To obtain such a fundamental understanding and to ultimately model
the whole system, a quantitative understanding and/or measurement of each
individual process occurring is needed. The objectives of this research project
are to establish and use a new method to determine electron concentrations as
function of time in low frequency (40 - 400 Hz) discharges. High frequency
discharges produce faster etch and deposition rates while low frequency
discharges produce higher ion bombardment energies of solid surfaces which leads
to improved surface effect such as better etching directionality. The PI's
method involves perturbing the low frequency discharge with high frequency
signals, and then measuring and analyzing the high-frequency impedance as a
function of time within the low frequency cycle. These impedances will be
interpreted in terms of the plasma as an electrical circuit to give the electron
concentrations in the discharge as a function of time. The technique will allow
experimenters to determine quantitatively the electron concentrations occurring
in specific etching or deposition discharges. Electron concentration
measurements will help in predicting rates of the electron-molecule reactions
occurring in the plasma reactor. These measurements can be combined with other
information to determine the ultimate effects on etching or deposition rates and
characteristics.