* 8910544
* Marketing and the Transformation of Small-Firm Practice
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/1989,12/31/1991
* Carroll Seron, CUNY Baruch College
* Continuing Grant
* Lisa Martin
* 12/31/1991
* USD 156,347.00

In the last decade legal services geared to individuals have been transformed.
Two key developments have accounted for the transformation--advertising legal
services and marketing prepaid plans. Ever since 1977 when the Supreme Court
opened the way to explore new avenues for getting legal business by ruling that
lawyers may advertise prices at which services are performed, notable changes
have taken place. These developments have given entrepreneurial attorneys the
opportunity to discuss a business- oriented approach to the delivery of legal
services. Today, the legal needs of individuals are being met through a variety
of new forms of private legal services such as legal insurance, store- front
legal clinics, mass-market legal clinics, and non-for- profit services. This has
resulted in major changes in the nature of work for the lawyer of individual
clients in solo and small firm law practices. Many of these small firms have
been eclipsed by a variety of these new mechanisms for delivering legal services
to individuals. This project is designed to address the question of what the
implications of these developments are for the professional organization of law.
The purpose of the study is to analyze the impact of advertising, business, and
other managerial techniques on the professional work setting of lawyers. Two
broad questions will guide the study: (1) What is the depth, range, and
penetration of these new trends in the context of the legal profession at-large?
and (2) What are the implications of these developments for understanding
professional work in the late twentieth century? Multiple methodologies will be
used in the project including surveys of a random sample of practicing
attorneys, in-depth interviews, and observation of selected sites in the New
York metropolitan area. Emerging forms of law practice suggest that the older
status professions, like newer occupational professions, are engaged in a
paradoxical response to shifting economic realities. In the quest to maintain
control over the market for service, these occupations may "re-professionalize"
economic and political relations into new forms and into new settings, while, at
the same time, "de-professionalizing" the tasks of employees in order to
maintain that power and position. In the process, associational ties are
transformed and a professional calling is re-constructed. This project will fill
in the empirical pieces of this complex theme in one professional arena. Not
only will the project make significant theoretical advances in our knowledge of
legal professionalism but the changes taking place in the market structure,
professional ideology, and internal organization of small-firm practice will
have considerable importance to theories of organizations and professionalism in
general.