* 8910741
* Prehispanic Settlement and Obsidian Procurement in the      Zinapecuaro Michoacan Source Area
* SBE,BCS
* 11/01/1989,02/28/1994
* Dan Healan, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/28/1994
* USD 132,818.00

Chemical analysis of obsidian (volcanic glass) artifacts from many Mexican
archaeological sites indicates that much of the raw material derives from the
Zinapecuaro area in Central Mexico. In preliminary reconnaissances Dr. Dan
Healan has located several specific sources, as well as cultural remains
associated with the mining and working of this material. Through examination of
surface scatters, he has also discovered several habitation sites. With NSF
support, Dr. Healan will conduct a six month field season followed by a year of
analysis. He and his colleagues will continue and expand the intensive surface
survey. Exploratory excavation will then be conducted at selected quarry and
related sites. A second series of excavations will then be undertaken at
habitation sites. Materials recovered will be analyzed to shed light on the
obsidian production system and to provide a detailed history of settlement and
exploitation of the region. Obsidian hydration analysis will provide a
chronological framework. Finally, data from the Zinapecuaro region will be
synthesized with information from other areas in Mexico to show how economic and
political relationships changed over time. Because obsidian is relatively easy
to work and holds an extremely sharp edge, (and given the lack of metal
implements before the arrival of the Spaniards) it was the preferred material
for stone tool manufacture in Mexico. Given its volcanic origin, obsidian is
found in only a limited number of areas and in prehistory was traded over large
areas. Different sources are chemically distinct and, thus, it is possible to
match implement with geographical point of origin. Archaeologists have come to
realize that trade and control over scarce resources played a major role in the
rise of Mexican civilization and believe that obsidian was perhaps the most
important commodity involved. Thus, through study of production at a source
area, it will be possible to understand more about how this trade originated,
developed, and was maintained. This research is important because it will fill
in a crucial blank in the archaeological map of Mexico. What happened in the
Zinapecuaro region had a major effect in the development of complex societies
elsewhere. The work will increase our understanding of how complex societies
develop.