* 8910475
* U.S.-Thailand Cooperative Research on Sediment Trapping by  Brackish Water Ponds in Thailand
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1989,02/29/1992
* Claude Boyd, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 02/29/1992
* USD 14,770.00

This proposal requests funds to permit Dr. Claude E. Boyd, Department of
Fisheries and Allied Aquacultures, Auburn, University, to pursue with Dr. Yont
Musig, Department of Aquaculture, Kasetsart University, Bangkok, Thailand, for a
period of 24 months, a program of cooperative research on sediment trapping by
brackish water aquaculture ponds in the vicinity of Bangkok, Thailand.
Objectives of the research are (1) to evaluate the sediment trapping ability of
these ponds and (2) to determine the chemical and textural composition of the
sediment as well as its oxygen consumption rate. Four large rivers enter the
upper Gulf of Thailand in the region around Bangkok. These rivers drain a large
area of agricultural land and pass through the heavily populated area around
Bangkok. Their waters are laden with suspended soil particles, organic matter,
and nutrients. In the estuarine reaches of the rivers, a vast network of canals
has been constructed for transportation, domestic and industrial water,
irrigation, capture fisheries, and to supply water for brackish water
aquaculture farms. These farms are mostly used for shrimp production by
extensive methods, i.e. without the addition of manure, fertilizers, or feed.
Water flushes through the ponds at the rate of at least 10% per day. It is in
this setting that the PI's will study the sediment trapping ability of the ponds
and the ecological importance of processes occurring therein. Through an
understanding of these processes, better water management schemes may be
formulated for the region. The PI's have a record of successful collaboration in
the field of this research. The present project will allow them to combine their
talents and interests for mutual benefit. This project is relevant to the
objectives of the Science in Developing Countries Program which seeks to
increase the level of cooperation between U.S. scientists and engineers and
their counterparts in developing countries through the exchange of scientific
information, ideas, skills, and techniques and through collaboration on problems
of mutual benefit.