* 8910288
* RIA: Analog Circuit Techniques for Improved Performance     Analog to Digital Interface
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1989,09/30/1992
* Paul Hurst, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 09/30/1992
* USD 79,570.00

Analog interface circuitry often limits the performance of DSP based signal
processing systems. Since analog circuitry will not shrink as much as digital
circuitry with device scaling due to performance, matching, and noise
considerations; schemes for digitally correcting or adjusting for analog circuit
errors are very attractive in submicron IC technologies. In this work,
techniques to improve MOS analog interface circuitry are being investigated.
Parallel switched-capacitor filter architectures, which will achieve an increase
in sampling rate with an increase in silicon real estate, are considered.
Additionally, digital techniques for realizing small shifts in the frequency
response of switched-capacitor filters are researched. Oversampled delta-sigma
modulation data converters are investigated. The goal is to achieve increased
sampling rates and improved performance using new switching schemes. And since
shrinking device dimensions for a reduction in the power supply voltage, analog
circuits operating off a 3-Volt supply are also explored. The proposed
architectures are evaluated using specially written computer programs and
available circuit simulators. Extensive simulation of the most promising
architectures and design and layout of experimental test circuits are carried
out. Suitable circuits are fabricated using MOSIS facility.