* 8910418
* Research Initiation: Application of Thermal Analysis to     Numerical Simulation of Solidification and Shrinkage        Prediction in Ductile Iron Castings
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/1989,06/30/1991
* Fred Bradley, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* F. Hank Grant
* 06/30/1991
* USD 70,000.00

The project deals with the development of finite element solidification
simulation software for the prediction of shrinkage defects in near and near-
eutectic commercial ductile iron castings. In order to accomplish this goal, two
fundamental problems must be solved. First, the solidification of eutectic
alloys which occurs essentially at constant temperature is inherently more
difficult to simulate than that of freezing range alloys because of the
discontinuity in the enthalpy-temperature relationship. Secondly, the
solidification behavior of ductile iron, perhaps the most complex of the common
casting alloys, is extremely sensitive to metallurgical processing conditions
and hence not at all amenable to modeling on the basis of fundamental
considerations. It is proposed that both problems may be overcome by a novel
application of Newtonian analysis of cooling curve data to obtain a heat
generation function that directly accounts for unique solidification
characteristics of a given alloy attributable to metallurgical processing
practice which can be efficiently incorporated into finite element
solidification simulation code to realistically model the liberation of latent
heat during solidification. A significant impact on the foundry industry as a
whole is anticipated from this work, and for the first time provides a direct
link between computer-aided design based on numerical simulation and process
control in the foundry based on thermal analysis.