* 8910930
* Tests of Strategic Bargaining Models Using Data on Strikes  and Wage Settlements
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1989,06/30/1992
* John Kennan, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 06/30/1992
* USD 79,666.00

The objective of the research project is to bring recent theories of bargaining
to bear on empirical analyses of apparent inefficiencies in the labor market,
using data on labor contracts. An understanding of labor contracts is an
essential component in analyses of economic policy, particulary with respect to
unemployment and inflation. Although about 85% of labor contracts are reached
through peaceful negotiations, the strike threat is clearly an important part of
the negotiation process. The model developed in this project asserts that
strikes occur when the union is uncertain about how much the firm can afford to
pay, and so the union starts by demanding a large wage increase, threatening
that the firm will have to endure a long strike before the union will reduce its
demand. The core of the proposed research is an assessment of whether empirical
data on strike durations and wage settlements can be explained as outcomes of
this kind of bargaining conflict. One potential application of the results is in
evaluating the effectiveness of the mediation services provided by federal and
state governments. There are potentially important similarities between strikes
and other kinds of economic and political conflict. Inefficient outcomes are
apparently observed in international trade, where tariffs and other barriers
impede beneficial exchange, and in lawsuits, where failure to reach a settlement
leads to expensive trials. There is also a clear connection between labor
contracting and exchange in "thin" markets, such as the housing market, where
bargaining may frustrate efficient trades. These analogies will not be
systematically analyzed in the proposed research project, but they indicate that
an understanding of private information bargaining is likely to have
applications to many important policy questions.