* 8910744
* Mathematical Sciences: Classical Analysis, Number Theory andSupercomputers
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1989,12/31/1992
* Dennis Hejhal, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 12/31/1992
* USD 93,492.00

Work on problems at the interface of complex analysis and analytic number
theory will be the central theme of this mathematical research. To obtain
additional insight, supercomputer experimentation will also play a prominent
role. From the number-theoretical point of view, the objective of the work is in
understanding properties of roots of various kinds of transcendental functions:
zeta functions. A particular instance is the Epstein zeta function, a complex
function depending on a class of parameters. As the parameters vary, the roots
traverse certain paths. This work seeks to understand this motion from the
standpoint of a statistical/dynamical analysis. Similar (statistical) analyses
have been found useful in studying many other types of zeta functions - though
here the emphasis will shift to studying the roots on the critical line where
they are believed to reside. Work on complex analysis centers on Schwarzian
differential equations on compact Riemann surfaces. Studies of the monodromy
group and the conformal mapping properties of the solution as the forcing term
of the differential equation - the quadratic differential - diminishes will be
carried out. Particular interest focuses on the case where the differential
passes through the Bers boundary of Teichmuller space.