* 8910896
* Reactive Intermediates Useful in Synthesis
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/1989,05/31/1994
* Mark Willcott, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* George M. Rubottom
* 05/31/1994
* USD 506,773.00

he Synthetic Organic Chemistry Program is supporting the research of Dr. James
C. Martin of the Department of Chemistry at Vanderbilt University. Dr. Martin is
developing routes to an exciting class of molecules which contain one or more of
a so-called hypervalent atoms that impart unique properties to the molecule.
These will provide the new methods for the increasingly complex materials needed
by agriculture, medicine and industry. An understanding of the charge
distribution and preferred geometry for hypervalent main-group element species
has allowed the development of several bidentate, tridentate, and tetradentate
ligands to provide important effects on the chemical reactivity of these
species. Important tridentate ligand species, with two apical fluoroalkoxy
ligands connected by five-membered rings to an equatorial aryl carbon, are
easily synthesized by reactions of main-group element species with a trilithio
derivative prepared from the iodinane by reaction with n-butyllithium. The
iodine(V) species, produced by oxidation of the iodinane with fluorine, followed
by other reactions, are useful as oxidizing agents. A neutral selenium analogue
with an equatorial methyl group is a very interesting methylating agent. Some of
these compounds are expected to provide applications in materials science. The
hexaiodobenzene dication, which was recently reported as a ten-electron sigma-
delocalized aromatic species involving the in-plane p-orbitals of the six
iodines, could be considered a species with a pentaiodophenyl tridentate ligand
attached to a six-electron iodine dication. The sigma-delocalized aromatic
system provides stabilization for this tridentate ligand. Introduction of other
6-electron centers, such as carbocations, to the pentaiodophenyl ligand has been
effected and the possibility of sigma-delocalized stabilization will be studied.
Analogues with iodines replaced by other main-group elements of similar van der
Waal's radii are expected to provide comparable sigma-delocalized aromatics, not
only for hexasubstituted benzenes, but also for naphthalene and other pi-
aromatic centers, as well as some alkyl centers with arrangements of the main
group atoms in cyclic array with close arrangement of the atoms relative to
neighboring atoms. Hexakis-(selenophenyl)benzene dication has been made, with
evidence for sigma-delocalized aromaticity. Several other aromatic species, with
a tree-center four-electron hypervalent bond parallel to the p-orbitals of a pi-
aromatic system, species which are called bis-ipso aromatic species, have been
prepared. These provide stabilization for hypervalent boron or carbon species,
and possibly even nitrogen species. Aluminum analogues of the hypervalent boron
species, reported earlier, have been prepared for comparisons. A wide range of
elements are to be studied in related aromatic species.