* 8910490
* Research Initiation Award:  Estimator/Detector for            Non-Gaussian Environments
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/1989,08/31/1992
* Adam Efron, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Alicia Harris
* 08/31/1992
* USD 70,000.00

Early work in detection and estimation almost exclusively assumed a Gaussian
model for the noise. It has long been known that many important environments
exhibit non-Gaussian behavior. For example, an examination of acoustic data from
the polar seas suggest that while the noise appears to be Gaussian most of the
time, there are also transients and sinusoidal bursts present. Since it is
generally impossible to obtain an accurate statistical characterization for the
non-Gaussian portion of the noise it is not possible to design optimal
detectors. This project will be concerned with the design of detectors to
operate in these environments. The detectors will be based on a divide-and-
conquer approach. The detectors will use the characteristics of the Gaussian
component and minimal information about the impulsive component to identify the
impulsive component and eliminate it. Once this has been accomplished the
detector will operate on the residual data using standard detection techniques
based on Gaussian statistics to determine the presence or absence of signal. The
environment will be modeled as consisting of a correlated Gaussian component
that is always present and an infrequently occurring impulsive component. Models
for impulsive component will include single sample impulses, known transients
and sinusoidal bursts (damped and undamped). The detectors considered will be
analyzed using asymptotic results if possible and an approximate statistical
analysis when necessary. Monte Carlo simulations will be undertaken to identify
salient system features and verify analytical results. It is hoped that the
detectors designed can be applied to actual arctic sea, acoustic data.