* 8910187
* Research Initiation: Very High Performance Residue Number   System Processors
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/1989,02/29/1992
* Alexander Skavantzos, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* S. Kamal Abdali
* 02/29/1992
* USD 37,918.00

The development of ultra-high-speed digital computing machinery, capable of
throughputs well beyond a 109 Instructions per second (IPS) rate, is essential
to the development of future high performance communication, radar, control,
image processing, as well as multidimensional signal processing systems. This
research is directed towards that goal. The research is based on the recent
advancements made to a 2000 year old branch of mathematics known as "residue
arithmetic". The Residue Number System (RNS) has received attention over the
last two decades because the advances in memory technology combined with the
system's ability for high-speed arithmetic provide attractive solutions in many
real-time Digital Signal Processing (DSP) applications. More recently the
Quadratic Residue Number System (QRNS) was introduced which offers significant
hardware savings and throughput enhancements for the case of complex
multiplicative intensive environments. The proposed research will extend the
concept of the QRNS to a higher order system, the so called Polynomial Residue
Number System (PRNS), that would have minimum complexity for operations such as
complex multiplication, convolution, crosscorrelation and autocorrelation. The
end product of this research will be the capability of designing high-
performance communications, control and image processing systems to meet the
future needs for higher speed.