* 8910743
* Complex Skill Development:  A Self-Regulatory/Information   Processing Framework
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1989,06/30/1994
* Ruth Kanfer, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Robin A. Cantor
* 06/30/1994
* USD 166,307.00

This proposal develops and empirically tests a theoretical model of self-
regulatory processes as they affect the acquisition of skills needed for
performance of complex, high-consequence decision making. Self-monitoring of
learning affects both job performance and job training, and this project has
general implications for the study of decision making and specific implications
for the training and performance of the selected target population of Air
Traffic Controllers (ATC). The behavior in question includes establishing
realistic performance goals, anticipating the consequences of activities, and
monitoring the effects of one's own actions. The proposed study involves three
parts: a first phase in which a theoretical model is refined and initial
hypotheses tested on ATC trainees, a second phase in which experiments are
conducted using a computerized, real-time simulation of an ATC task, and a third
phase in which self-regulatory determinants of behavior are tested using
advanced ATC trainees. The proposed hypotheses are interesting and complex,
including questions about when task-related demands are sufficiently high that
self-monitoring may become counter-productive. The empirically-verified research
results could have direct implications for the design of job-training programs
and for increasing the effectiveness of complex decision making in stressful job
situations.