* 8910685
* Experimental and Theoretical Studies of a Nitrogen Arc With Copper Evaporation From the Anode: RIA
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/1989,12/31/1991
* Kasra Etemadi, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* MILTON J LINEVSKY
* 12/31/1991
* USD 70,000.00

This proposal is concerned with experimental and theoretical studies of thermal
plasmas, in particular with the impact of anode evaporation to the anode region
of a high intensity nitrogen arc. An improved emission spectroscopic technique
will be utilized to measure the temperature and the vapor density distribution
of the anode material (copper). In a two-step process the unresolved (0,0)
emission band of molecules at 3914.4 A and the spectral line of CuI at 5218.2 A
are chosen for the measurements. The plasma properties will be also determined
by the relative line intensity method of CuI using 5105.5, 5153.2, 5218.2,
5700.2, and 5782.1 A spectral lines. Holographic interferometry will be used for
flow visualization and for temperature measurements in the lower temperature
regions (in the absence of turbulence and in the presence of an axisymmetrical
plasma). An already existing computer program for the modeling of a mixture of
argon and copper thermal plasma will be modified for a nitrogen-copper free
burning arc. The thermodynamic and transport properties of the nitrogen-copper
plasma required for the modeling will be calculated by a program written for a
general multicomponent two-temperature plasma. In the intended study the plasma
is assumed to be optically thin and in the state of Local Thermodynamic
Equilibrium. Thermal plasmas can be applied for melting, cutting, welding and
refining materials, and they play an important role in high power interrupters,
arc lamps, reduction metallurgy and plasma spraying. A change in the anode
geometry due to evaporation can have a deleterious affect on the desired heat
and mass transfer and can damage switching devices. By applying advanced optical
methods to determine the temperature and flow characteristics of the plasma in
the vicinity of the electrodes, the evaporation process can be better
understood.