* 8910229
* Research Initiation:  Symbolic Computer Geometry and        Interactive Geometric Design
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/1989,11/30/1992
* Beat Bruderlin, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 11/30/1992
* USD 69,300.00

Despite the progress that has been made in the field of computational geometry
and solid modelling, only little has been achieved in the field of interactive
Computer-Aided Design (CAD). A cost-effective design system should support an
interactive user in its interaction much more than current CAD systems do. One
of the reasons for this deficiency, is that geometric objects are always looked
upon as numerically represented objects by CAD systems. Much information is lost
when objects are translated to the internal representation of such a program.
The understanding of geometry is implicit in the algorithms which manipulate
these objects on a numerical level, rather than on an object level. With the
Principal Investigator's approach, geometric objects and their properties can be
represented symbolically. Therefore, manipulations of such objects and the
results of the manipulations are meaningful for the interactive user. The
Principal Investigators will develop a geometric calculus for symbolically
manipulating geometric expressions. A theoretic framework will be developed to
prove correctness and decidability of geometric problems. The approaches to be
applied are term-rewriting methods and logic programming methods. This research
should result in a more powerful user interface for the Alpha One Computer-Aided
Design system, developed at the University of Utah.