* 8910117
* The Economics of Institutions and Organizations:  Firm and  Markets
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1989,01/31/1993
* Donald Roberts, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 01/31/1993
* USD 82,389.00

This project builds detailed theoretical models describing economic
institutions. The models employ the methods of the theory of noncooperative
games in extensive form, paying careful attention to issues of information and
timing of actions. The objective is to understand better the efficiency
properties of these institutions, why they exist and persist, and how to improve
their performance. The institutions modeled span micro and macroeconomics. One
part of the work focuses on detailed modeling of market institutions for
determining the prices and quantities in transactions. A major element of this
work is to study the possible emergence of involuntary unemployment in
macroeconomic models with explicit microfoundations. The project already has
demonstrated how labor rationing emerges naturally from business decision
making. This work is generalized. The project seeks to determine whether
appropriate government policies or institutional changes such as the use of the
labor compensation contracts advocated by Martin Weitzman in his book "Share
Economy" can reduce involuntary unemployment. The other part of the work focuses
on the internal organization of the firm. Major elements in this part of the
work are the concept of influence cost and the impact of technological change on
organization. For example, the investigator demonstrated that personnel
departments should be unresponsive, even to efficiency arguments, so as to
prevent line managers' spending too much time trying to get good deals for their
people and, in turn, to discourage employees' attempting to get managers to
exert influence to their benefit. This work will be generalized into a novel
theory of bureaucratic structure. Members of the bureaucracy are rewarded on
grounds other than immediate organizational performance in order to reduce
influence costs. This research is part of the emergence of a comprehensive,
rigorous theory of organizations that is improving the scientific rigor of
research on political and economic institutions and providing valuable new
insights into a wide range of economic issues. The research on models of market
organization and the foundations of macroeconomics is especially important
because it synthesizes and reconciles two different bodies of theory that often
give conflicting results about the possibility of persistent involuntary
unemployment. The research on the internal organization of firms should provide
new insights into ways of improving firm performance.