* 8910327
* Research Initiation:  Computer-Aided Generation and         Evaluation of the Spatial Equivalent of Burmester Curves
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/1989,01/31/1992
* John Nisbett, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 01/31/1992
* USD 59,542.00

The objective of the proposed research is to develop an interactive, computer-
aided graphical construction and viewing environment to be used in studying the
geometric entities which represent the spatial loci of joints equivalent to
planar Burmester curves. The entire construction process, based on Burmester's
original geometric principle, will be available for display and evaluation. This
is necessary to correlate portions of the geometric entities with the design
specifications and physical characteristics of the resulting linkage. Revolute
and prismatic joints will be treated as restricted cylindrical joints, thus
allowing for a common construction approach using screw axes. Spherical joints
must be handled separately. This program is expected to be a valuable aid to
researchers, educators, and designers in furthering the understanding,
visualization, and use of the geometric entities associated with spatial joints.
The construction and viewing environment will be conducive to studying
relationships between the geometric entities and the physical linkage, e.g.,
crank rotatability, branch problem, and order problem. The development of these
areas of study should greatly improve the practicality and efficiency of
synthesizing spatial linkages. To maximize portability, the coding will be in
standard FORTRAN-77. The graphics will be in accordance with the PHIGS standard.