* 8910938
* Enhancing the Computer Science Infrastructure
* CSE,EIA
* 06/01/1989,11/30/1990
* Benjamin Martin, Spelman College
* Standard Grant
* Beverly P Baker
* 11/30/1990
* USD 50,000.00

The first and primary goal of the Department of Mathematics and Computer
Science at Spelman College is the production of quality female scientists and
engineers. In order to accomplish this goal, a strong research component for
academic programs must be built in computer science and applied mathematics.
Although Spelman is primarily a teaching institution, they propose to increase
the percentage of students involved in research or realistic practical
experiences to at least seventy percent of the upper division students (i.e.,
juniors and seniors) over the next five years. This requires the development of
a faculty of adequate size for the student population with strong research and
teaching capabilities. The current faculty size is four full-time members.
Second, they will develop a computer science program which meets the Association
of Computing Machinery (ACM) guidelines for accreditation. Third, they will
increase the percentage of students in computer science with an interest in
scientific applications through systematic exposure of these students to
scientific careers and involvement in appropriate science related activities.
Fourth, they intend to separate the mathematics and computer science programs by
creating a new Department of Computer Science to house the newly accredited
program. To accomplish these objectives, Spelman propose a planning grant (1)
improve and expand research efforts in progress in the areas of image
processing, and information storage and retrieval; (2) increase the number of
courses in Computer and Information Science which have laboratory components;
(3) study and modify the curriculum as necessary and desirable to meet the
accreditation standards of ACM; (4) expand the course offerings in Applied
Mathematics to include relevant topics and techniques for image processing; (5)
recruit additional faculty in Computer Science and Applied Mathematics with
research interests and performance in the selected areas; and (6) expose
students to governmental and industrial environments in which scientific
applications of the discipline occur.