* 8910432
* Cultured Peptidergic Neurons:  Electrical, Secretory,       Immunological and Morphological Correlates
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1989,07/31/1992
* Ian Cooke, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Stacy Springer
* 07/31/1992
* USD 208,600.00

Information is sought to answer questions about the relationship between the
differing electrical characteristics of neurons that secrete different peptide
hormones and their biochemical and morphological characteristics. The neurons
will be studied intact within an acutely isolated preparation and isolated in
cell culture. In culture, the neurons synthesizing different hormones, as
indicated by their immunoreactivity to specific antisera, assume distinct
morphologies under defined conditions. The cultured neurons having different
form show distinct differences in their electrical characteristics. The material
used for these studies is the X-organ - sinus gland of the tropical land crab,
Cardisoma carnifex. Earlier work has demonstrated that this crustacean
neurosecretory system is directly analogous to the major vertebrate
neurosecretory system, the hypothalamic-neurohypophyseal system, and that at
every level of analysis yet undertaken the physiological and cell biological
mechanisms involved are directly comparable. Many of the observations obtainable
with the crab material, however, would not be possible with vertebrate material.
The crab neurosecretory system is easily isolated and consists exclusively of
peptidergic neurons and supporting tissue. The terminals are unusually large (up
to 30um), permitting recording with intracellular or patch electrodes. Antisera
to several peptide- hormonal activities permit typing of neurons and terminals.
Isolated X-organ neurons immediately commence regeneration of processes in
unconditioned dishes and defined media. Conventional microelectrode techniques
and dye injection will be used to characterize neurons in acutely isolated
systems. Both conventional and patch-clamping techniques will be applied to the
neurons in culture. The regional distribution in the membrane of channels giving
rise to different ionic currents will be explored by testing the effects of
axotomy and by localized recording. Regional sensitivity to putative
neurotransmitter agents will be explored. As feasible, changes with time in
culture or with changed morphology induced by altered culturing conditions will
be detailed.