* 8910433
* Research Initiation:  Expert System to Analyze Mechanical   Products for Ease of Assembly
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/1989,11/30/1991
* Lourdes Rosario, University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
* Standard Grant
* None
* 11/30/1991
* USD 60,148.00

The research objective is to develop a framework for an expert system to assist
designers during the early design stages and within the environment of a
Computer-Aided Design system in the design of easy to assemble products. The
system will provide estimates of the difficulty level in the automatic assembly
of mechanical designs, provide re-design recommendations, and identify changes
required in other components due to these suggestions. The research consists of:
(1) the development and implementation of a basic flexible assembly model (BAM)
and a second mode assembly model (SMAM) for mechanical products, (2) the
development of a set of rules and procedures that employ the information in the
models to design easy to assemble mechanical products, (3) the development of
control strategies to process these rules and procedures and (4) the
implementation of the rules and control strategies in an IBM AT compatible
computer using AutoCAD and AutoLISP. The system will allow more flexibility in
the assembly definition, automatically implementing changes in the complete
assembly after performing re-design changes in specific product features. This
will yield better products for automatic assembly operations. Future expansion
of the system will allow the implementation of a complete decision support
system which integrates design, process planning, and actual assembly.