* 8910269
* Melatonin and Dopamine as Neuromodulators of Light-Driven   Photomembrane Metabolism
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1989,01/31/1991
* Nancy Dahl, University of Kansas Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* None
* 01/31/1991
* USD 20,000.00

Melatonin has long been known to be produced by the pineal gland and to
influence daily cycles in vertebrates. Melatonin is also produced in the
vertebrate retina where it controls functions such as allowing old fragments of
light sensitive membrane to be discarded. Melatonin is synthesized from
serotonin by rods and cones during the dark, and because it is lipid soluble, it
quickly diffuses through the retina. In light, the enzyme converting serotonin
to melatonin disappears and serotonin accumulates. It is unknown if all
photoreceptors can actively accumulate serotonin and manufacture melatonin or if
only green sensitive rods perform these functions. Also unknown is the path
information must take from the reception of light by the photoreceptor to
melatonin synthesis and from there to photomembrane disposal. Possible paths
are: (i) a single transducer such as the green sensitive rods, suppressing all
photoreceptors; (ii) each photoreceptor receiving the signal for itself; and
(iii) every photoreceptor broadcasting an inhibitory message to all other rods
and cones. Radioactive serotonin and electron microscopic autoradiography will
be used to determine if all classes of photoreceptors in the frog retina can
accumulate serotonin and which colors of light are capable of inhibiting
melatonin syntheses. The relation of melatonin synthesis to the periodic
disposal of photoreceptor membrane will be investigated.