* 8910457
* Earthquake Hazards and the Disabled
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/1989,08/31/1992
* Mansour Rahimi, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* William A. Anderson
* 08/31/1992
* USD 145,830.00

This research will develop an experimental system to observe and evaluate the
post- earthquake behavior of individuals with three classes of disabilities -
lower extremity, all extremities, and visual. Four groups (three groups of
disabled persons and a non-disabled group) will be involved in the study. A
static room will be set up to simulate the effect of earthquakes on the interior
room objects and arrangements typically found in residential dwellings. After
viewing an audio-visual tape showing earthquake shaking and effects, subjects
will be asked to perform different safety-related tasks that would be carried
out immediately after earthquake impact. The room simulator will be able to
reflect the after-effects of two levels of earthquake shaking (low and high).
One source of data on occupant behavior and performance will be video tapes of
each subject's performance on the safety-related tasks. An attempt will be made
to determine: a) Whether disabled persons differ from able-bodied persons in
their ability to carry out self-protective tasks; b) Whether the type of
disability is related to task performance; c) How earthquake intensity affects
occupants' ability to take self- protective measures. Analysis of variance
techniques will be used to analyze the data. In addition to providing data for
quantitative experimental analysis, the video tapes should be an important
source of qualitative data on the coping behavior of building occupants
following earthquakes.