* 8910989
* Mechanistic Studies on Halodiazirines, Radical Stabilization by meta Substituents
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1989,12/31/1992
* Xavier Creary, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing grant
* Benjamin F. Plummer
* 12/31/1992
* USD 246,400.00

This project by Xavier Creary of the University of Notre Dame is supported by
the Organic Dynamics Program, and is involved in a study of the detailed
molecular pathway of certain organic reactions. The reaction of a class of
compounds known as bromodiazirines with negative ions will be studied, and in a
second part of the project, free radical stabilities are to be examined. This
program will provide useful information about how organic reactions proceed on a
molecular level. This study is based on the belief that the commonly accepted
mechanism of the reaction of bromodiazirines with nucleophiles cannot be
correct. A novel N-azidodiazirine is proposed as an intermediate for the
reaction of bromophenyldiazirine with azide ion. However, in cases where the
nucleophile is highly polarizable (e.g., thiophenoxide), electron transfer may
become the preferred pathway. N-15 labeling experiments will be carried out to
distinguish among the various mechanistic possibilities. Understanding of
substitution reactions will be advanced and insights should be gained into the
factors controlling direct nucleophilic attack vs. electron transfer.
N-azidoamines will also be generated and factors that affect their stability
will be investigated. In a second part of this work, a novel and previously
unrecognized mechanism by which meta substituents can stabilize free radicals is
proposed. Attempts will be made to verify this hypothesis experimentally by
using the methylenecyclopropane rearrangement probe developed by the Notre Dame
group. These studies will enhance the state of understanding of factors that
contribute to free radical stability.