* 8910362
* Research Initiation:  Nonlinear Predictive Process Control
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/1989,01/31/1992
* B. Wayne Bequette, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 01/31/1992
* USD 60,000.00

The economic viability of a chemical manufacturing process is dependent on
maintaining and regulating the system in some prescribed manner. The ability to
maintain product specifications while minimizing energy or natural resource
consumption is accomplished by the use of process control systems. The goal of
this project is to develop control system techniques that use a nonlinear
dynamic model of the chemical process as a basis for feedback control. A
nonlinear parameter estimation procedure will be developed to estimate important
process parameters such as effectiveness factors or heat transfer coefficients,
as well as process disturbances such as feed stream composition. In addition to
parameter estimation, a nonlinear optimization-based procedure will be used to
maintain a desired output variable trajectory, similar to techniques that have
been proven successful for linear systems. The process model, characterized by a
set of nonlinear differential equations, will be transformed to algebraic
equations using orthogonal collocation on finite elements. Sequential quadratic
programming will be used to solve the nonlinear optimization subject to the
algebraic equation equality constraints and manipulated and state variable
inequality constraints. This nonlinear control strategy will result in tighter
regulation of important process variables, allowing a more optimal operation of
chemical processes. This research will also result in a more complete
understanding of linear predictive control techniques, since many of the
important effects proposed for study have not been previously addressed for the
linear system case.