* 8910606
* U.S.-Belgium Cooperative Science Program:  Analysis of the  Structure of Fuel/Nitrogen Oxide Flames
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/1990,06/30/1993
* Melvyn Branch, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 06/30/1993
* USD 5,705.00

This award will support continued collaborative research between Dr. Melvin
Branch, University of Colorado and Professor Pierre Van Tiggelen, Laboratory for
Physical Chemistry of Combustion, Catholic University of Louvain, Belgium. The
research will focus on the analysis of the structure of fuel/nitrogen oxide
flames. The decomposition of many solid propellants during combustion leads to
the formation of gaseous hydrocarbons and oxides of nitrogen, which can react to
support a flame above the surface of the propellant. These flames can provide
heat which is fed back to the propellant surface and thereby influence the
burning rate. Experimental measurements of many of fuel/nitrogen oxide flames
are in progress at the University of Colorado at Boulder. The proposed
cooperative research with the Catholic University of Louvain involves the
chemical kinetic flame modeling of these data. The research will focus first on
the description of the flame profile data for fuel/nitrogen oxide flames using a
flame code with a complete chemical kinetic mechanism. The second task will be
to use the flame code to predict the burning velocity of free standing flames
for comparison with the experimental data. The final task will be to model the
chemistry of the ammonia added flames. Both the U.S. and Belgian investigators
have significant expertise in the kinetics field. The results of this research
will be of benefit to practical combustion problems such as nitrogen oxide
production mitigation schemes and the improved performance of nitramine based
propellants.