* 8910757
* Molecular Basis of Stage-specific Gene Activation
* BIO,IOS
* 12/01/1989,11/30/1994
* A.  Krishna Kumaran, Marquette University
* Continuing grant
* Ralph Hecht
* 11/30/1994
* USD 240,800.00

In holometablous insects the pattern of gene expression in many tissues changes
dramatically at the metamorphic molt. The larval fat body cells in Galleria
mellonella synthesize several larval hemolymph proteins but after metamorphosis
into pupa these fat body cells cease synthesis of these proteins. The same fat
body cells synthesize vitellogenins in pharate adult females. Dr. Kumaran has
showed that Lhp76 is expressed all through larval life whenever ecdysteroid
titers are low and that Lhp82 is expressed during the period when both
ecdysteroid and juvenile hormone titers are low or undetectable. Northern
analysis showed that these genes are not expressed in day- 2 or older pupae,
pharate adults or adults. This apparent irreversible inactivation of Lhp genes
after metamorphosis and the concomitant activation of vitellogenin genes can be
explained, in theory, on the basis of changes in the population of trans acting
transcriptional factors in fat body cell nuclei. Dr. Kumaran has the entire
transcription unit and 4 to 5 kb of the upstream sequences and 2 to 3 kb of
downstream sequences of Lhp76. He proposes to characterize this and the Lhp82
gene in detail and identify the cis acting regulatory elements by in vitro
transcription assays and by transient expression assay in primary cultures of
Galleria fat body cells or by studying their expression in tissue culture cells
of Lymantria fat body following stable integration. In addition, if found
suitable, transgenic flies bearing Lhp gene constructs will be used to identify
the regulatory elements. The identity of the regulatory elements will be further
defined by DNA footprinting and studies on metamorphosis associated changes in
the trans acting factors, using filter binding and gel retardation assays will
be initiated. %%% This proposal will look and how gene expression changes are
regulated during metamorphosis in insects. This is a dramatic developmental
change and therefore offers a good model system for studying the hormone induced
alterations in gene expression.