* 8910060
* Acquisition of a Portable X-Ray Unit and a Microtome for    Maize Genetics Research
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/1989,12/31/1992
* William Sheridan, University of North Dakota Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Kathie L. Olsen
* 12/31/1992
* USD 22,394.00

A major goal of maize developmental genetics is the identification and
characterization of the genes that direct and regulate the morphogenesis of the
embryo and the plant. The principal investigator and his coworkers have been
characterizing embryo-lethal mutations in several genes that play essential
roles in the normal morphogenesis of the embryo. A second project is aimed at
characterizing two genes that regulate the development of the axillary
meristems. A major goal of these projects is to investigate the cellular
autonomy of mutant expression of these genes. This will be done by using x-rays
to break a chromosome arm carrying the normal allele, thereby producing
genetically mutant sectors in otherwise genetically normal immature embryos.
Specially constructed stocks will be used so that the mutant sectors will be
marked by a lack of color (anthocyanin) while the normal tissues will be
colored. If the genetically mutant sectors are phenotypically mutant, then the
expression is cell autonomous, but if the mutant sectors are phenotypically
normal, then mutant expression is non-autonomous. Similar approaches will be
used in studies on dominant mutants affecting mature plant traits. Finally,
x-ray induced sectors will be used in normal embryos to examine cell lineages
and cell fate in the developing maize embryo. The acquisition of the portable
x-ray unit would be of extraordinary significance for the research. This is so
because, instead of having to bring heavy pots containing the corn plants with
their attached developing ears into a building containing an x-ray unit, the
mobile unit can be used to irradiate ears in the field. As a result, it will be
possible to increase the scope of this area of research by at least an order of
magnitude.