* 8910947
* Mathematical Sciences: Topics in Ergodic Theory and Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/1989,11/30/1991
* Roger Jones, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* William Y. Velez
* 11/30/1991
* USD 85,526.00

Professors Bellow and Jones will continue their ongoing investigation of
almost-everywhere convergence questions arising in connection with the pointwise
ergodic theorem along subsequences and along other sequences of operators. A.e.
convergence in mean for certain arithmetic sequences will be an especial focus
of interest. Calderon-Zygmund type decomposition techniques will be used to
study such problems. The principal investigators will also pursue problems at
the other extreme involving the strong sweeping out property, where a.e.
convergence in the sup norm fails very badly. This project is mathematical
research in ergodic theory. This theory is concerned with what happens on
average over the long run when a suitable transformation of a suitable
underlying space is iterated many times. (Typically, the underlying space might
be just a line segment, and the transformation might cut the line segment up
into pieces, then stretch or shrink and rearrange them.) One point of view is to
study the behavior of functions on the space when their arguments are repeatedly
subjected to the transformation. It frequently happens that the averages of the
iterates of the functions converge in a meaningful fashion. A recent trend in
the subject is to look at averages over subsequences, for instance the squares
or the primes, instead of over all integer indices. Professors Bellow and Jones
will pursue ergodic theory over subsequences in this sense.