* 8910840
* Cosmic Ray Anisotropies and Density Gradients in            Interplanetary Space at High Rigidities
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1989,01/31/1992
* Derek Swinson, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Sherry O. Farwell
* 01/31/1992
* USD 84,600.00

This proposal is for the continuation of a study of the long term properties of
cosmic ray anisotropies in interplanetary space surrounding the earth, with
emphasis on the information that can be extracted from these data regarding the
properties and long term variations of cosmic ray density gradients in the inner
heliosphere. This work is expected to yield important information on the three-
dimensional magnetic and cosmic ray profile near the earth, and its dependence
on activity on the sun. It will permit studies of how the cosmic ray gradients
near the earth are influenced by asymmetry of solar activity on the two solar
activity hemispheres, and the way in which the dependence changes over the
11-year solar activity cycle and the 22-year solar cycle. Using data from
inclined and vertical muon telescopes as well as data from other underground
telescopes, it will be possible to observe these effects over a wide range of
terrestrial latitudes over the period of 1965 to the present, and examine any
dependence on heliospheric polarity and solar magnetic field reversal. This will
allow a study of the continuing evolution of the heliospheric magnetic field and
its influence on high rigidity galactic cosmic radiation in the inner
heliosphere. Support is provided for continued data acquisition, reduction and
interpretation, and for continued operation of currently operating large
underground multi-directional muon telescope recorders at Embudo Cave and
Socorro, New Mexico.