* 8910789
* Human Influences on the Dispersal of Living Organisms and   Genetic Material into Aqatic Ecosystems (Two-Day Symposium) in Los Angeles, CA - February 15-16, 1989
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/1989,07/31/1990
* Aaron Rosenfield, University of Maryland Center for Environmental Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Martin
* 07/31/1990
* USD 2,000.00

This conference will examine human influences on, and considerations relating
to, the dispersal of genetically-altered living organisms into the aquatic
environment. The topic of the conference promises an opportunity for the
building of bridges between the social sciences, interested in questions of risk
and organizational responses, and the biological sciences, interested in
questions of biotechnology development and the fate of genetically-altered
organisms when released to the natural environment. The topic is important, new,
and holds great scientific and financial challenges for both the research
community and industry. This conference, to be held in Los Angeles February
15-16, 1989, will be in conjunction with the annual meeting of the National
Shellfisheries Association. Over 30 scientists and research managers will make
presentations, stressing the commonality of approaches used to assess benefits
from genetic engineering due to enhanced food production and risks from genetic
engineering due to the possibility of harm to aquatic and other plants or
animals. In addition, the links between biological systems and social systems
(e.g., the communities dependent on fisheries production for their livelihood)
will be emphasized, in the terms of the risks and benefits accompanying
deliberate releases of genetically-altered organisms.