* 8910999
* Trophic Dynamics of a Changing Zooplankton Community
* GEO,OCE
* 11/15/1989,10/30/1993
* John Lehman, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 10/30/1993
* USD 411,999.00

This is a case study of the Lake Michigan ecosystem. The basic goal of the
research program has been to improve understanding of food web relations,
productivity and recruitment processes through the investigation of large-scale
natural perturbations. Recent invasion of the laurentian Great Lakes by a
predatory invertebrate never before present in the Nearctic has altered
ecosystem food webs at a middle trophic level. Changes have subsequently
occurred in zooplankton species composition, and in recruitment success of some
fish species. These changes may be linked. The arrival of the invading predator
in Lake Michigan has been documented, the first food web changes have been
quantified, and the background, baseline conditions against which changes can be
judged have been established. The results from Lake Michigan prompted a new
examination of historical data from Lake Washington, one of the most important
analog studies, and yielded the discovery that nutrients produce distinctly
different results at the ecosystem level than do food web changes. %%% The
structure of the food web of Lake Michigan has changed substantially since the
introduction of the predators Bythotrephes and Leptodora. The lake was under
study before the predators arrived, and continued examination of its food chain
dynamics and community structure will provide important insight on the
adjustment of aquatic ecosystems to major perturbations in their food webs. The
contained nature of the Great Lake ecosystem makes it an ideal site for such an
investigation.