* 8910088
* Research Initiation Award:  Techniques for Design and         Analysis of Short Memory Stochastic Adaptive Control        Algorithms
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/1989,01/31/1992
* Sean Meyn, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 01/31/1992
* USD 45,000.00

Because the environment in which a system will operate is often time varying and
cannot be predicted exactly by the designer, the development of adaptive
controllers has been an extremely active research area in the past ten years. A
large number of algorithms have been proposed; however, with the exception of
the example analysed in ıMeyn and Caines, 1987!, there have been no concrete
stability results for adaptive systems with non-trivial parameter variation
operating in a stochastic environment. The proposed research considers the
application of Markov chain techniques for the stability and performance
analysis of short memory adaptive algorithms. Some of the basic issues to be
address, and techniques to be applied are: *the analysis of practical
algorithms: The adaptive control algorithms which are currently used in practice
are not fully understood, and a new set of tools is needed to analyse their
stability and performance characteristics. Recent results of the proposer are
expected to make an important step towards fulfilling this goal; *the adaptive
control of time varying plants in a stochastic setting is poorly understood. A
specific goal of the proposed research is to achieve a better understanding of
the performance of short memory algorithms using a test function approach
initiated in ıMeyn, 1989a!, and currently under investigation by the proposer;
*the proposed methods use an equivalent of the state space approach currently
used in the local analysis of determistic adaptive control systems; *these
methods provide a means to study a combination of nonlinear and stochastic
phenomena; *it will be shown that these techniques have several important
advantages over current methods used to study stochastic adaptive control
algorithms particularly in regards to stability.