* 8910921
* Coordination and Atom Transfer Chemistry at Surfaces of     Polyoxometalate Anions
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/1989,05/31/1993
* Michael Pope, Georgetown University
* Continuing Grant
* E. Kent Barefield
* 05/31/1993
* USD 263,981.00

This award from the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry Program
is in the area of inorganic chemistry and deals with large clusters of either
molybdenum or tungsten atoms tied together by oxygen atoms, known as
polyoxoanions. These species have become the focus of much attention recently as
models of catalytic metal oxide surfaces, and are also under intensive
investigation as highly active and versatile homogeneous catalysts. Development
of reactivity on the surfaces of large polyoxoanions of molybdenum and tungsten
in aqueous and nonaqueous solvents is seen as a way (a) to lead to new classes
of compounds and homogeneous catalysts and (b) to model processes that are
important in heterogeneous catalysis on metal oxides. "Activation" of polyanion
surfaces is achieved by reduction, e.g. oxomolybdenum(VI) to aquomolybdenum(IV),
or by synthesis of polyanions containing one or more lower-valent heteroatoms in
place of W(VI) or Mo(VI). The activated polyanions bind a variety of neutral
ligands, especially in anhydrous solvents. With appropriate choice of heteroatom
and oxidation state, polyanion-ligand complexes undergo atom transfer, either to
or from the ligand. This tendency toward atom transfer will be used to develop
stoichiometric or catalytic oxygen atom transfer involving one or several
adjacent sites on the polyanion surface. An extension of this work is expected
to lead to rational synthesis of polyanions containing terminal multiply-bonded
groups other than oxo oxygen (e.g. imido, hydrazido) with consequent novel
reactivity.