* 8910415
* RIA: Novel Electroabsorption in Stained-Layer Hetero- structures A New Effect with Potential Applications in Optoelectronics Devices
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1989,12/31/1991
* Neal Anderson, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Arthur R. Bergen
* 12/31/1991
* USD 70,000.00

Optoelectronic light modulators, i.e. devices through which the transmission of
light may be modulated by variation of an applied control voltage, are of
interest for applications in which electronic control of guided light waves is
required (e.g. fiber-optic commlunications systems). The current state-of-the-
art in such devices is the multiple-quantum-well (MQW) waveguide modulator,
which makes use of an electroabsorption effect called the quantum-confined Stark
effect (QCSE). Significant improvements in MQW modulator performance may be
possible, however, by exploiting an electroabsorption enhancement mechanism
proposed here and termed the "field-induced absorption-edge mixing" (AEM)
effect. The unique valence-band configuration required to achieve this effect is
available only in certain types strained-layer heterostructures which have not
yet been considered in electroabsorption studies. A detailed investigation of
the hitherto unexplored AEM effect is the topic of this proposal. Theoretical
models of the field-dependent near-gap absorption characteristics will first be
developed and used to design optimum structures for maximum AEM effect.
Appropriate strained-layer MQW structures will then be grown by metalorganic
chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD), evaluated using low-temperature luminescence
techniques, and used to fabricate test structures. Demonstration of the AEM
effect will then be attempted and, if observed, the effect will be further
characterized and its potential usefulness in optical modulators assessed.
Observation large AEM effects at reasonable control voltages - which seems
promising based on fundamental considerations described in this proposal - could
lead both to improvements in existing MQW waveguide modulators and to new
optoelectronic devices such as voltage-controlled polarizers as well.