* 8910482
* Long-Range Monitoring of Movement Patterns and Infrasonic   Vocalizations
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1989,07/31/1992
* William Langbauer, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Continuing grant
* Fred Stollnitz
* 07/31/1992
* USD 182,684.00

Katharine B. Payne has discovered that elephants emit "infrasonic"
vocalizations, calls with sound frequencies below the range that is audible by
people. Much evidence suggests that these low-frequency calls of free-ranging
African elephants function over long distances and play an important role in the
organization of elephant society. For instance, Rowan B. Martin has tracking
data on elephant matriarchs in the Sengwa Research Area in Zimbabwe, showing a
long history of movements that are coordinated even between elephants separated
by 1 to 10 kilometers of woodlands. To study this phenomenon, Payne, Langbauer,
and Martin will will attach radio microphones and transmitters to the collars of
the same Sengwa elephants, and will simultaneously monitor their vocalizations
and movement patterns over at least two months. Behavioral observations from
aircraft and ground vehicles will supplement the continuous tracking and
acoustic data, which will be entered into a computer in the field and later
analyzed at Cornell University. In a collaborative study, blood samples from the
collared elephants will be analyzed using DNA-fingerprinting techniques, to
determine whether or not close genetic relatives are more likely to call to each
other and to coordinate their movements. The researchers' long-term goals are to
describe the structure of elephants' acoustic communication system and the
behavioral patterns it affects, both at the level of the individual and of the
society. The findings of this project will also contribute to conservation of
severely threatened populations of elephants. In Africa, the major cause of a
disastrous decline (57% of East Africa's elephants have disappeared in the last
10 years) is potentially reversible, for it is related to a booming
international trade in ivory that makes poaching extremely lucrative in
countries where management is difficult. Public education, including
presentation of the results of this project, will be important in the effort to
stabilize the elephant populations.