* 8910046
* Research Initiation Award:  Conditional Stochastic          Decomposition - An Algorithmic Interface for                Optimization/Simulation
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/01/1989,04/30/1992
* Julia Higle, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* None
* 04/30/1992
* USD 60,000.00

This research addresses the design, development, and analysis of algorithmic
interfaces between optimization and simulation procedures. The proposed
algorithm, Conditional Stochastic Decomposition (CSD), is based on stochastic
decomposition, a newly introduced algorithmic concept for the solution of two
stage stochastic linear programs with recourse. While stochastic decomposition
is essentially a version of Bender's decomposition with an embedded randomizing
agent, CSD is an algorithm that makes maximal use of each available observation
of the random element. The research includes two major tasks. The first involves
analytic verification of CSD, and will lead to the development of computational
expedients, including cut/variable elimination and aggregation techniques. The
second involves an empirical investigation of the algorithms performance
characteristics, and will necessarily include the development of test problems.
As preliminary tests with a basic version of stochastic decomposition suggest
that it is ideally suited for the solution of large scale two stage stochastic
optimization problems with recourse, the development of CSD as an
optimization/simulation interface should allow for the solution of such problems
when the stochastic nature of the problem is sufficiently complex to preclude
its description with closed form distributions.