* 8910972
* Frontier Urbanization and Implications                      for Regional Development
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/1989,10/31/1991
* John Browder, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 10/31/1991
* USD 59,688.00

Rapid urban population growth has become one of the most distinctive attributes
of Third World development since the Second World War. Not only has growth
occurred in preexisting large cities, it has also taken place in numerous small
pioneer towns on frontiers. The emergence and growth of new settlements has
important social and environmental implications, but the patterns of frontier
urbanization have not received a great deal of attention. Based on a
comprehensive review of secondary source materials and a comparative analysis of
two emerging centers in the Brazilian Amazon, this project has as its goal the
illumination of the larger political-economic role of frontier urbanization in
the process of national and global capital accumulation. The investigators will
study under what political and economic circumstances new settlements originate;
what functions are provided by the rapidly growing frontier settlements; how
these functions have changed over time in response to regional production in
mining, timber, and agricultural sectors; to what extent frontier towns provide
services, employment, and consumer opportunities necessary for the social
reproduction of the local population; what industries emerge in the new Amazon
towns; and how these industries are linked in capital composition to national
and transnational enterprises. This innovative and timely study will develop a
model of landscape change and urban transformation using a number of research
methods drawn from spatial analysis, history, and historical geography. This
research effort offers a contemporary test of theory at a time when a clearer
understanding of the development of urban frontiers can contribute to policies
concerning settlement expansion in the Amazon, one of the world's most important
and fragile ecological areas, and it is also likely to add to our knowledge of
frontier urbanization in other tropical areas of the world.