* 8910980
* Extensive and Intensive Growth
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1989,07/31/1992
* Costas Azariadis, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/1992
* USD 110,962.00

This project seeks to expand on recent innovations in growth theory and
development economics in order to explain different patterns of growth in
different countries and time periods. Recent work has addressed this topic but
the most important models which have emerged, such as those of Lucas, Romer, or
Boyd-Prescott, tend to predict similar behavior for economies with similar
initial conditions. They are unable to account for the fact that a variety of
countries that look relatively similar at certain points in time (say Canada and
Argentina around 1940) look very different economically at later dates. In their
own previous work, the principal investigators have given examples of how
theories can be developed to explain why economies with similar "initial
conditions" follow very different time paths for per capita output. In this
proposal they seek to extend their earlier work in order to integrate a theory
of endogenous population dynamics with a theory of per capita income
determination. Existing growth models suggest that population and (per capita)
income dynamics should interact. This proposal sets forth several models that
carry on this fruitful line of research. More specifically, the investigators
propose to elaborate a dynamical theory of endogenous population growth that is
consistent with well-established historical development patterns and helpful in
identifying some of the less obvious reasons why some countries grow faster than
others over long periods of time. Among the regularities they seek to illuminate
are (i) a logistic pattern of population growth in many parts of Europe and Asia
over the last four hundred years; (ii) the passage of many successfully
developing countries from an early extensive period of economic growth to a
later intensive period; (iii) fertility cycles with a period of approximately
sixteen years; and (iv) the slowest growth often occurs in the poorest
countries. The underlying theory differs from existing literature on endogenous
fertility in that children in traditional economies are modelled primarily as
factors of production rather than as consumption goods, and the terms of trade
are allowed to be set by intra- family bargaining instead of competitive
markets. The new models are well designed to answer a rich set of questions, but
are still tractable to analyze. Not only are they challenging from the
standpoint of growth theory and development economics, but they are also highly
policy-relevant. Although other researchers have made little progress on the key
issues to date, the work of the investigators is far enough advanced to give
promise of a variety of significant results.