* 8910437
* Research Initiation:  A Passivity-Based Control Methodology for Distribution Parameter Systems (SGER Supplement)
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/1989,02/29/1992
* John Wen, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Elbert L. Marsh
* 02/29/1992
* USD 75,000.00

The intent of this project is to develop tools to analyze stability of a closed
loop distributed parameter control system with plant uncertainties, and to apply
these tools to the design of robustly stabilizing controllers. In the control of
mechanical systems, distributed parameter plant models are often used because of
major advantages over lumped parameter models. However, with the very large
number of degrees of freedom in distributed parameter models and the practical
limitation of computational resources, the control problem faces the challenging
task of maintaining stability of the entire plant with a low dimensional
controller based on inexact open loop plant information. This project proposes
to extend the passivity approach to address the robust stability analysis and
robust controller design problems related to this scenario. A passive system is
defined as one having colocated sensors and actuators. The approach has the
advantage of combining the time domain analysis (to infer stability), and the
frequency domain analysis. The four topics investigated in this project include
(1) incorporating the parameter robustness requirement in the passivity method,
(2) generalizing the passivity approach to unbounded input and output operators,
(3) reducing conservatism in the passivity based robustness analysis by using
the optimal multiplier technique, and (4) validating the theoretical results
through simulation and laboratory experiments.