* 8910843
* Structure and Impact of Spatial and Spatio-Temporal States  on Catalytical Surfaces
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/1989,02/28/1993
* Dan Luss, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Burka
* 02/28/1993
* USD 272,535.00

Large variety of spartial and spatio-temporal patterns with a wide degree of
complexity exist in nature. Such structures show mathematically predictable
order in the midst of complex nonlinear behavior. The coupling of chemical and
biological reactions to transport processes such as diffusion or hydrodynamic
convection leads to the formation of spatially organized distributions of the
reactive compounds in reacting systems. The objective of this research is to
conduct a coordinated experimental, theoretical and numerical study of the
formation and evolution of spatial and spatio-temporal patterns on the surface
of heterogeneous catalysts on which chemical reactions occur. The experiments
will characterize quantitatively stationary and travelling wave temperature
patterns on catalytic surfaces using an infrared imager. Analytical and
numerical studies will help direct and organize the experimental studies and
guide the development of principles predicting pattern formation. The
experiments, in turn, will serve as a critical test of theoretical predictions
and as a guide to model development and modifications. The study should help
develop a framework for predicting the classes of reactions and mechanisms which
lead to the formation of spatial and spatio-temporal studies, the conditions
which lead to the evolution of these patterns, the impact of surface
nonuniformities on these structured states, and the impact of these patterns on
the performance of a catalyst. The study should provide information on how
common these temperature patterns are, point out potential pitfalls in current
interpretation of experiments carried out on catalytic surfaces, and advance the
ability to exploit these structures for chemical synthesis purposes.