* 8910984
* Carnegie-Rochester Conference on Public Policy: 1990-1991   being held at Pittsburgh, PA and Rochester, NY in April     1990 - November 1990 and April 1991
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/1990,01/31/1993
* Charles Plosser, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 01/31/1993
* USD 150,000.00

The Carnegie-Rochester Conference on Public Policy is designed to foster
research and discussion of major policy issues by economists from academia and
policy making institutions. Economists in universities are often unfamiliar with
the constraining effect of institutional arrangements in the shaping of policy
issues and policies. Economists in government are often less aware of current
research and its implications. A central purpose of the conference is to
facilitate the interaction between these groups in order to improve the economic
analysis of policy issues and policy. The specific aims of the conference are
to: 1) develop the implications of recent research for policy; 2) bring together
economists with different approaches or conclusions to narrow the differences;
and 3) to uncover the analysis used by institutions that set policies. The
conferences are held semi-annually at the University of Rochester and Carnegie-
Mellon University. About 45 participants plus faculty and graduate students from
the host institution are invited to each conference. Participants from U.S. and
foreign central banks and U.S. and international agencies attend regularly.
Special care is taken to involve promising younger scholars. The papers and
formal discussions are edited and prepared for publication to broaden the impact
of the conference. Support should be renewed for this successful and influential
conference series. The conference series stimulates research by providing a
regular forum for policy and methodological debates, identifying and
commissioning papers from the leading figures in these debates, and publishing
the results of the conference in a timely fashion. Some of the most influential
papers in modern macroeconomics were written for Carnegie-Rochester conferences.
Carnegie-Rochester retains its vitality and its effectiveness. The quality of
the most recent papers from this conference series has been exceptionally high.