* 8910427
* RIA: Learning Control of Mechanical Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/1989,07/31/1992
* Nader Sadegh, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Elbert L. Marsh
* 07/31/1992
* USD 70,000.00

The research goal is to design a new class of learning controllers for non-
linear mechanical systems. A learning controller, similar to the human motor
control system, learns the desired feedforward control input through practicing
the given task over several cycles. From one cycle to the next, the controller
improves its performance based on errors from previous cycles and once
converged, under ideal conditions, it executes the task without any error. This
research is divided into five tasks. Prior to this study, the Principal
Investigator has developed several classes of learning controllers, including
the Fourier Based and Finite Element Based repetitive controllers. The first
task of this project will further refine these two approaches, and will include
proof of stability and experimental verifications. The second task, neural
network based learning control, attempts to develop a learning controller which
can use the information learned from one task to perform a different task. The
third task extends the second to include force control capability. The
modification needed for this task is development of a third layer of neural nets
to recognize the output pattern of force sensors and learn about characteristics
of contact surfaces, such as stiffness and local geometry. The fourth task
focuses on the experimental verification of the learning controllers developed
earlier. It requires assembling an articulated two degree of freedom manipulator
as well as hardware and software implementation of neural network architecture.
The fifth task will extend the activity of the first two tasks to include
mechanical system flexibility. This work will contribute to the field of dynamic
controls and learning systems, and will have immediate application to the fields
of robotics and automation.