* 8910030
* Competition and Communication: ROW Award
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1989,02/28/1991
* Katherine Bruce, University of North Carolina at Wilmington
* Standard Grant
* Fred Stollnitz
* 02/28/1991
* USD 11,526.00

The relative importance of male-male competition and female mate preference in
determining reproductive success has been studied in a variety of species,
including freshwater guppies. Dr. Bruce's preliminary observations indicate that
male guppies appear to adjust their courtship displays depending on the presence
or absence of the highest-ranking male of their social group. These observations
suggest that the roles of male-male competition and alternative mating
strategies deserve further investigation. Dr. Bruce will investigate the effects
of social structure on courtship displays of male guppies. Social groups of
three male and three female guppies will be observed to determine male social
rank; the highest-ranking (alpha) male will then be removed from the group and
the behavior of the subordinate males monitored. The alpha male will then be
reintroduced and all males' courtship behavior observed. Subordinate males'
sexual behavior is expected to increase when the alpha male is absent and
decrease after his reintroduction. In a subsequent study, the behavior of males
in a stable social group will be monitored before and after the introduction of
a novel male. The resident males' sexual behavior is expected to remain high or
increase and inhibit the novel male's courtship displays to females. If
competition affects the courtship displays of male guppies, then male-male
competition may affect reproductive success not only directly, by removing some
males from contention, but also indirectly, by influencing males' communication
with females and thereby the females' preference for mates. Dr. Bruce's research
thus has the potential for contributing to our understanding of the behavioral
factors in reproductive success.