* 8910153
* Regulation of Manganese-Superoxide Dismutase in Escherichia coli: Isolation and Characterization of the Repressor       Protein
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1989,07/31/1994
* Hosni Hassan, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 07/31/1994
* USD 238,400.00

Synthesis of the manganese-containing superoxide dismutase (MnSOD) in
Escherichia coli is regulated by changes in the redox state of the cell as well
as by the concentrations of oxygen, superoxide radicals, and intracellular iron.
To accommodate these facts, a regulatory model based on a negatively-controlled
operon has been proposed where an iron-containing redox-sensitive protein is
envisioned to play the role of a repressor. The best proof of this model comes
from recent success in isolating trans- acting mutations that cause the
constitutive expression of sodA gene. This is the first time such mutants have
been isolated. The MnSOD regulatory gene (sodR), will be cloned, its nucleotide
sequence determined, and its position mapped on the E. coli chromosome. The
product(s) of sodR gene will be identified and purified and its effect on the
expression of sodA will be studied. Studies to identify the operator site of
sodA gene will be conducted. Oxygen is essential for the survival of aerobic
organisms, yet it is known to be toxic and mutagenic. These deleterious effects
of oxygen are due to the generation of several reactive partially reduced
intermediates. Superoxide dismutases are present in almost all living cells and
provide protection against oxygen toxicity and mutagenicity by scavenging and
eliminating the deleterious chemical species. Understanding the mechanisms of
regulation of superoxide dismutases is essential in order to understand how
aerobic as well as anaerobic cells cope with oxygen and oxidative stresses.