* 8910793
* Biography of General Leslie R. Groves
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/1989,01/31/1992
* Stanley Goldberg, Individual Award
* Standard Grant
* Ronald J. Overmann
* 01/31/1992
* USD 40,000.00

The relationship of science and the military and the management of "Big Science"
are two themes which have become increasingly important in contemporary science
and technology studies in the United States. The paradigm case for both themes
is the Manhattan Project for the crash program during World War II to develop
the first atomic bomb. While a number of biographies of the leading scientific
figures involved in this project have already been produced, there has yet to be
an adequate study of the principal military director of the project, General
Leslie R. Groves. It is the purpose of Dr. Goldberg to produce such a study. The
fact that no scholarly biography of Groves has been written is reason enough to
justify such a project. In almost all treatments of Groves, he appears full
blown and unexplained, in September, 1942, in the office of the Office of
Scientific Research and Development (OSRD) Director Vannevar Bush. This
biographical study will provide a context for understanding who Leslie R. Groves
was and why he was picked to manage development of the atom bomb--one of the
largest efforts ever made to mobilize large numbers of scientists and engineers
for a single effort. In addition, this biography will be a vehicle for analyzing
anew the changing relationships between the military and civilian sectors of the
American scientific and technological research communities during and
immediately after World War II.