* 8910294
* Data Dependencies and Inference Control in Multilevel       Relational Databases
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/1989,12/31/1990
* Tzongan Su, University of Toledo
* Continuing grant
* Ron Ashany
* 12/31/1990
* USD 30,726.00

A multilevel relational database (MDB) stores data at different security levels
and provides this data to users with different clearance levels. The security
problem for an MDB is to prevent users from obtaining any unauthorized data.
Until recently, research about the security of an MDB was concerned with access
control. While access control techniques work to prevent one type of attack, the
security can still be subverted by inference attacks. An inference attack to the
MDB occurs if a user can infer unauthorized information in the MDB by using his
preknowledge about the MDB and query responses authorized to him. This work
investigates the inference problems arising from integrity constraints in the
database (i.e., constraints that enforce the correctness of data). Two of the
most popular integrity constraints, i.e. functional dependencies (FDs) and
multivalued dependencies (MVDs), are considered. Examination of the combination
effects of FDs and MVDs on the security of an MDB under an elementary item
classification scheme will be made. A protection scheme with minimum information
loss will be found. The work also will investigate the same problem under a
dynamic environment, i.e. data in the MDB can be changed. Finally, the research
will explore the possibility of unifying inference mechanisms for different
integrity constraints.