* 8910808
* RUI:  New Research Laboratory at the Bowdoin Scientific     Station, Kent Island, New Brunswick
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/1989,02/29/1992
* Nathaniel Wheelwright, Bowdoin College
* Standard Grant
* James L. Edwards
* 02/29/1992
* USD 15,500.00

The Bowdoin Scientific Station (BSS) is a biological field station located on
Kent Island, New Brunswick. The island, ringed by 7 km of sandy beaches and
rocky intertidal, comprises 125 ha of boreal forest, old fields, meadows, and
marsh, and has easy access to islands in the Bay of Fundy and Gulf of Maine.
Since 1935 the field station, owned and supported by Bowdoin College, has
promoted biological research by faculty, graduate students and undergraduates
from numerous U.S. colleges and universities, resulting in over 3000 visits to
the station and the publication of 82 scientific papers. The field station has
recently had a change in administration, modernized facilities and scientific
equipment, and expanded the research program. In 1988, investigators from 10
institutions studied vertebrate social behavior, navigation and orientation,
development and diet, population biology, atmospheric chemistry, and sensory
physiology. Research space that once was adequate is now limiting as more
researchers study at the station and as their increasingly sophisicated research
requires better laboratory facilities. This project provides funds to cover 50%
of the construction costs of a new laboratory wing at BSS. The funds will be
matched by Bowdoin College. The new laboratory will provide private space for
five research projects, with a common area for shared equipment (microcomputers,
data loggers, electronic balances, microscopes, etc., already available at BSS).
Improved facilities will attract leading scientists, widen the scope of research
at BSS, and enhance undergraduate research opportunities.