* 8910101
* Research Initiation:  Automatic Conversion of Wireframe     Geometric Models to a Boundary Representation
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/1989,01/31/1992
* Warren Waggenspack, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 01/31/1992
* USD 69,127.00

The objective of this project is the development of new and improved algorithms
for converting wireframe geometric models to a solid boundary representation.
The complete, unambiguous geometric description of three-dimensional volumes
provided by the solid representation can be used to model mechanical parts or
any solid object. Solid modeling holds the promise of complete computer based
prototyping of mechanical parts and assemblies; however, it has not yet attained
the widespread commercial application once envisioned. This is due in part to
the cumbersome interaction often required to model complex geometries and
assemblies. The wireframe to solid conversion addresses this problem as
wireframe creation bears a strong resemblance to traditional drafting
methodologies and provides a relatively familiar and natural user interface. It
also supplies the mechanism for transforming a large existing industrial
wireframe database into a more robust solid model format. A topologically based
divide and conquer strategy will be investigated to develop a new algorithm for
extracting accurate face topology from wireframe models and alleviate the
current restriction to manifold objects which contain no holes (genus zero
objects). Criteria will be established for automatic surfacing detailing, i.e.
extracting the geometric information (surface equation) associated with each
face of an object in order to complete the solid model.