* 8910677
* Group Travel for U.S. Participants in XIIth World Congress  of Sociology, to be held in Madrid, Spain, July 9-13, 1990
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/1990,11/30/1990
* William D'Antonio, American Sociological Assoc
* Standard Grant
* Shelton White
* 11/30/1990
* USD 20,000.00

Important international meetings among social scientists provide vital
opportunities for enriching the research endeavors of all countries represented.
More and more problems of basic and applied research have implications for the
role of the United States in the world. At this point, dialogue between Western
and Eastern European and Russian sociologists is especially promising for the
development of collaborative efforts. This grant will provide partial support
for a highly selected group of American sociologists playing significant roles
in The Twelfth World Congress of Sociology, to be held in Madrid, Spain, July
9-13, 1990. Held once every four years, the Congress is a function of the
International Sociological Association and draws over 4,000 sociologists,
approximately 20% of whom are American. The recipient of these funds, the
American Sociological Association, will, through a special committee, conduct
the competition for individual awards and distribute the travel grants to those
who most merit them. To be eligible, sociologists need only have a paper
accepted for presentation or have a significant role on the program. Among those
eligible, the selection criteria to be employed include the intrinsic merit of
the paper, the significance of the paper as an U.S. contribution within the
program to which it is submitted, and the qualifications of the applicant.
Attention will also be given to balance among participants of various ages,
genders and racial/ethnic groups.