* 8910766
* Microbial Transformations and Fate of Vascular Plant        Detritus in Aquatic Ecosystems
* BIO,DEB
* 11/15/1989,04/30/1993
* Ronald Benner, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 04/30/1993
* USD 400,000.00

Bacterial metabolism often dominates energy and nutrient flow in aquatic
ecosystems and thereby has a major impact on biogeochemical cycles as well as
food webs. There are numerous potential sources of nutrients fueling bacterial
metabolism, but in many rivers and estuaries detrital material derived from
vascular plants is likely to be of major importance. This research will
determine rates of bacterial production and respiration in a variety of systems
including the Amazon River and several estuaries on the south Texas coast. The
sources of organic matter fueling bacterial growth and the chemical identity of
this material will be investigated using stable isotope (C &amp; N)
compositions, solid-state 13C nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) and source-
specific biomarker compounds. Dissolved organic matter (DOM) is thought to fuel
most of the microbial heterotrophic production in these systems, and it appears
likely that vascular plants contribute significantly to this pathway of nutrient
flow. In the proposed research the production, microbial transformations and
fate of DOM derived form avariety of plant materials will be investigated during
long-term (2-3yr) decomposition studies. Diagenetic changes in the chemical and
stable isotope compositions of both the particulate and dissolved components
will be determined. The project team is well qualified. Institutional
accommodations are good. Collaboration and coordination with other work in
progress will be productive.