* 8910714
* Symposium on the Natural History of Inbreeding and          Outbreeding; Highland Heights, KY; June 14-15, 1989
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/1989,05/31/1990
* Nancy Thornhill, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Tarri Joyner
* 05/31/1990
* USD 10,000.00

Currently within evolutionary biology much controversy surrounds the study of
inbreeding. The controversy address the role of inbreeding or, conversely, its
avoidance in the evolution of plant and animal social systems. Proponents of one
extreme assume the disadvantages of inbreeding (inbreeding depression resulting,
for example, from exposure of deleterious recessive alleles) categorically to be
large and further that advantages in inbreeding are rare or non-existent. Thus,
selection is thought to favor individuals who outbreed. On the other hand,
proponents of the other extreme think of inbreeding as having such positive
effects (inbreeding "enhancement" resulting from reduced genetic recombination
thus potential increased genetic harmony) that any potentially detrimental ones
are negligible. In this view, selective advantage is though to accrue to
individuals who inbreed. This symposium will bring together leading scientists
involved in theoretical and empirical research on inbreeding across taxa. The
symposium will facilitate exposure and review of the available data on
inbreeding and outbreeding. The symposium will help evaluate both extremes of
the controversy, highlighting the valuable parts of each argument and discarding
the fruitless. In this way important questions surrounding inbreeding and
outbreeding will be identified, focusing future research on them.