* 8910513
* Disclosure-Limited Data Dsssemination for Microdata
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1989,07/31/1992
* George Duncan, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/1992
* USD 111,727.00

As our society balances community needs and individual rights, an energetic data
dissemination program by government agencies in support of public policy
research must have parity with an effective disclosure limitation program. The
substantial growth which has occured in the number of publicly collected
microdata files in recent years has made it increasingly difficult, however, to
reconcile the public's interest in scientific inquiry with its equally
legitimate interest in protecting individual privacy. This project seeks to
promote the usefulness of federal statistical data through the development of
methodologies that will allow important types of social data to be accessible
while assuring an appropriate level of confidentiality. Specifically, the aim is
both to develop and evaluate disclosure-limiting techniques that will help guide
microdata dissemination. The disclosure-limiting data disseminating approach
advanced by Duncan and Lambert in 1985 will be extended to both complete census
data and sample data. Examination will be made in the DL context of a variety of
proposed disclosure avoidance techniques, for both reidentification and data
base query situations. There are four kinds of resolutions between the tension
between dissemination and disclosure: ethical guidelines to encourage
responsible use of data; administrative rules to control access to data; legal
specifications that delineate when data may or may not be used; and statistical
techniques to mask data on individuals without compromising information about
the group. The approach embraced in this proposal has potential applicability to
all four kinds of disclosure limitations. To date, only statistical controls
have had any exploration in this framework. The proposed research would effect a
significant extension to ethical guidelines, administrative rules, and legal
specifications.