* 8910649
* Collaborative Research on Legal Interventions in Divorce    Cases
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1989,07/31/1992
* Richard Maiman, University of Southern Maine
* Continuing Grant
* Lisa Martin
* 07/31/1992
* USD 69,596.00

Research on dispute transformation over the past decade suggests that disputes
are reconceptualized as they pass through the legal system. Studies of legal
negotiation and lawyer-client interaction indicate that lawyers play a central
role in this transformation process. Yet we know very little about the ways that
lawyers carry on this work and about the factors that influence the variation in
their practices and legal outcomes. Drs. Mather, Maiman, and McEwen are
collaborating on a unique project to address these issues. Using divorce law
practice as the empirical base, their objective is to understand the varying
ways in which lawyers intervene between clients and the legal system and the
consequences of their influence on the outcome of divorces. The investigators
will examine the work of divorce lawyers in two states with different legal
procedures for divorce--mandatory mediation and infrequent voluntary mediation.
Through extensive interviews with 150 lawyers, the character of and variation in
divorce lawyering in six counties will be examined. The investigators will
identify how much variation can be attributed to differences in legal procedures
or to characteristics of individual practitioners, their practices and clients,
or to the local legal cultures in which they operate. The degree to which
variations in lawyer behavior bear on the substance of legal outcomes will also
be tested. The cross- sectional data among lawyers and across courts and states
will be complemented by investigation of changes in divorce procedures and
outcomes over the past decade as they are reflected in court records of samples
of cases from 1980, 1984, and 1988. This research draws from and contributes to
several rich traditions of sociolegal research involving the court system, the
legal profession, dispute processing and transformation, and theories of legal
change and implementation. The study of lawyering--the goals, strategies,
tactics, and practices of working lawyers--in the context of legal and
institutional change will help draw these traditions together. Because the study
examines lawyer conduct within the context of a variety of related constraints,
its scientific value is enhanced beyond simply understanding the divorce
phenomenon. From a policy perspective, a study of divorce lawyers' roles as
rights advocates and dispute settlers is timely because legal entitlements are
being expanded and redefined simultaneously with strong encouragement and
expansion of divorce mediation. Since there is some evidence that levels of
child support and levels of satisfaction of divorcing women are lower after
mediation, the study could have far reaching practical impact. //