* 8910662
* Genetic Analysis and Population Structure of Spiny Lobsters in the Caribbean
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/1990,08/31/1993
* Brian Meehan, College of William & Mary Virginia Institute of Marine Science
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 08/31/1993
* USD 15,950.00

This award will support Professors Romuald N. Lipcius and Brian W. Meehan of
the Virginia Institute of Marine Science of the College of William &amp; Mary,
in a research collaboration with Professors Karl Aiken of the University of the
West Indies and Milton Haughton of Jamaica Fisheries, both in Jamaica. The
investigators intend to use a recent technique (mitochondrial DNA restriction
fragment analysis) to assess genetic and population hetero-geneity in
statistically sound samples from selected populations in Jamaica, Mexico, the
Bahamas, and Bermuda of the spiny lobster Panilirus argus. The key unresolved
issue concerning the ecology and fishery biology of the spiny lobster and other
widely dispersed marine species in the Caribbean pertains to the scales and
degree of geographic differentiation of populations. Resolution of this issue
could lead to major advances in our understanding of ecological relationships
(e.g., recruitment dynamics) and management of this and other important
Caribbean marine fisheries. Spiny lobsters inhabit coastal waters from Bermuda
to Brazil, and their recruitment is affected by major oceanic current systems.
The potential exists for pelagic transport of larvae throughout the Caribbean
basin, thereby producing pan-Caribbean homogeneity in population structure.
Alternatively, larvae could be retained within local gyres, thereby producing
geographic differentiation. In order to assess the degree and scales of
geographic differenti- ation, it is critical to characterize population
heterogeneity across and within geographic areas. This Science in Developing
Countries Program award will provide the requisite information for (1) further
investigations of geographic differentiation in the spiny lobster, (2)
investigations of recruitment processes in widely dispersed Caribbean species,
and (3) help to support the development of effective pan-Caribbean fisheries
management.