* 8910738
* Short Term Prediction of International Events Using Pattern Recognition
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1989,06/30/1991
* Philip Schrodt, University of Kansas Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli Jr.
* 06/30/1991
* USD 56,258.00

This project focuses on the development of artificial intelligence methods for
finding short-term patterns in international behavior. Much of the contemporary
study of international politics focuses on "events": discrete interactions
between nation-states. Events may be as dramatic as the outbreak of war or the
signing of a major trade agreement, or as simple as one government
congratulating another on its independence day. Individual events can be group
into event sequences which describe more complicated behaviors such as
conflicts, negotiations or changes in relations. Human observers of
international behavior such as journalists, historians and political scientists
know that international events follow patterns. A war will almost inevitably be
preceded by escalating tensions; a trade agreement will be preceded by months of
negotiations. These patterns provide enough regularity in international affairs
that expert analysts usually have a good idea of what the likely next events
will be, and can also detect unusual changes in behavior. This project will use
pattern recognition methods developed in artificial intelligence to detect
short-term regularities in contemporary events in the Middle East. The events
will be coded from the Foreign Broadcast Information Service (FBIS) reports
available from the U.S. Government Printing Office. FBIS reports several hundred
events per day: these will be coded into standard categories of events, then the
computer programs will look for repeated patterns in those events data. Those
patterns can then be used to make predictions much as human analysts use the
observed regularities in international behavior to make predictions. The project
uses two artificial intelligence methods. One method constructs "partially-
ordered event sequences" - - sequences of events which are observed repeatedly
because certain events must be preceded by other events (for example, one must
have negotiations before one can have a trade agreement). The other method uses
"genetic algorithms", which assemble complex event sequences out of simpler
sequences using a process resembling evolution. The Principal Investigator has
already published several papers employing these methods on historical data;
this project will be the first to use them on contemporary data. The project
will make three contributions to the understanding of international behavior.
First, it will be one of the first efforts to create a computer model of the
day-to-day behavior of a contemporary international system, the Middle East.
While international relations theory has provided a number of computer models
for long-term trends in international politics, relatively little work has been
done on short- term behavior. Second, the project will create general tools for
finding patterns in political behavior. While these techniques are being
developed to study international behavior, the same methods could be used to
study any other political, economic or social behavior which can be described
using events. Finally, the project will provide some new tools for dealing with
large amounts of data generated on a daily basis using relatively inexpensive
microcomputer equipment.