* 8910718
* Engineering Studies of Recombinant Filamentous Fungi        Fermentation
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/1989,12/31/1990
* Eliana De Bernardez Clark, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Dov Jaron
* 12/31/1990
* USD 29,994.00

The objective of this research is to conduct systematic engineering studies on
the growth kinetics, morphology, stability, gene expression, and secretion in
recombinant filamentous fungi. A recombinant Aspergillus nidulans strain has
been chosen as a first system for study. It carries a glucoamylase gene under
the control of the strong inducible promoter of the A. nidulans alcohol
dehydrogenase I (alcA) gene. The cloned product, glucoamylase, is secreted into
the medium. The alcA promoter is activated in the presence of various compounds
including ethanol, cyclic alcohols, and threonine, and is subject to carbon
catabolite repression. Glucoamylase expression levels can be regulated by a
combination of induction-repression conditions. Experiments will be conducted
with both host and recombinant cells to provide a quantitative description of
the growth dynamics of recombinant fungal cells in terms of growth rates,
nutrient yields, production rates, secretion efficiencies, productivities, and
stabilities. This information can be used in the future to build a mathematical
model of fungal growth dynamics, necessary in the engineering design and
development of operational strategies for bioreactors used in the production of
recombinant proteins from filamentous fungi.