* 8910222
* Biomolecules Immobilized onto Planar Affinity Surfaces for  Biosensor Application
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/1989,02/28/1991
* Candice McCloskey, Agnes Scott College
* Standard Grant
* None
* 02/28/1991
* USD 12,000.00

This Research Opportunities for Women Research Planning Grant is in the general
area of analytical and surface chemistry and in the subfield of biosensors.
During the twelve month period beginning 1 September 1989, Professor McCloskey
will draw both upon her expertise in synthetic and physical organic chemistry
and upon a new, highly sensitive optical material that has been recently
developed at the Georgia Tech Research Institute to carry out preliminary
investigations on new sensors for bioanalysis. Specifically, the Principal
Investigator will evaluate this new optical material as the basis of an affinity
based biosensor. As a test system, biotin will be covalently attached to glass
slides which will have been coated with the optical material. Using waveguide
techniques, the surface refractive index of this assembly will be measured in
the presence and absence of avidin, which specifically binds to biotin. In
collaboration with workers at Georgia Tech Research Institute, Professor
McCloskey will optimize the conditions for device preparation, the analytical
reaction, and analyte detection. These activities should assist the Principal
Investigator's change of research field and should contribute to her
establishing an independent research program at Agnes Scott College. The
research area that will be explored in this project is broadly important to
basic science and biotechnology. The results of this work could lead to the
development of new, highly sensitive biosensors.