* 8910546
* Indexing Representations in Language Production
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/1990,01/31/1993
* Gary Dell, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Paul G. Chapin
* 01/31/1993
* USD 87,975.00

ABSTRACT Language production, the process by which thoughts are formulated in
sentences and spoken, is typically characterized as a sequence of stages, each
stage associated with an internal representation of the utterance. A sentence-
to-be-spoken initially exists as a conceptual representation, then as a series
of linguistic representations, and finally as an articulatory representation.
This project addresses the question of the time course of the construction of
these representations, particularly those linguistic representations associated
with the form of spoken words and their positions in a syntactic structure. For
example, how far in advance of the word currently being spoken are upcoming
words prepared? Can one distinguish between the selection of upcoming words as
abstract lexical items and the retrieval of their phonological constituents? How
is this advance planning affected by the syntactic and prosodic structure of the
planned utterance? The investigators address these questions by applying to
production the priming methodology that has proved so successful in the study of
language comprehension. In the experiments, subjects prepare to say single
words, phrases, or sentences. After this preparation, subjects are occasionally
presented with a probe word to which they must respond in some way (e.g., by
naming the probe). The probes bear either formal or semantic relations to words
in the planned utterance, and thus the response times to the related probes
(compared to unrelated control probes) can index the extent and nature of
utterance planning. The investigators also develop and test an explicit
spreading-activation model of form-related priming to aid in the interpretation
of the data.