* 8910062
* Color Vision in Nonhuman Primates
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1989,02/28/1994
* Benjamin Reese, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing grant
* Christopher Platt
* 02/28/1994
* USD 313,047.00

Color vision is a sensory capability that is extremely valuable for
discriminating objects. The retina of the eye detects colors using the cone
cells, containing special pigments that are the expression of certain genes. New
discoveries in genetics have led to some proposed generalizations about the
distribution and evolution of color vision in primates, which are considered to
be the only mammals with exceptional color vision. But very few primate species
have been rigorously studied for this attribute, to either confirm or refute the
generalized picture. Earlier work revealed a large variability both among
individual squirrel monkeys in making color matching tests, and in the pigments
found in the cone cells of the retina of individual animals. The variation was
discovered to be related to expression of color pigments based on a single gene
on the X-chromosome, so there is a fundamentally different variability between
male and female color perception. Preliminary studies have extended this finding
to a few other "new-world monkey" species, emphasizing the difference from
humans and "old-world monkeys" so far studied, which have a second cone pigment
gene on the X-chromosome. This project will use behavioral measurements of color
vision, and external recording of retinal potentials that convey information
about the cone pigments, from a variety of monkey and prosimian species. The
data will be used to test how valid the generalization may be about color vision
in new-world and old-world monkeys, and how early in the evolutionary branching
of primates the genetic split may have occurred. This novel work, using
psychology, physiology, genetics, and zoology, will have impact on visual
neuroscience and behavioral ecology, and may even provide some insight into
human origins.