* 8910676
* The Role of Academic Research in Fostering                  Industrial Innovation
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/1989,09/30/1992
* Edwin Mansfield, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Carolyn Arena
* 09/30/1992
* USD 56,258.00

The purpose of the proposed study is to extend a data base that was initially
developed to examine the extent to which technological innovations in various
industries have been dependent on recent academic research. The extended data
base would identify the academic groups and institutions which were responsible
for research that led to major industrial advances, determine sources of
financial support at various stages of the research as well as the sources of
ideas for these projects. Data would be obtained on about 50 to 100 innovations
identif- ied by 40 or 50 firms as leading to new products or processes that
would not have been developed without academic research. The results of this
study should provide valuable information to science policy makers. New
information will be available on the types of research groups and kinds of
universities that have been relatively successful in promoting significant
industrial innovation and whether they have been the most highly rated in the
relevant discipline. Given the current emphasis on the role of science and
technology in promoting economic growth and the competitiveness of American
industry, it should be helpful to know whether certain funding agencies,
foundation, or firms have supported a disproportion- ate share of research
leading to industrial innovation. The results will also address the extent to
which targeted or un- targeted research is more productive of findings important
for innovation.