* 8910648
* Studies of Nuclear Reactions and Structure (Physics)
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/1989,07/31/1993
* Kirby Kemper, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* John W. Lightbody, Jr.
* 07/31/1993
* USD 4,029,709.00

This grant supports the research program of the experimental nuclear physics
laboratory at Florida State University. The laboratory includes a
superconducting linear accelerator and an FN tandem Van de Graaff accelerator
injector. The research of the laboratory lies in six main areas. The macroscopic
properties of nuclear reactions with heavy ions are studied through inclusive
and coincidence measurements of fusion, fission, breakup, and incomplete fusion
reactions. High resolution resonant particle decay spectroscopy is applied to
studies of selected high spin, high excitation energy states. The interaction of
collective and single.particle excitations is examined in f.p.g shell nuclei
using gamma.gamma and multiparticle.gamma coincidence techniques. Spin dependent
effects in reactions, including asearch for a spin orbit force, will be carried
out using reactions induced by beams of polarized lithium.6 and lithium.7. The
effects of angular momentum on octupole excitations will be pursued
experimentally using a variety of techniques. Collaborative research at CEBAF,
Argonne and other laboratories is also conducted, as is collaborative research
with outside users of the Florida State University accelerators. In addition,
ongoing projects to construct an optically pumped polarized ion source, and a
large solid.angle Bragg curve spectrometer will be completed.