* 8910601
* The Predictability of Macroeconomic Fluctuations:  Methods  and Empirical Analysis
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1989,07/31/1992
* Mark Watson, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/1992
* USD 172,209.00

Much of what is known about the evolution of the U.S. economy is based on
statistical descriptions of the behavior of individual aggregate time series or
of the relations among key series. This project continues and expands previous
work on quantifying the sources of aggregate fluctuations. It consists of three
parts. The first is primarily empirical, and focuses on the role of human
capital accumulation (learning-by-doing) as a mechanism whereby short-run
fluctuations have permanent effects. The second is also primarily empirical and
concerns the predictability of recessions and expansions (as opposed simply to
fluctuations in levels of growth rates) and the implications of this
predictability for economic theory. The third is primarily one of theoretical
econometrics and develops techniques for inference about orders of integration
of time series variables. This project makes important methodological and
substantive contributions to economics. The first part of the project provides
one of the first systematic empirical investigations of the link between long-
run growth and shocks traditionally viewed as purely temporary such as
transitory shifts in monetary policy or in preferences. This has important
implications for our understanding of the sources and the transmission of
economic fluctuations. The second part builds on recent joint work aimed at
developing a revised Index of Leading Economic Indicators. It could provide
better predictions of future recessions and expansions. The third part yields
new tools for applying time series methods to economic problems.