* 8911554
* Paleoceanographic and Climatic Evolution of Southern High   Latitude Oceans Based on Deep-Sea Sedimentary Sequences
* O/D,OPP
* 09/01/1989,09/30/1992
* James Kennett, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Scott Borg
* 09/30/1992
* USD 270,101.00

This award supports an investigation of the paleoceanographic, paleoclimatic,
stratigraphic and biogeographic evolution of the Antarctic Ocean, using a suite
of high-quality, deep-drilled sedimentary sequences. This investigation will
utilize, in an integrated fashion, oxygen and carbon isotopes, quantitative
planktonic foraminiferal analysis, sediment composition including ice-rafted
detritus and trace metal analysis. Biostratigraphic and strontium isotopic data
are also being generated for integration with magnetostratigraphy to develop the
necessary chronostratigraphic framework. The recent, highly successful, ocean
drilling expeditions to Antarctic and Subantarctic regions have now provided
important, new sedimentary sequences that can be employed for further rapid
advancement in the understanding of Southern Ocean evolution. Of particular
importance is the availability of Antarctic calcareous biogenic sequences of
Paleogene age that have never before been available. Much of this research will
concentrate on the latest Cretaceous through Paleogene sequence. The primary
objective of this research, in its broadest sense, is to better understand the
evolution of the Antarctic marine environment since the latest Cretaceous and
the impact that major changes in this region had on global paleoceanographic and
climate history. These investigations are expected to add much knowledge about
the evolution of Antarctic paleoclimates and oceans through the late
Phanerozoic. Being so remote, this area still remains among the least known of
the world's latitudinal belts, yet has played a key role in the evolution of the
global environment.