* 8911694
* Computational Models of Olfactory and Spatial Cognition
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/1989,02/29/1992
* Lynn Nadel, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Garvia M. Hill
* 02/29/1992
* USD 23,800.00

This award provides funds to a group of neuroscientists at the University of
Arizona for the purchase of a computer, networking hardware, and associated
software. This equipment will be used to analyze experimental data resulting
from comparative studies of olfaction and spatial orientation in lower and
higher animals. Though collaborations with mathematicians, these investigators
plan to generate models for nerve cell interactions that appear fundamental to
these processes. Models will be based on anatomical and electrophysiological
properties of the nervous system. Other models will have an explicitly
behavioral basis. The models will developed using a neural network simulation
program called GENESIS and the computer. Interspecific comparisons have
traditionally provided a useful tool in understanding the underlying mechanisms
of biological processes. Increasingly, the use of experimental data and
theoretical schemes for the synthesis of models that make detailed predictions
has played an equally important role in modern biology. Olfaction and spatial
orientation are both problems of nervous integration that have interested
neurobiologists for some time. The use of computational models, in particular
neural network models, to get at the underlying integrative mechanisms is a
promising approach to these classical problems.