* 8911211
* Family Models of Sibling Delinquency:  Testing a            Differential Social Control Theory
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1989,08/31/1991
* Ross Matsueda, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Shelton White
* 08/31/1991
* USD 39,965.00

It would come as no surprise in the folklore of modern industrial society that
'partners in crime' were especially likely to be 'brothers in crime', or more
generally siblings or members of the same family. Whether that is supported by
careful analysis of appropriate data, or more precisely how and why this is true
-- is the subject of this research project. Little is actually known in general
about the mechanisms by which siblings come to resemble each other in delinquent
behavior or about the dynamics of family processes that may lead to sibling
resemblance. This will be the first large scale research into these mechanisms.
The project will undertake a state-of-the-art analyses of a sample of 470
sibling pairs. The study will also take advantage of data from the National
Youth Survey, perhaps the best dataset collected on the social-psychological
determinants of delinquency. Under study will be the relative effects on a
sibling's delinquent behavior (if any) of 1) parents' positive or negative
concepts of each sibling (seen as getting along well with people or as a rule-
breaker, for example), 2) the sibling's own concepts of themselves as viewed by
significant others' (teachers', friends', the other sibling), 3) parental
delinquent behaviors and 4) other sibling's delinquent behavior. The effects of
the gender composition (both male, both female or mixed) of the sibling pair
will also be studied. This research, undertaken by a promising young
criminologist, will also break ground in the general study of sibling models and
of the family 'inheritance' of other types of behaviors.