* 8911845
* Molecular Genetics Analysis of Ribosomal RNA in Tetrahymena
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1989,01/31/1995
* Meng-Chao Yao, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center
* Continuing Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 01/31/1995
* USD 692,400.00

We propose to define and analyze the functional regions of the ribosomal RNAs
(rRNAs) through a new molecular genetic approach in the model organism
Tetrahymena thermophila. Although the rRNAs are extensively studied, very little
is known about their specific roles in protein synthesis or other cellular
activities. The ciliate Tetrahymena is unique among eukaryotes and eubacteria in
containing a single germline copy of the rRNA genes (rDNA). In addition, we have
recently developed a transformation method to replace the functional somatic
copies of the rDNA with injected, cloned copies. These two properties combined
makes Tetrahymena an ideal organism for the genetic analysis of the rRNA. We
will construct rDNA clones with specific oligonucleotide insertions and
substitutions at 76 positions of the transcribed region, and determine the
effect of these mutations by transformation and gene replacement. This study
should help us define the functional regions of the rRNAs. We will also
characterize the putative peptidyl transferase center of the 23S-like rRNA by
constructing and analyzing specific single nucleotide substitutions in this
region. Through this analysis we hope to understand the mechanism through which
this RNA sequence affects translation. We will also attempt to construct rRNAs
with specific temperature- sensitive defects to facilitate future studies. This
will be accomplished by inserting modified versions of an RNA sequence
possessing self-cleavage activities (e.g. a segment of the plant virus vLTSV
RNA) into various sites of the rDNA, and look for clones which confer
temperature-sensitive growth defects as the result of rRNA cleavage. Mutations
of this type could help us link specific rRNA regions to particular steps in
protein synthesis or other cellular functions. The unique characteristics of
this system should allow Dr. Yao to specifically correlate ribosomal structure
to ribosomal function for the first time. Although ribosomes have been
recognized as the cellular site for translation of mRNA into protein, little is
known about the mechanism utilized by the ribosome to achieve this. This system
promises to illuminate the actual mechanisms involved.