* 8911030
* Collaborative Research on the Political Economy of          Military Spending in the Developing World
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1989,12/31/1991
* Alex Mintz, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 12/31/1991
* USD 69,263.00

Studies of military spending and arms accumulation in less developed countries
have concentrated on arms races. Arms races in the developing world have been
especially violent and deadly. This investigation will amplify our understanding
of military spending patterns in the developing world by also examining the
specific ways in which decision-makers in the developing world use the military
budget to help control their economies and to augment their internal political
support. These aspects of defense policy making have been shown to be important
in Western industrialized societies, but rarely studied in the context of a
developing society. In essence, the researchers will be testing these ideas for
eight developing nations that are significant arms producers to explore whether
the interplay between domestic political and economic concerns, that helps to
determine military spending policy in the industrialized world, also apply more
generally around the globe. More specifically, a great deal is already known
about defense-welfare tradeoffs in Western democracies, but, how, if at all,
does this tradeoff operate in the developing world. Systematic, in depth case
studies for the political economy of military spending in India, South Korea,
Taiwan, Israel, Egypt, Argentina and Brazil, and South Africa will be conducted.
A small computer simulation of the relevant mathematical dynamics in each
society will be developed drawing on the insights from prior work. Data for each
nation in the study will then be used to "test" the statistical validity of the
hypothesized relationships. These data will consist of quantitative information
about arms expenditures, arms productions, arms sales, the size of the armed
forces, war casualties, et. cetera. Economic data such as GNP, inflation rates,
corporate profits, governmental deficits will also be used in addition to
information about the domestic political situation in each society. Much like
models of the economy, these models will permit different policy scenarios to be
explored. Successful completion of this research should embellish our
understanding of defense spending in the developing world - - where according to
one estimate, roughly 16 million lives have been lost to warfare during the past
40 years.