* 8911228
* Subaqueous Pyroclastic Deposits from Tambora and Krakatau   Volcanoes, Indonesia
* GEO,OCE
* 11/15/1989,04/30/1992
* Steven Carey, University of Rhode Island
* Continuing Grant
* Bilal U. Haq
* 04/30/1992
* USD 95,665.00

During the great explosive eruptions of Tambora in Indonesia as up to 30 km3 of
pyroclastic flows may have entered the ocean during the 1815 event. Similarly,
pyroclastic or debris flows of unknown character formed up to 30 m thick
submarine deposits up to 15km from the Krakatau volcano in the 1883 event. The
nature of the interaction between subaerial pyroclastic flows and the sea is
poorly understood but is critical to competing models of volcanogenic tsunami
generation and of the formation of co-ignimbrite ash. The PIs will study the
submarine deposits from tambora (1815) and Krakatau (1883) by using a suite of
existing piston and gravity cores from the Tambora area and by collection of new
cores from the shallow seas around Krakatau. The results of the study will be
used to 1) test existing models for the generation of tsunamis and co-ignimbrite
ash fall during the Tambora and Krakatau eruptions, 2) develop general models
for the interaction of pyroclastic flows and seawater, and 3) characterize the
nature of subaqueous deposits formed by such interactions. These results will be
significant in terms of understanding the eruptive processes of these events and
providing modern analogues of volcaniclastic sedimentation that can be applied
to ancient convergent margin sequences in the geologic record. The project is
being co- funded with National Geographic Society.