* 8911263
* The Dynamics of Decisionmaking in Immigration Enforcement
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1989,01/31/1992
* Janet Gilboy, American Bar Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Lisa Martin
* 01/31/1992
* USD 46,684.00

Every day thousands of individuals stand at the borders of the United States and
seek to be admitted. Many are United States Citizens returning from vacations or
business trips. Others are aliens seeking to enter the country. Should the
border inspector challenge the qualifications of an individual seeking to enter
the United States, his or her admissibility will be determined in exclusion
proceedings before an Immigration Judge. These decisions are extremely important
and affect not only those who desire to enter, but also U.S. citizens, permanent
residents, and companies who stand to benefit from the alien's admission.
Moreover, decisions over the entry of foreign nationals have important
international implications and are a potential source of tension between
countries. Despite its importance and concerns about the immense discretionary
power delegated to immigration government officials, little is known about the
nature of governmental decisionmaking in controlling the flow of foreign
nationals into the United States. This study is an empirical examination of
Immigration and Naturalization Service and Immigration Judge decisionmaking
regarding aliens seeking to enter or reenter the United States. The major focus
for exploration of how national exclusion laws and procedures are implemented
will be the Chicago, Illinois immigration court since it is the second largest
in the country and conducts several hundred formal exclusion hearings a year.
Applying the organizational approach to the exclusion decisionmaking process,
the study will explore three broad areas of practical and scholarly interest:
(1) the organizational environment of the Immigration Service, including its
functioning in relation to the wider administrative, legal and political system;
(2) the nature of the internal process through which Service employees
adjudicate applications for admission to the U.S.; and (3) the patterns and
practices of immigration regulation by the Immigration Service and immigration
court through the use of aggregate data. Immigration exclusion laws are one of
many interrelated mechanisms of social control of foreign nationals by a
sovereign state. The results of this study will have important policy
implications as well as contributing significantly to theoretical knowledge
about decisionmaking in a little studied area of the law. In addition, the study
will explore the interrelationships among a variety of state institutions (the
Immigration Service, immigration court, the State Department, the U.S. Customs
Agency, and U.S. Attorney's Office) and private enterprises (airline carriers)
that shape decisionmaking. Consequently, the study offers an opportunity to
examine some interesting and intricate ways in which discretionary
decisionmaking by a local entity of a Federal bureaucracy may be shaped by
institutional relationships and ties operating at both the local and national
levels.