* 8911624
* National Differences in Educational Outcomes: A ComparativeAnalysis of Mathematics Achievement and Instruction
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1989,07/31/1991
* David Lee Stevenson, Catholic University of America
* Standard Grant
* Robin A. Cantor
* 07/31/1991
* USD 85,000.00

Spectacular findings comparing the national mathematics achievement of American
students with those in other mostly Western nations have lately reached the news
media. These mostly descriptive findings show that American students perform
comparatively poorly: in the eighth grade they are at an achievement level that
is only average among all nations; by the twelfth grade, far below average. This
research proposes to undertake an analysis of these educational outcomes. This
research will be using one of the sources of the much publicized findings -- the
Second International Mathematics Study Data covering the mathematics interests
and achievements of students from 32 countries, as well as measures of students'
knowledge of material from the curriculum used by each teacher. But this
research begins by merging this data with information on the institutional
characteristics of each nation's education system, e.g., data on how centralized
is the control of curricula and teachers, the basis on which students are
assigned to the next leveling of schooling, types of schools, sizes of schools
and of classes in which sampled individuals are placed, per capita expenditures,
characteristics of post-secondary education systems and their linkage with
secondary education and other relevant national data including rates of female
labor force participation. As a result, the proposed analyses should provide a
much improved understanding of the impact of the characteristics of national
educational systems, as well as the characteristics of school, classroom and
individual students on how well they learn mathematics.