* 8911688
* Multitracers II - Wintertime Particle Production, Transport and Sedimentation
* GEO,OCE
* 01/15/1990,12/31/1992
* Robert Collier, Oregon State University
* Continuing grant
* Bilal U. Haq
* 12/31/1992
* USD 213,688.00

An important goal of the Multitracers Project is to quantify paleoproductivity
(defined as organic carbon flux out of the euphotic zone) off the coast of
Oregon from the peak of the last glacial maximum to the present. By
accomplishing this goal the PIs will also develop paleoproductivity tracers that
can be applied elsewhere in the oceans, and establish the limitations of each
tracer. Three sediment trap moorings forming a transect away from the Oregon
coast are a key aspect of the tracer calibration. The approach is to apply
multipletracers for productivity the bulk organic fraction, inorganic elements
(Cu,Zn,Ba), organic geochemical biomarkers, and microfossils to determine when
all give consistent information and to determine when each begins to track
paleoceanogrphic variables other than productivity. Funding is provided for an
additional field season for the Multitracers Project, consisting of two 6 month
trap deployments at the two inshore sites. The high-solution sediment trap data
and the water column information from the springtime should enable to adequately
define winter-spring productivity events in the region. In addition, the three-
year time series of sediment trap fluxes will help understand the interannual
variability of productivity in the California Current. This represents a
modification to the previously funded project entitled "Multitracers to predict
paleoproductivity in the California Current System from sediment and sediment
trap materials" (OCE-8609366).