* 8911791
* U.S.-Indonesia Cooperative Research: Geodetic Investigation of Oblique Plate Convergence in Sumatra
* O/D,OISE
* 07/15/1989,06/30/1991
* Yehuda Bock, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 06/30/1991
* USD 25,000.00

This proposal requests funds to permit Dr. Yehuda Bock, Scripps Institution of
Oceanography, University of California, San Diego, to pursue with Dr. Joenil
Kahar and Ir. Klaas Villanueva, Working Group on Earth Disaster Prevention,
Bandung Institute of Technology, Indonesia, for 24 months, a study of the
tectonics of the Indonesian archipelago, using measurements of the Global
Positioning System (GPS). In the first year, they will study deformation
associated with oblique plate convergence in Sumatra. Specifically, they will
examine the mechanism of decoupling of the oblique slip into normal subduction
and shear slip on faults parallel to the convergent margin by measuring the
deformation both southwest and northeast of the Sumatran fault zone. The long-
range goal of this project is extend GPS measurements across the entire
Indonesian archipelago, concentrating on specific tectonic problems such as the
distribution and rates of slip associated with arc-continent collision in the
Banda arc in eastern Indonesia. In the Indonesian region, many tectonic
processes that result in mountain building, continental accretion, destruction
of continents, displacement of ophiolites, development of subduction zones, arc
polarity reversal, basin closure, etc. are now active. This project will provide
U.S. scientists a unique opportunity to observe such phenomena. Because
Indonesia lies in a zone of high seismicity and volcanic activity, monitoring of
crustal deformations has potential humanitarian and economic value as well. The
U.S. and Indonesian collaborators are highly respected scientists who have
records of successful research in the field of this project. The present project
will allow the collaborators to combine their talents and interests for mutual
benefit. This project is relevant to the objectives of the Science in Developing
Countries Program which seeks to increase the level of cooperation between U.S.
scientists and engineers and their counterparts in developing countries through
the exchange of scientific information, ideas, skills, and techniques and
through collaboration on problems of mutual benefit. Primary support for this
project is provided by NSF Grant No. EAR8817067, the Indonesian government, and
the World Bank.