* 8911495
* A Deep-Tow Magnetometer, SEABEAM, and Airgun Study of the   Pacific Jurassic Quiet Zone
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/1990,02/28/1995
* Harlan Johnson, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Bilal U. Haq
* 02/28/1995
* USD 645,446.00

The "tape recorder" analogy of magnetic reversal patterns frozen into oceanic
crust has been one of the major discoveries in the last three decades of earth
science research. Though marine magnetic lineations have been identified back to
M38, none in the Pacific that are older than M25 have yet been proven
conclusively to result from field reversals. Part of the difficulty in
evaluating these oldest anomalies results from their characteristically low
amplitudes and apparently short periods. Johnson and his colleagues propose to
construct a magnetometer that will be towed near the seafloor, and being closer
to the source of the lineations than conventional shipboard or airborne
instruments, this device will detect especially subtle features. During 22 days
of surveying, Johnson and his colleagues will also gather topographic
measurements of the oceanic crust and the seafloor with seismic reflection
profiles and SEABEAM swath maps, respectively. Three regions will be surveyed in
the western Pacific where post-M25 magnetic lineations are known from previous
studies. These new data will allow modelling studies to compare details among
the three study areas. If similarities in wavelength and amplitude are found,
they will strongly support the interpretation that they are true records of
magnetic field reversals. If future ocean drilling recovers and dates the
sediments resting on these lineations, the marine magnetic reversal time scale
could be extended several millions of years further back into the Jurassic.