* 8911789
* Industry Equilibrium Dynamics &amp; Theory of Technology        Diffusion and Vintage Captial
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1989,01/31/1992
* Hugo Hopenhayn, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Lynn A. Pollnow
* 01/31/1992
* USD 57,818.00

During the last few years there has been an explosion of new data sets and
empirical studies of these data focused on the size distribution of firms,
turnover (entry and exit of firms), growth and size of firms and the variability
of firms' employment. The purpose of this project is to develop economic models
that can rigorously compare the time series and cross section data on industry
behavior now available. These models will ultimately be useful for predictions
and policy evaluations. More specifically, past competitive industry analysis by
the investigator is extended to a dynamic stochastic framework. Capital
investment decisions are included in the stationary equilibrium analysis to
permit the analysis of the impact of economic policies on the rate of turnover
of firms, size distribution and variability of employment. The general
competitive industry dynamic theory is extended to account for aggregate
uncertainty and capital accumulation. This theory provides a dynamic programming
algorithm. The project also analyzes diffusion of technological change and
growth in the presence of technological complementarities and specific (putty
clay) forms of capital, in a general equilibrium framework. The dynamic
properties of the growth model are analyzed, focusing on understanding how the
existing distribution of specific capital affects the introduction of new
technologies; the role of expectations in the diffusion of new technologies;
joint implications between innovation, diffusion and growth; and a model on the
diffusion of organization capital. This project is important because it fills a
gap in the industrial organization literature. In contrast to the vast empirical
work in this field, there have been very few attempts to develop economic models
on the dynamics of industry behavior with implications on entry, the rate of
turnover, exit and size distribution of firms. The results of the research
should provide new insights into a number of extremely significant issues such
as how equilibrium prices, turnover, concentration, etc. evolve in an industry
as a consequence of a change in demand or the evolution of new industries or the
implications of changes in demand for the evolution of a declining industry.