* 8911486
* The Structured Use of Space and Movement in a Visual-Manual Language
* SBE,BCS
* 12/01/1989,11/30/1993
* Edward Klima, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies
* Continuing Grant
* Paul G. Chapin
* 11/30/1993
* USD 90,000.00

ABSTRACT This project is concerned with the study of visual gestural languages,
primary linguistic systems that are not derivative from spoken language. The
existence of such fully expressive systems arising outside the mainstream of
spoken languages affords a new vantage point for investigating biological
constraints on linguistic form. The research centers around the structured use
of space and movement in the grammatical processes of signed languages. The
investigators couple new linguistic analyses with powerful techniques for three
dimensional computergraphic analysis in two major series of experiments. 1) Sign
space, mental space, and language universals: The area where American Sign
Language (ASL) is most clearly conditioned by the visual modality is in the
spatialized mechanisms for conveying syntax and discourse. The research will
explore the underpinnings of the spatialized syntax of American and Chinese Sign
Language, and investigate the relations of sign space to mental spatial
representations. 2) Biological and linguistic constraints on structure: the
investigators will study prosodic rhythmic and timing processes in sign
language, which will help distinguish language particular characteristics from
more general ones. Three-dimensional computergraphic techniques make possible
direct analysis of sign language articulation. The study of signed (as
contrasted with spoken) language will provide important clues to the biological
basis for the prosodic determination of phonological structures. The importance
of prosody goes beyond illuminating the functional role of this linguistic level
in ASL; it also serves as probes to the brain's control of rhythm and timing
more generally. The studies proposed should provide insight into the principles
governing the structural organization of language, into the ways languages are
shaped by their modality of expression, and into the functional organization of
the brain for language.