* 8911580
* Ceramic Analysis of Guatamalan Archaeological Materials
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1989,12/31/1990
* Frederick Bove, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 12/31/1990
* USD 76,309.00

Drs. Frederick Bove and Hector Neff will conduct analyses of archaeological
ceramics from the Pacific coast of Guatemala which date to the periods
immediately preceding and following 250 A.D. This date marks an abrupt change
from a group of cultures termed "Terminal Formative" to another set termed
"Early Classic." The team will conduct instrumental neutron activation analysis
on approximately 400 potsherds, most from the stratified deposits at the site of
Balberta. They shall also collect and analyze 200 raw material samples from clay
deposits in the region. Together with data already in hand, as well as binocular
microscope examination, paste color analysis, and typological and attribute
analysis, it should be possible to trace changes in ceramic production and
distribution across this time boundary. Although the abrupt Formative-Classic
transition has been noted by other archaeologists, explanations for this have
varied. Some have suggested that some catastrophic natural event such as a
volcanic eruption caused rapid culture change. It has also been suggested that
long-distance culture contacts with central Mexico played a significant role.
Finally, it has been argued that intra-regional or local processes are
responsible for this change. The issue is important because the Early Classic
marks the appearance of hierarchically organized centralized states which
replace a more uniform and widely distributed form of organization. The question
then is what process is responsible for the rise of the state in lowland Middle
America. The ceramic analysis should shed light on organization of production
and trade and this, in turn, should provide insight into changes in social and
political organization. This research is important because it will shed light on
the processes which gave rise to the state and led to the development of complex
societies such as our own. It will also increase our understanding of the
prehistory of the New World.