* 8911149
* Political Cultures and the Early Development of Genetics in Latin America
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/1989,04/30/1991
* Thomas Glick, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Ronald J. Overmann
* 04/30/1991
* USD 40,000.00

While scientific theories are debated on a seemingly abstract, academic plane in
the leading developed countries of the world, developing countries have long
been interested in new scientific developments in order to apply them for their
own purposes. Yet little is known about the interest in, development and impact
of new scientific theories in developing societies. Professor Glick is looking
at one aspect of this phenomenon. Specifically, under this grant, he is
undertaking a comparative study of the first phase of the reception of Mendelian
genetics in Uruguay, Argentina and Brazil (Rio Grande do Sul). In all three
countries, early genetics was introduced by biologists working in schools of
agronomy or in agricultural experiment stations. Of particular interest is the
relationship between early genetics and the improvement of herds of "creole"
cattle--a matter of debate since the 1860s and one which, in Uruguay, had been
waged between partisans of "crossing" and selection, in the context of the
contemporary polemic of Darwinism. The fact that genetics was introduced there
by German agronomists ensured that the discussion of breeding continued in an
evolutionary framework. In this research, Professor Glick seeking to determine
just how much early genetics was tailored to the demands of the breeders in
Argentina and Rio Grande do Sul, two other areas where cattle breeders were a
predominant economic interest group and where debates over creole cattle had
taken place. Professor Glick is studying not only the political relationship
between breeders and genetics but also the extent to which breeders themselves
kept abreast of changing scientific ideas.