* 8911488
* A Basic Research Program for EVS Education
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/1989,06/30/1992
* Leonard Waks, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Rachelle D. Hollander
* 06/30/1992
* USD 53,489.00

The National Science Foundation program, Ethics and Values Studies in Science,
Technology and Society, has always had a dual focus on research and education.
This project will help to guide educational efforts by preparing five review
articles in three broad areas: (1) goals and objectives of EVS education, (2)
effective methods of EVS education, and (3) appropriate roles for public
education and non-governmental organizations, including private educational
institutions and citizen action groups. With guidance from an advisory board,
the authors will develop articles surveying the results of existing research for
ethics and values education and draw implications regarding needed research and
the development of educational programs. The authors will meet to coordinate
their efforts, and the final drafts will provide the basis for a workshop at the
sixth National Technological Literacy Conference in February 1991. Participants
at the workshop will respond to these findings; and the papers and workshop
outcomes will be published in a special issue of the Bulletin of Science,
Technology and Society. Further presentations and publications are also planned.
This study is being coordinated by a very well-qualified investigator who has
identified appropriate advisory board members and authors. Oversight and
dissemination plans are exceptionally good; institutional support is good. The
projects important implications for future curriculum development. Support is
recommended.