* 8911378
* An International Conference on Farm Animal Welfare:  EthicalScientific and Technological Perspectives--Spring 1991,     Aspen Center, Easton, Maryland
* BIO,DBI
* 02/15/1990,08/31/1991
* William Stricklin, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Rachelle D. Hollander
* 08/31/1991
* USD 25,000.00

New developments in science and technology have led to rapidly changing
management systems for agricultural animals. These new practices result in
lowered production costs and cheaper food; they also raise ethical questions of
public concern. This new social context has spawned new science and technology
for animal welfare. This award provides partial support for travel costs for
speakers and organizing committee members for "An International Conference on
Farm Animal Welfare: Ethical, Scientific and Technological Perspectives" in
Spring, 1991. The conference will address the ethical considerations involved in
animal-based food production and the potential impact of scientific and
technological changes on the human-farm animal interface. Sponsors and
participants represent a variety of viewpoints and disciplines including
research, education, ethics, animal welfare organizations, government agencies
and animal industries. Five symposia are planned: Ethical and Technological
Issues associated with Animal Agriculture; Assessing Animal Well-Being; New
Technologies to Improve the Welfare of Production Animals: Sustainable and
Alternative Production Systems for Animal Agriculture; Current Regulations,
Guidelines and Codes of Practice Affecting Farm Animals Used in Production and
Research; and Workshop on Future Directions. Output from the conference will
include numerous special publications and several volumes of proceedings. This
project addresses an important issue; it brings together leaders from science,
industry, animal welfare and public interest organizations in this nation and
abroad to listen to state-of-the-art presentations and discuss future research
directions, undergraduate and graduate educational activities and public
educational activities. The project team, advisors, and speakers represent an
appropriate mix of expertise and views and are uniquely qualified to collaborate
in this project. Results are likely to forward professional and public
discussion of the issues. The project is designed well; significant support is
forthcoming from other organizations and from the university sponsor. An award
in the amount of $25,000 is recommended.