* 8911080
* Dissertation Research:  Formation Processes of the          Archaeobotanical Record:  A Peruvian Case Study
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/1989,04/30/1992
* NONE NONE, Washington University
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 04/30/1992
* USD 4,391.00

Under Professor Browman's guidance, Ms. Patti Wright, a graduate student at
Washington University, will collect archaeological data for her doctoral
dissertation. She will participate in excavations at the site of Tambo Viejo
located on the desert coast of southern Peru. Her work will focus on the
examination of plant remains. Previous work at the site has shown that, because
of the environmental conditions, plant remains are extremely well preserved. Ms.
Wright will conduct excavations and screen soil in different areas of the site
to collect carefully controlled floral samples. These remains will be classified
according to such variables as provenience, mode of preservation, size class,
and anatomical part. With such data, it will be possible to gain insight not
only into the subsistence practices of ancient Peruvians but also the factors
which affect the differential preservation and distribution of floral remains.
In conjunction with this archaeological research, Ms. Wright will collect extant
specimens to provide reference material. She will also construct four
experimental plots and introduce flora in known amounts and types. These will be
left exposed to the natural elements. Several plots will be preserved for future
analysis while others will be excavated. This will permit examination of post-
depositional forces which pattern the archaeological record and overlie and
distort the original cultural imprint. Archaeologists realize that it is
extremely difficult to recover cultural behavior from excavated remains. While
very little work has been done with flora, faunal remains have been extensively
examined. The research has indicated that very special techniques for analysis
must be devised. It has also shown that the imprint by post-depositional factors
is strong and additional approaches must be developed to control for this. Very
little attention has been devoted to floral remains, and this work will help to
remedy this problem. This research is important for several reasons. It will
develop techniques which will have wide archaeological applicability. Secondly,
it will further the training of a very promising young scientist.