* 8911188
* Rules Versus Discretion in Trade Policy:  An Empirical      Anaylsis
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1989,01/31/1991
* Guido Tabellini, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Lynn A. Pollnow
* 01/31/1991
* USD 55,096.00

The debate on the efficacy of rules versus discretion has received a great deal
of attention in the theory of economic policy, in macroeconomics, public finance
and in trade policy. But the existing literature has focussed almost exclusively
on theoretical aspects of this debate. To date there has been virtually no
empirical study of how relevant the distinction between rules and discretion is
in the real world. Trade policy lends itself particularly well to an empirical
investigation of these issues, for two reasons. First, the theory yields very
sharp predictions of how a trade policy chosen under discretion differs from
that chosen under rules. Second, and perhaps more important, trade policy in the
U.S. is implemented under a variety of institutional arrangements. A major
difference among some of these arrangements is the commitment technologies that
they provide. Hence, by comparing the policies implemented within these
different environments, one can examine whether the capacity to undertake
binding policy commitments matters or not. This project represents an empirical
exploration into the effects of government discretion on trade policy decision-
making. The theoretical literature on time-consistent trade policy suggests that
government discretion may be counter productive, and that reliance on a simple
set of trade policy rules may be preferred to endowing trade policy makers with
a high degree of policy discretion. This research proceeds on the premise that
tariff decisions made in the context of escape clause actions (section 201 of
the United States Trade Act of 1974) and the determination of exclusions from
the tariff reductions negotiated under the Tokyo Round form a natural experiment
that can be used to assess the impact of policy discretion on trade policy
decisions. The former decisions were made in an environment in which the
government possessed a high level of discretion relative to the allocation
decisions of those factors of production affected by the government choice. The
latter decisions were implemented only after a substantial time lag, and were
thus made in a setting in which the government possessed little discretion
relative to the relevant factor allocation decisions. The aim of this study is
to analyze differences in the government decisions made in each of the two
environments, and to ask whether or not systematic differences exist which would
suggest that trade policy discretion leads governments to be trapped in sub-
optimal time-consistent tariff equilibria. The answer to this question has very
important implications for economic policy and for trade policy in particular. A
finding that the two environments lead to systematically different policies
would imply that policies conducted under rules tend to dominate policies chosen
under discretion; as a consequence a institutions providing a commitment
technology would be valuable. The opposite conclusions would be reached if
instead the two environments led to similar policies or to policies that
differed on dimensions other than those predicted by theory.