* 8911303
* Bi-Level Reconfigurations of Fault Tolerant Arrays in Bi-   Modal Computational Environments
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/1989,02/29/1992
* Rami Melhem, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Maguire
* 02/29/1992
* USD 61,547.00

The objective of this research is on developing fault-tolerant architectures and
algorithms for processor arrays. The computational loads of these systems are
assumed to alternate between two phases: a strict phase that is characterized by
a heavy load and strict constraints on response time, and a relaxed phase that
is characterized by a light load and relatively relaxed constraints on response
time. Under this type of load, a bi-level algorithm is applied to reconfigure
the system after faults. Specifically, at one level, called the fast response
level, a local distributed fault-tolerant algorithm is used during strict phases
to achieve fast fault recovery at the expense of possible rapid degradation in
the potential to tolerate future faults. To minimize the effect of this
degradation, a second level, called the optimization level, uses a relatively
slow reorganization algorithm during relaxed phases to restore the system into a
state that ensures adequate fault tolerance in the remaining part of the
system's mission. Computing arrays provide computational power that is
comparable to that of supercomputers. Fault tolerance of these arrays is a very
important issue. Traditional approaches focus on reconfiguring a faulty
processor with a fixed local pool of spares. This inflexibility reduces the
fault coverage capability and thus the reliability of the entire system. The
approach studied in this research considers two types of algorithms: local
algorithms and global algorithms. Local algorithms reconfigure faulty processors
using local information, while global algorithms optimizes redundancy according
to some fault tolerance criteria. A combination of these two types of algorithms
allow a better tradeoff in fault tolerance of the overall system.