* 8911125
* Oceanographic Factors Affecting Seabird Occurrence in the   Tropical Pacific Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/1989,01/31/1993
* David Ainley, Point Reyes Bird Observatory
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 01/31/1993
* USD 181,273.00

The ecological structure of pelagic communities is not well known, except for
portions of the zooplankton. Pelagic marine zooplankton communities may be
organized differently than benthic or even terrestrial communities. Seabird
abundance, species assemblages, assemblage constancy, and responses to habitat
perturbation can be quantified more satisfactorily than for any other pelagic
nektonic organisms. The EPOCS program, a large oceanographic project gathering
data for prediction of El Nino events, will be used to quantify the link between
seabird ecology and physical factors of the epipelagic environment. Seasonal
periodicity and interannual variability of climate, a complex of well known
water types in the eastern tropical Pacific, a non-migratory avifauna, and the
EPOCS cruises dombine to provide natural experiments in which factors that
structure pelagic seabird communities become clear. %%% Seabirds which depend
upon pelagic organisms at the surface or near the surface of the sea often are
found aggregated in particular areas of the ocean coincident with major features
of the physical environment such as currents and fronts. Because seabirds can be
seen and recognized at a distance, their abundance and presence in one area of
the ocean or another is often indicative of a particular water mass carrying a
particular group of pelagic organisms. In the Pacific Ocean, recent natural
variation known as El Nino and cold anomalies, have shown that seabirds vary
spatially in the same way as water masses influenced by El Nino. The
distribution of birds and types of birds indicate not only what water mass is
present in an area, but also the kind and abundance of plankton present which
are the food resource of the birds. Bird ecology gives us a unifying overview of
oceanic processes and their biological effect on the large scale.