* 8911710
* Field Measurement of NO, NO2, and 03 From Lightning
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/1989,01/31/1991
* Carl Popp, New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jarvis L. Moyers
* 01/31/1991
* USD 65,500.00

Nitrogen oxides are important chemical species in the atmosphere. For instance,
the amount of nitrogen oxides controls whether ozone is produced or consumed in
the oxidation of hydrocarbons. To assess the importance of industrial and other
anthropogenic sources of nitrogen oxides, it is necessary to determine the
natural production of these compounds. Lighting is suspected to be a significant
natural source of nitrogen oxides. Yet, a major uncertainty exists in the
quantity of nitrogen oxide produced during a flash. As a consequence, the
biogeochemical cycling of nitrogen add nitrogen photochemistry in the natural
atmosphere is also uncertain. This project seeks to determine experimentally the
production of nitrogen oxides from nearby triggered lightning and also from more
distant natural lightning. The project will measure with a chemiluminescent
oxides of nitrogen analyzer the ratio of NO to NO2 in plumes from lightning
flashes and will measure with an absorption spectrometer the cross sectional
burden of NO2 in plumes from lightning flashes and in air parcels in which a
number of lightning flashes have occurred. The project will lead to improved and
more confined estimates of the natural production of nitrogen oxides by
lightning and thus determine the importance of lightning as a global source.