* 8911258
* Expedited Award for Novel Research:  Investigation of the   Novel Processing Technique for Fabrication of Flexible High Tc Superconducting Wire
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/15/1989,03/31/1990
* Shyam Samanta, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* F. Hank Grant
* 03/31/1990
* USD 30,000.00

This project deals with a fabrication technique for producing flexible
superconductor wire by employing a novel processing technique and a composite of
yttrium-barium-copper-oxygen system plus silver oxide. During the course of
processing, the oxygen stoichiometry of the ceramic superconducting material
will be maintained at the desired level, thus obviating the need to regenerate
superconductivity by heat treatment. Prior work using an optical and a scanning
electron microscope revealed a dense microstructure and absence of cracks.
Fractured surface showed the mixed mode fracture behavior of the composite
material and the evidence of ductility. The as-extruded wires showed Meissner
effect at a significantly high field and the magnetic susceptibility
measurements showed the onset temperature of 91K. This project is addressed to
optimize the process parameters, to improve texture and hence the current
density of the extruded wire. It is also possible that the sintered billet can
be cold extruded for lower extrusion ratios and after process annealing the
extruded wire can be drawn to finer dimensions. Another novel processing
technique of ultrasonic wire drawing for fabricating fine flexible wires of
these superconducting ceramic composites will also be explored in this project.