* 8911898
* Policing Divided Societies
* SBE,SES
* 01/15/1990,09/30/1992
* Ronald Weitzer, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Martin
* 09/30/1992
* USD 82,000.00

Institutions of law play a pivotal role in maintaining or undermining stability
in societies, especially deeply divided societies fractured along racial,
ethnic, or religious lines. Policing in such situations has been characterized
as having little accountability to and little legitimacy in major segments of
the community. Despite the importance of understanding law enforcement
processes, the social science literature lacks studies of the police in divided
societies, particularly primary research that is theoretically and empirically
robust. This study examines a series of theoretical questions on the role of
policing in a deeply divided society. The focus of the research is on the Royal
Ulster Constabulary in Northern Ireland. This is an apt context for examining
policing because it allows for comparative and longitudinal analysis of a
polarized society under two very different political systems, Protestant (1921-
1972) and British (1972-present) rule. Three analytical theses derived from the
literature are addressed--the instrumentalist thesis, the functionality thesis,
and the fortification thesis. The research will examine how the role of the
police has evolved along with changes in the political structure and in
particular whether the movement toward police normalization affects the links
between the police and the divided community. The research design will consist
of systematic interviews with community and religious leaders, government
officials, politicians, and the police; direct observation of police activity;
and collection of reports, documents, and newspaper accounts. The data will be
analyzed with the help of secondary studies of the police in other divided and
integrated societies. This study should have major implications for
understanding the various ways in which the police affect and are affected by
their social and political environment. Not only will it contribute to knowledge
about societies which are institutionally and culturally divided, but also it
will contribute to understanding of policing in more integrated, ethnically
diverse, societies such as in the United States. Issues of legitimacy, impartial
law enforcement, use of force, and accountability have effects on police-
minority relations that are not unlike the effects in deeply divided societies.
A general theory of policing in societies will be developed by connecting
policing to communal divisions and grievances. The comparative, longitudinal
framework will highlight both changes and continuities over time and offer
insights about the opportunities and limits of reform.