* 8911603
* Compositional Domains in Altered Oceanic Crust
* GEO,OCE
* 12/01/1989,05/31/1992
* Hubertus Staudigel, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Bilal U. Haq
* 05/31/1992
* USD 124,071.00

The generation, alteration, subduction and recycling of mid-ocean ridge basalts
results in first order chemical transport between seawater, the mantle, volcanic
arcs and continental crust. The study of chemical processes in each phase of
this oceanc rustal life cycle requires knowledge of the previous one. A most
significant missing link is the poor understanding of the bulk chemical changes
during alteration of the oceanic crust prior to subduction. This study will
involve careful documentation of the primary and secondary mineralogy, modal
abundance estimates and an integrated chemcial and isotopic analysis of samples
from DSDP Sites 417A, 417D, and 418A. The PIs will determine a number of
alteration sensitive parameters, including the concentrations of K2O, H2O, CO2,
B, and the isotopic ratios of delta O18, Sr87/86, and deltaB11. A profile of
these parameters for similary lithologies will provde insights into the decay of
the effects of seafloor alteration with depth. By monitoring these parameters in
the upper portions of the crust, quantitative estimates of the amount of
seawater entering the oceanic crust will be possible. Sites 417A, 417D, and 418A
have been studied extensively, however, there is no data on stable or radiogenic
isotopes and only a few trace elements, and there are too few analyses of
extremely altered pillow margins. The PIs will provide these analyses.