* 8911656
* AIDS Transmission in Western Africa:  An Anthropological    Approach
* EDU,EES
* 07/15/1989,06/30/1991
* Janice Hutchinson, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* None
* 06/30/1991
* USD 12,000.00

This proposal is to design a study to examine sociocultural and biological
factors associated with the transmission of AIDS in Western Africa. During the
planning period the following are expected to be fulfilled: 1. Selection of
hospital(s) in the Ivory Coast or Gambia; the highest incidences of HIV-2
seropositivity have been reported in these countries. 2. Establish research ties
with an academic department or research organization in the selected country. 3.
Obtain from hospital administrators consent to participate; and permission to
review patient charts to gather information on infection rate and duration. 4.
Establish working relations with local administrators, physicians and nurses. 5.
Determine sample design to a) obtain a population of African and Caucasian HIV
seropositives and seronegatives b) insure a sample of high risk individuals c)
plan a strategy to contact and receive participants at designated locations 6.
Determine the best storage and transportation method for blood samples and
identify legal requirements for transporting blood samples containing HIV across
country boundaries, if necessary. 7. Select blood groups and serum proteins to
be identified in the blood analysis; and identify laboratory to conduct blood
analysis and determine cost of analysis. 8. Develop demographic, cultural and
health belief instrumentations. 9. Prepare a research proposal to examine
bicultural factors influencing the transmission of AIDS in Western Africa which
will be submitted to the National Science Foundation.