* 8911870
* The Rhetorics of Electric Power Planning:  A Case Study of  Planning in Chicago
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/1989,02/28/1991
* James Throgmorton, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Rachelle D. Hollander
* 02/28/1991
* USD 37,720.00

Studies in Science, Technology and Society supports projects that examine the
social, economic, and political contexts that influence the development and use
of science and technology. Ethics and Values Studies supports projects that
examine the social values and mutual obligations and responsibilities that arise
in these interactions. This project examines these issues in the context of the
electric power industry, currently undergoing fundamental changes in structure
and regulation. It is designed to explore the ways in which electric power
planners and policy analysts seek, through their styles of speech and writing
(that is, their rhetorical strategies), to influence those changes. It also
seeks to discover and explore the ethical dilemmas associated with those
strategies, and to discover how planners resolve those dilemmas. The project
attempts to accomplish these objectives by conducting a case study of electric
power planning in Chicago. Relying heavily on the methods of participant-
observation and depth interviews, the project analyzes the rhetorical strategies
of eight to ten key planners who are contributing to, supporting, or opposing
the City of Chicago's current effort to explore innovative options to remaining
on Commonwealth Edison's electric power system. When completed, the project will
enhance our understanding of the role that rhetoric plays in planing,
particularly with regard to the electric power industry. It will also provide
students of rhetoric with a detailed case study of how their research relates to
public policy making. And it will provide students of planning ethics with
greater insight into how planners interpret and respond to practical ethical
dilemmas. This study comes from a well-qualified researcher. Research and
dissemination plans are appropriate; institutional support is very good; the
budget is modest. The project has important implications for our understanding
of how expertise operates in political contexts. Support is highly recommended.