* 8911362
* Group Travel for U.S. Participants in the International     Conference on Recent Developments on the Fracture of        Concrete, Rock, Cardiff, United Kindgom, Sept. 20-22, 1989
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/1989,06/30/1990
* Stuart Swartz, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Ken Chong
* 06/30/1990
* USD 10,800.00

Funds are provided for partial travel support for the Principal Investigator and
eleven other researchers in the field of fracture mechanics applications to
cementitious and aggregative materials to participate in the International
Conference on Recent Developments on the Fracture of Concrete and Rock to be
held in Cardiff, September 20-22, 1989. This conference, the fifth in an annual
series, is supported by RILEM committees, TC- 89 FMT, Fracture Mechanics of
Concrete, Test Methods; TC-FMA, Fracture Mechanics of Concrete, Applications;
SEM subdivision on Fracture of Concrete and Rock; ACI 446, Fracture Mechanics;
and the International Society for Rock Mechanics. This meeting provides an
international forum for technical discussions on using fracture mechanics
methodologies for describing crack propagation and fracture in concrete and rock
subjected to complex states of stress. A particularly important feature of this
-- and the previous two conferences -- is to bring together researchers working
primarily with concrete and those working primarily with rock, as the testing,
evaluation and application problems are quite similar. It is noted that the
Europeans and Japanese are making great progress toward implementing these
concepts into forensic engineering and design practice. As this area of research
has also developed rapidly within the United States, interaction between the
various groups on formal and informal levels is very desirable.