* 8911897
* Computer Systems Support
* SBE,NCSE
* 03/01/1989,12/31/2005
* Lowell Oder, NORTHROP GRUMMAN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY INC
* Contract
* Melissa Lane
* 12/31/2005
* USD 1,922,912.00

Syscon provides on-site support for the PRA computer systems, including
assistance as required for system management and maintenance, configuration
planning, and technical and logistical support. On-site technical staff install
Convergent Technologies and IBM hardware and software; connect IBM compatible
machines into the microcomputer networks; install PC hardware, including hard
disks and boards and troubleshooting; maintain backup facilities; manage
communications between the CT/IBM networks and peripherals and other
microcomputers and mainframes; and insure that the system is backed up.
Contractor technical staff also supply programming support for special
applications and training to PRA staff as needed, and produce necessary
documentation. With regard to PRA database tools, including both mainframe (IBM
370 environment) and microcomputer (IBM PC) science and engineering databases,
contractor personnel are responsible for support, development, expansion and
refinement of both historical, SAS formatted, data files; and for the PRA
personal computer based data management/file server system, CASPAR, custom
programmed in C language, which is PC and PC-network resident. The major
database development task to be accomplished under this contract is to expand
the CASPAR data base to include individual NSF awards and non- academic science
and engineering data. The contractor is also responsible for producing special
reports from the microcomputer and mainframe resident databases on an as-needed
basis. %%% The Division of Policy Research and Analysis (PRA) of the National
Science Foundation (NSF) provides factual information and issue analysis to the
Director of the NSF, the National Science Board, and other Federal agencies;
conducts research on national science and technology issues; and conducts
research to improve science policy analysis methods. To effectively carry out
this mission, PRA staff performs analyses using a variety of automated systems.
Syscon Corporation provides technical support to PRA for its hybrid
microcomputer system, including IBM-Convergent Technologies microcomputer
networks; its microcomputer- resident science and engineering database system,
CASPAR; and for maintenance and enhancement of its science and engineering
mainframe database, currently at the National Institutes of Health computer
facility. Technical support activities include maintenance and enhancement of
the PRA CASPAR system and mainframe database; on-site support for microcomputer
hardware and peripherals; evaluation of microcomputer software and hardware to
keep abreast of new developments of potential utility to PRA applications;
training as necessary for PRA staff in hardware and software use; programming
for special applications; and documentation as necessary.