* 8911815
* Chemical Transformations Involving Carbonyls and Carboxylic Acids Within Clouds
* GEO,AGS
* 11/01/1989,04/30/1993
* John Sigmon, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Jarvis L. Moyers
* 04/30/1993
* USD 57,800.00

Carbonyl compounds are photochemical precursors of ozone while carboxylic acids
are major sources of acidity and therefore control in part pH dependent
transformations in atmospheric droplets. Despite the recognized importance of
these classes of compounds in atmospheric chemistry, much uncertainty exists
concerning processes in their biogeochemical cycling. The proposed investigation
will provide the first concurrent gas-phase and aqueous-phase (cloud)
measurements of carbonyls and organic acids at a rural site. Three institutions,
each bringing expertise in specific fields will perform a detailed study of in-
cloud chemical transformations involving these compounds. This investigation
will employ various meteorological and vapor- and aqueous-phase chemical
measurements from an instrumented tower (1014 m elevation) situated in the
Shenandoah National Park, Virginia. Intensive field sampling will be conducted
over a one month period in April-May 1990, with later interpretation of the data
facilitated by state-of-the-art computer modeling of in-cloud chemical and
physical processes. The concurrent observations of carbonyls and organic acids
will be examined for evidence of atmospheric oxidation of carbonyls to organic
acids, with special focus on the in-cloud aqueous-phase oxidation of
formaldehyde as a source of formic acid. The observed fractionations of
individual compounds between the gas phase and the cloudwater phase will be
compared to those expected from thermodynamic equilibrium. Two cloud droplet
size fractions will be collected, which will document the size dependence of
cloudwater concentrations. The results of this investigation will contribute
substantially to our knowledge of important processes determining the chemical
composition of the troposphere.