* 8911747
* ROW:  A Field Study of the Role of Simulated Grazing and    Time of Establishment on the Growth of a Woody Plant
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1989,08/31/1991
* Janis Bush, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Althea Ball
* 08/31/1991
* USD 11,990.00

The goal of the proposed research is to experimentally evaluate the mechanisms
contributing to the conversion of grasslands to shrubland. Woody species in the
southwestern USA become established in disturbed grassland and act as foci for
the recruitment of other woody species. The reasons postulated for the
conversion are overgrazing, reduced grass competition, lack of fires, changes in
climate, spread of seeds by livestock, or a combination of factors. Although
many of these successional sequences have been described, and mechanisms
postulated, experimental evidence supporting ther mechanisms are lacking.
Historically, woody plants were thought to invade shrub-free productive
grasslands; but more recently have been thought to be colonizers of highly
disturbed grasslands. To partially test this postulate, a series of field
experiments will be conducted which deal with competition between a woody
increaser, Prosopis glandulosa (honey mesquite) and native grasses of the semi-
arid savanna of southwestern North America. The hypothesis to be tested is that
after woody plant establishment, the woody plants and the grasses obtain
resources from different root zones, and competition between the two is
significantly reduced. A competion experiment between P. glandulosa and a native
grass, grown in different depth pots will be conducted. Statistically, the H0
would be that the reduction of P. glandulosa biomass would be equal across all
treatments (depths), while the Ha would be that the reduction is unequal. If the
reduction in P. glandulosa biomass is inversely correlated to depth, it would
suggest that competition is more intense during the establishment stage of the
woody plant, when both the grasses and woody plants have roots in the same zone.
Once the woody plant root extends below the grass root zone, competition then
decreases. Although this experiment is very restricted due to pot experiments,
if results are only extrapolated to P. glandulosa establishment rather than
competitive interactions after establishment, the experiment could offer
worthwhile information.