* 8911116
* Flow Mediation by Understory Kelp Beds: Consequences to Benthic Organisms
* NONE,NONE
* 10/15/1989,09/30/1993
* James Eckman, Skidaway Institute of Oceanography
* Continuing grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 09/30/1993
* USD 287,995.00

Dr. Eckman and collaborators have been investigating the influence of understory
kelps on flow, and its significance to recruitment and growth of suspension
feeders that dominate shallow subtidal rocky substrata. In earlier research he
demonstrated that: 1) mass transport, 2) particulate deposition, 3) growth of
suspension feeders, and 4) recruitment of suspension feeders were greatly
affected by the presence of understory kelps. For all species studied, growth
was greater beneath kelp canopies than at nearby exposed areas and effects of
kelps on recruitment were significant. The continuing research will elucidate
the hydrodynamic processes that determined these patterns and will examine non-
hydrodynamic covariates that may have contributed to the observed treatment
effects. Several hypothesized mechanisms may have contributed to patterns
observed. These mechanisms will be examined in a series of field and laboratory
experiments that will allow assessment of the relative contributions of
hydrodynamic and non-hydrodynamic processes to growth and recruitment of
suspension feeders living in nearshore rocky habitats. Development of this
broader view represents an important and logical progression in studies of
hydrodynamics in marine ecology.