* 8911523
* Motorneuronal Differentiation in Caenorhabditis elegans
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/1989,12/31/1992
* W. Walthall, Georgia State University
* Standard Grant
* Steven C. McLoon
* 12/31/1992
* USD 220,029.00

A central issue in developmental neuroscience is how func- tional circuits are
assembled from developing cells. One excellent system for this kind of study is
the a worm, Caenorhabditis. This tiny animal has a small nervous system where
the individual cells are identifiable, and a number of genetic studies have
revealed interesting mutant strains that have abnormal neuronal connections and
abnormal behavior. This project will examine motor neurons, which directly
innervate particular muscles. There are two sets of "D" motoneurons having
similar shape and functions. But they arise from different cell divisions, so
they have different "lineages," and they also have different patterns of
synapses, the functional connections, to their muscles. One mutation, involving
the "unc- 55" gene, alters the pattern of synapses in one class of the D
motoneurons so that it becomes identical to the other class, instead of
different. Genetic and ultrastructural techniques will be used to further
clarify the focus of unc-55 during development of the D cells, and see how
additional mutations might act on developmental processes. Use of a laser to
make specific ablations of individual motoneurons will allow correlation of
behavioral activity with identified cells, and so provide a mechanism for
genetic screening of further mutations, perhaps similar, affecting the other
class of D motoneurons. Results from this study will be important to
neuroscience, developmental biology, and genetics, addressing how a finite
genome can produce the extraordinary diversity seen in nervous system
connections.