* 8911049
* RUI:  Cell-Specific Gene Expression in Dictyostelium
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/1989,01/31/1994
* David Ratner, Amherst College
* Continuing Grant
* Judith A. Verbeke
* 01/31/1994
* USD 217,500.00

Embryonic tissues of a multicellular eukaryote diverge through the selective
expression of their common genetic constitution. The long term goal of this
research is to understand the basis of cell specific gene expression during
differentiation. Dr. Ratner's experimental system is the cellular slime mold,
Dictyostelium discoideum, in which spore and stalk cells develop from common
vegetative precursors. Dr. Ratner is studying the regulation of prespore gene
expression. Several prespore genes require developmental protein synthesis for
their transcription; in the case of another gene, transcripts are made but
quickly decay. Dr. Ratner has cloned one gene of the first class, and shall
obtain a genomic clone of the latter type. Both genes will be analyzed by
restriction mapping and sub-cloning, RNase mapping, and DNA sequencing.
Presumptive control regions will be mutagenized in vitro, ligated to a unique
"reporter" DNA fragment, and transformed back into amoebae. In vivo transcript
levels will be measured by RNA hybridization in order to identify cis-acting
regulatory sequences essential for DNA transcription or mRNA stability. Any
essential DNA sequence thus discovered will be used, in gen retardation assays,
to search for DNA binding trans-regulatory proteins. %%% During the development
of any complex, multicellular organism, genetically identical cells descended
from a single fertilized egg somehow differentially regulate the expression of
their common genomes so as to achieve diverse forms and functions. This project
exploits the simple slime mold as a model to try to understand how this
differential gene expression is controlled.