* 8911272
* Mechanism of Egg Activation
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1989,07/31/1993
* Meredith Gould, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Judith A. Verbeke
* 07/31/1993
* USD 104,300.00

A protein fraction isolated from Urechis sperm acrosomes has been shown to
activate eggs, causing electrical responses like the fertilization potential of
sperm, as well as morphological changes typical of fertilization. Some peptide
fragments from thermolysin digests of the protein fraction retain ability to
activate eggs. Proposed experiments includes purification and sequence
determination of the peptide(s) which activate eggs, and the attempt to identify
with which components ("receptors") of the egg plasma membrane they interact. Of
interest is whether they might interact directly with the Na channels
responsible for the fertilization potential; reconstitution experiments will be
directed towards this question. A model for the triggering of the initial events
in egg activation without second messenger system is proposed and some aspects
of this model will be tested (e.g. Do increases in intracellular pH and pCa
occur at fertilization in Urechis? Are such increases required for activation?
Can fertilization potentials occur when intracellular Ca is buffered to low
levels?) Whether isolated sperm surface components activate eggs in other
species, as well as some aspects of the proposed model will also be tested with
oyster gametes. %%% This work addresses the question of how sperm interact with
the egg surface to initiate development (activation). Even prior to sperm entry
into the egg, a complex series of events are triggered in the egg by that
contact that mark the beginning of the development of the organism.