* 8911401
* Cable Telegraphy and the Development of Field Theory
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/1989,09/30/1990
* Bruce Hunt, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Ronald J. Overmann
* 09/30/1990
* USD 40,000.00

The interrelationship between science and technology is one of great importance
for the development of science and technology policy. Historical studies of
their interactions are among the best ways to determine the many fruitful kinds
of interactions which may occur, both of science influencing the development of
technology and of technology influencing the development of science. Dr. Hunt is
investigating an example of the latter interaction, indeed, an example of
technology influencing one of the most important developments in modern science
--the development of Maxwell's theory of electricity. The formulation of
Maxwell's theory of the electromagnetic filed was one of the great intellectual
achievements of the 19th century. Why did it emerge in the 1850's and 1860's,
and why in Britain? Dr. Hunt argues that the answer to these questions lies in
another great achievement of mid-Victorian Britain, the construction of a global
network of submarine telegraph cables. The operation of these cables exposed
British engineers and scientists to propagation phenomena and field effects that
their Continental counterparts rarely encountered. Field theory, he argues, had
important roots in these distinctively British technological concerns. Dr. Hunt
has previously studied the role telegraphy played in the reformulation of
Maxwellian theory in the 1880's. He now is examining earlier developments,
particularly the discovery of "retardation" on cables in the early 1850's and
the subsequent revival of interest in Faraday's field ideas, and the work of the
British Association Committee on Electrical Standards in the 1860's. He has
found rich archival sources in Britain which he will use in developing this
argument. Clearly, this research will add significantly to our understanding of
the reciprocal relationship between technology and science.