* 8911550
* Cognitive Issues in the History &amp; Philosophy of Science
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/1989,07/31/1990
* Howard Margolis, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Ronald J. Overmann
* 07/31/1990
* USD 40,000.00

Scientific revolutions, how they occur, why some scientists make the transition
to the new theory and others do not are all issues of central importance for
understanding the nature and modes of development of science and technology.
Professor Margolis is bringing a cognitive science approach to these issues.
Specifically, he is looking at two closely related projects extending his prior
work. The first project explores his novel hypothesis about the nature of
scientific revolutions, the "barrier hypothesis." In the barrier hypotheses,
Professor Margolis speculates that in paradigm shifts one can identify some
particularly stubborn intuition, the "barrier," that must be overcome to permit
the emergence of the new paradigm. Further, as used in this hypothesis, the
stubborn intuition requires the absence of any comparably well-entrenched
contrary intuition. He has found that in some cases, the barrier may not even be
something previously seen as central for the paradigm shift. In the Copernican
Revolution, Professor Margolis found the barrier to be the nested spheres sense
of how the heavens are constructed. For the Darwinian Revolution, he found it to
be the perceived intuition that a world that demonstrates design must have had a
designer. In this research project he will extend his analysis of the barrier
hypothesis by examining the chemical revolution of Lavoisier. A second part of
his research under this grant will examine the role of continuity in
revolutions. As a case in point, he will examine the transparent way of showing
the relations which permit transformation of the Ptolemaic into the Tychonic
into the Copernican system so that the observational equivalence that holds
across all three systems becomes particularly easy to see. This study will allow
him to make number of novel points about the history of these transformations,
several of which tie into the "barrier" idea.