* 8911440
* Group Travel Grant for NATO Advanced Study Institute on     Science Policy, October, l989 in Pisa, Italy
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/1989,03/31/1990
* Susan Cozzens, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Rachelle D. Hollander
* 03/31/1990
* USD 13,485.00

This grant will provide funds for international travel for approximately 20
U.S. participants to attend the NATO Advanced Study Institute on "Managing
Science in a Steady State." The support will benefit U.S. scholars in the field
of science, technology and society studies and U.S. science policy analysts and
managers, by exposing them to (1) a curriculum designed to introduce and augment
the knowledge of each group with that of the other, and (2) their counterparts,
and the work of their counterparts, in other countries. The Institute will be
held the first two weeks of October 1989, at Il Ciocco, Tuscany. It includes
three components, lectures, panel discussions, and seminars around three themes:
national science systems - how they are changing; the selection and management
of the research base; and knowledge, skill and career progression in science.
The faculty includes men and women who are highly regarded scholars and
administrators from the U.S. and Europe. Both the quality of the faculty and the
selection of the program for inclusion as a NATO Advanced Institute provide
assurance as to its quality. Guidelines for choosing U.S. recipients for travel
grants include: need; balance between academic participants and those in
management or policy positions; balance between experienced and junior
researchers, research managers and policy analysts; representation of a wide
range of academic disciplines, home organizations, and government, industry and
academic participants. Results will include a book and evaluative reports on the
need for further training and research in this field. In the last two decades,
the fields of science studies and science policy have grown and become
international. This grant will provide opportunities for the kind of exchanges
that are essential if U.S. researchers and practitioners are to remain at their
forefront. An award is highly recommended.