* 8911995
* Tensile Strain and Quantum Size Effects in III-V Semiconductor Material Systems
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1989,01/31/1993
* Kei Lau, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing grant
* Brian J. Clifton
* 01/31/1993
* USD 190,970.00

A comprehensive study of tensile strain and quantum size effects in three major
compound semiconductor material systems is proposed. The goals are to thoroughly
investigate these effects which will lead to band structure engineering for new
device applications. Quantum well structures included in this study are
AlxGa1-xAs/GaAsyP1- y, AlxGa1-xSb/GaSbyAs1-y, and GaxIn1-xAs/InP (x>o.47), in
which the well layers are under biaxial tension. Preliminary results in the
first material system were found to be very promising. These structures will be
grown by organometallic chemical vapor deposition (OMCVD) and characterized by a
variety of electrical and optical measurements. Systemic experimental results
will be combined with theoretical models to describe the band structure. This
will provide insight on the tensile- strained OW structues and lead to
exploration of devices using their unique properties. Correlation of the growth
parameters with the optical and electrical characteristics will also provide a
better understanding of the OMCVD process of strained-layer growth. To
demonstrate the potential conductive detectors will be fabricated and tested.
This will allow assessment of the tensile strain effects on quantum well lasing
properties such as threshold currents and optical gain dependence on
polarization.