* 8911770
* Redistributional Effects of Metropolitan Population         Movements
* NONE,NONE
* 12/15/1989,12/31/1992
* William A Clark, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* Thomas J. Baerwald
* 12/31/1992
* USD 123,713.00

As households move among housing units, the geographic patterns of metropolitan
populations change. Over time, these changes have profound impacts on the
location of residents and of the services and facilities that serve those
residents. Equally important, those changes also alter the character and quality
of the housing units themselves. Considerable attention has been focused by
geographers and other scholars on residential mobility from the perspective of
households, but relatively little research has highlighted the ways in which
movements of households have affected housing units. This project will analyze
mobility and related factors for ten American metropolises using longitudinal
data from the American Housing Survey collected between 1974 and 1986. The
research will focus on two major questions: (1) How do patterns of residential
mobility within metropolises change as the overall level of mobility changes?
and (2) What are the impacts of changing levels and patterns of mobility within
metropolises on the geographic distributions of residential populations?
Variables describing the mobility and demographic characteristics of households
occupying housing units and of related variables reflecting the constitution of
housing submarkets will be fit into a logit model in order to test a number of
hypotheses related to the two central questions. The results of this research
will be significant from both scholarly and practical standpoints. In terms of
basic research, the project will provide a firmer basis for understanding the
relationship between local mobility and the changing socioeconomic and
demographic patterns of populations within metropolises, and it will clarify the
relationship between households and housing units. These new understandings will
also provide a firmer foundation for analyses of the evolving residential
structure of specific cities, thereby enabling civic leaders to better assess
the possible impacts of various policies.