* 8911492
* Xth International Symposium on Glycoconjugates, Jerusalem,  Israel, September 10-20, 1989.
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/1989,05/31/1990
* Alan Elbein, Society for Complex Carbohydrates
* Standard Grant
* M.  Paige
* 05/31/1990
* USD 8,400.00

Complex carbohydrates or glycoconjugates are widely distributed in nature,
mainly as glycoproteins or glycolipids. The presence of carbohydrates in
proteins may affect their stability, modulate their biological activity, and
control their lifespan in the body. Glycoproteins and glycolipids on cell
surfaces confer specificity to the cells and play a crucial role in phenomena
such as the selective binding of hormones, growth factors and toxins; the immune
response; fertilization, differentiation and growth; and the social behavior of
cells. The past decade has witnessed an extraordinary burst of activity in
glycoconjugate research and applications as evidence by doubling of the number
of publications in this field. Currently there are over 5000 publications a year
on glycoproteins alone. Financial support for young scientists affords them the
opportunity to attend the Xth International Symposium on Glycoconjugates and
glean information on the latest advances made in these areas worldwide. This
award funds partial support for postdoctoral fellows and/or junior scientists to
attend a multidisciplinary conference, the Xth International Symposium on
Glycoconjugates, to be held in Jerusalem, September 10-20, 1989. The purpose of
this Symposium is to present and discuss the major advances in the structural
and functional studies of glycoproteins and glycolipids, as well as applications
of the recent findings to biology, medicine, agriculture and biotechnology.