* 8911836
* Modeling and Analysis of Heterogeneous Chemical Processes   in the Atmosphere:  The Ozone Hole and Tropospheric         Chemistry
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1989,11/30/1992
* Richard Turco, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* Jarvis L. Moyers
* 11/30/1992
* USD 461,900.00

The construction and use of models aid the understanding of the real thing.
Computer models of the atmosphere lead to an understanding of various processes
and their interactions. Furthermore, the results of models can identify
parameters that are particularly important and suggest laboratory and field
experiments that may clarify uncertainties. As computing capabilities improve,
more complex models can be constructed. Models generally grow from detailed box
models to one- dimensional (altitude dependence), two-dimensional (altitude and
latitude), and three-dimensional (altitude, latitude, and longitude) models in
which physical and chemical detail is sacrificed for expanded spatial coverage,
but the higher dimensional models are designed to capture the essential features
of the lower dimensional models. Most models of atmospheric chemistry have been
limited to gas phase chemistry. They ignore the role of clouds and aerosol
particles. This project will develop numerical models of atmospheric chemistry
to include these multimedia systems. The importance of these processes has been
highlighted by the discovery of the Antarctic ozone hole which develops, in
part, because of the presence of polar stratospheric clouds. The long-range
objective is to develop a three-dimensional photochemical model that includes
the most useful features of the cloud/aerosol chemical models.