* 8911508
* Instruments and Arguments:  Traditions of Laboratory        Practice in Particle Physics
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/1989,03/31/1991
* Peter Galison, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Ronald J. Overmann
* 03/31/1991
* USD 40,000.00

The history of 20th century particle physics has typically been periodized
around the epochal breaks of theory: quantum discontinuity (1900), special
relativity (1905), general relativity (1915), quantum mechanics (1926), quantum
field theory (1948) and so on. Dr. Galison argues, both in his prior work
supported by his Presidential Young Investigator Award, and in this project,
that there are traditions of instrumentation with the same degree of complexity
and partial autonomy that we usually ascribe only to high theory. Furthermore,
these instrumental traditions carry with them characteristic forms of
experimental demonstration and therefore play a primary role in the acceptance
and rejection of new empirical phenomena. Dr. Galison is also investigating two
interrelated features of instrumentation: 1) the split of particle physics
detectors early in the 20th century into an instrument tradition that produces
highly resolved "Golden Events" (e.g. the cloud chamber, the nuclear emulsion,
the bubble chamber), and a competing instrument tradition that produces "high
statistics" -- vast numbers of events with relatively little information
contained about each event (e.g. the Geiger-Muller counter, the spark chamber,
the wire chamber); 2) the profound division of research labor, beginning in the
1930's and accelerated in wartime weapon projects) that prevents one person from
participating in all aspects of the experimental enterprise. Together the
enormous expansion in scale and the tension between two traditions provide a
framework in which to locate a history of particle detectors. Particle physics
detectors are the site where experimental work in physics has undergone the
greatest mutation. By tracing the history of this inner sanctum of the
experimental physicist, one gains insight not only into the changing historical
sense of the very term "experiment," one also sees in a different light the
connections between physics and the wider technological culture in which it is
situated.