* 8911816
* Comparative Analysis of Social and Legal Change
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/1989,12/31/1991
* Marjorie Zatz, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Lisa Martin
* 12/31/1991
* USD 59,773.00

Important dimensions in the relationship between social and legal change include
the form of law, its content, and the process whereby change occurs within the
legal arena. One of the first decisions of a newly established government is the
content of law. This is determined by the beliefs held by the political
leadership and includes substantive concerns that they think can be addressed
within the legal order. A second and related decision is what form the legal
order will take. The essence of this decision is the mix of formalism and
informalism that characterizes the law. Research on legal and social change has
been hindered by a lack of conceptual clarity regarding informalism and a
failure to locate changes in the form and content of law in the broader context
of structural and historical influences on the society. This project examines
these dimensions through an analysis of specific changes in the content of law,
the mix of formalism and informalism of law, and the relationship between this
mix and the content of law in Latin American socialist legal orders. Cuba and
Nicaragua, two socialist regimes that have taken different approaches to legal
order and which have undergone marked changes in their political-economic
structures, are the natural settings for the research. Central to the analysis
is an understanding of the historical and structural factors that shape
particular aspects of legal institutions. The methodology is both comparative
and historical. Documentary data and in-depth interviews with key actors will be
used deductively and inductively by testing the theoretical framework in one
site and further refining the model as new information emerges from the
comparison site. This research bridges the gap between structural analyses of
lawmaking and research on the dialectical relationship between informal and
formal justice, thus enhancing our understanding of the relationship between
legal and social change. The role of legal professionals, the strategy of legal
borrowings from other countries, and the specifics of Cuban and Nicaraguan
initiatives have important policy implications as well. Finally, the study will
inform research on the use of informal justice options in the U.S. by enhancing
our understanding of the tension between formalism and informalism in the legal
arena.