* 8911042
* Protein Structure and Function,Second U.S. Pakistan         Conference, Karachi, Pakistan, December 1989
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1989,08/31/1990
* David Smith, Purdue Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 08/31/1990
* USD 13,550.00

Description: Support is provided for participation by five U.S. scientists in
the "Second international Symposium and Workshop on Protein Structure and
Function," to be held in Karachi, Pakistan, December 4 to 8, 1989. The
conference is to be followed by a ten-day workshop for attendees to have hands-
on experience with amino acid analyzers, HPLC chromatographs, and peptide
sequencers. The conference organizer is Dr. Zafar Zaidi of the HEJ Research
Institute of Chemistry at University of Karachi, with support from two eminent
chemists, Dr. Salimuzzaman Siddiqui, and Dr. Atta-ur-Rahman, Co-directors of the
Institute. Participation is expected to be from the UK, Germany, France, Italy,
Japan, India, Phillipines, Jordan, Egypt, and Morocco as well as from the U.S.
and Pakistan, as was the case in the first conference held in January 1988,
Scope: These conferences provide considerable assistance to scientists in
developing countries in the advancing science of protein chemistry and in the
modern experimental techniques used for protein analysis. They provide an
opportunity for exchange of information and for developing joint research
activities in the field. The use and maintenance of sophisticated analytical
equipment and data interpretation is covered in the laboratory sessions
following the conference. The HEJ Institute is Pakistan's leading center for
chemical research, and one of South Asia's best, and is very well equipped and
staffed. It is quite suitable for hosting the conference and the laboratory
workshop that follows. This project meets the objectives of the Science in
Developing Countries Program.