* 8911676
* The Development of a Median Adaptive Filter
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/1989,02/28/1991
* Peter Clarkson, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 02/28/1991
* USD 45,000.00

This work is concerned with the analysis and development of a class of robust
adaptive filtering algorithms which are capable of operating effectively in an
environment of impulsive noise. Adaptive signal processing and particularly
adaptive filtering involving linear filters provides a powerful approach to many
signal processing problems. The capacity of adaptive algorithms to operate when
limited a priori information is available makes them ideally matched to many
practical applications. The performance of linear adaptive filters is, however,
severely degraded when impulsive noise is present in the filter inputs. Such
impulsive interference occurs frequently in many applications. The work here is
concerned with the development of a class of nonlinear adaptive filters which
are insensitive to the presence of such interference. This is achieved through a
proposed Median Least-Mean- Squares (MLMS) algorithm. This algorithm operates by
replacing the instantaneous estimate of the gradient of the mean-squared error
performance surface (as used by the well-known LMS adaptive filter) by the
sample median of that quantity. In this work, the feasibility of the MLMS is
established and a theory for the MLMS, both for random and deterministic inputs,
is developed. A general class of robust adaptive filtering procedures based on
order statistics (of which the MLMS is a single member) is developed. The
properties of key order statistical adaptive filters including the kth rank and
trimmed mean are established, and algorithms designed to facilitate adaptation
to optimize the order statistical filter in relation to the statistics of the
input are developed.