* 8911668
* Studies in Agricultural Dynamics and Labor Markets
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1989,06/30/1994
* Sherwin Rosen, National Opinion Research Center
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 06/30/1994
* USD 131,650.00

This project addresses three different problems. The first is the unusual
dynamics of managed domestic farm-animal populations, which requires detailed
investigation to understand the extreme volatility of this important component
of our food supply. More realistic and, thus, more complicated models based on
reproductive technology and demographic considerations will be specified,
simulated, and estimated. Intertemporal linkages of some animal species through
final demand substitution and feed grain competition provides an unusual source
of dynamics for study. A better understanding of the economic forces operating
the livestock market could have important implications for government policy and
economic efficiency in this sector which is notorious for boom and bust
conditions. The other two project are concerned with labor market issues. The
first problem concerns the unusual wave-like pattern that describes the time-
series for both student tuition and faculty salaries at all ranks and levels of
higher education in the U.S. from 1965. This time series will be documented and
analyzed. The demographics of changing student enrollments, changing subsidies
to colleges and students, trends in staff to faculty inputs, and changes in the
rate of return to schooling are possible causes for the observed patterns. The
second project involves a major survey of the recent theoretical and empirical
work on the determinants of executive pay, as connected to emerging theories of
agency, contracts and internal organization. This work will provide a better
understanding of the functioning of academic and professional labor markets.