* 8911697
* Estimation of Air-Sea Exchange, Nutrient Transport and New  Primary Production in the Subtropical Ocean Using Time      Series Tracer Data
* GEO,OCE
* 11/15/1989,10/31/1994
* William Jenkins, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Rodger W. Baier
* 10/31/1994
* USD 270,000.00

The thrust of this work will be able to use available tracer data to set
quantitative limits on a number of biogeochemically important processes in the
subtropical ocean. The fundamental problem that will be attacked is the apparent
mismatch between the more "conventional" estimates of primary production and the
geochemical tracer estimates recently proposed (eg Jenkins, 1982; Jenkins and
Goldman, 1985; Jenkins, 1988; Spitzer and Jenkins, 1989). On hand is an extended
time series of tracer data and maps of the large scale distribution of many of
these tracers that reuires interpretation. The PI plans to do the following: %%%
1. Using existing time series tracer data combined with upper ocean prognostic
and inverse modelling, estimates of gas exchange rates, vertical mixing,
nutrient transport and new primary production in oligotrophic waters will be
made. %%% 2. Using knowledge of large scale tracer distributions the problems
associated with lateral processes influencing the essentially one dimensional
natue of the time series data will be addressed. %%% 3. A simple stochastic
model will be employed to study the problems of timescale mismatch associated
with comparison of conventional bottle-incubation techniques and the longer term
integrating tracer measurements. %%% This work will result in a series of papers
based on the above modelling and interpretive efforts which will serve to
synthesize and extend the tracer based estimates of these important processes,
and rationalize their comparison with other techniques.