* 8911476
* The American Style in Physiology:  Case Studies of Four     Research Schools
* BIO,DBI
* 07/15/1989,06/30/1990
* Gerald Geison, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Ronald J. Overmann
* 06/30/1990
* USD 10,000.00

Dr. Geison is examining the history of physiology at four leading research
schools in the discipline in the United States before World War II: Chicago,
Harvard, Johns Hopkins, and Washington University, St. Louis. Despite a rapidly
growing body of literature on the history of the biomedical sciences in the
United States, the technical and conceptual content of physiology has attracted
little attention. Of the four schools he is studying, only Harvard has been
examined previously in any detail, and even in that case much remains to be
done. This study represents a preliminary phase in a broader study of the
social, conceptual, and technical history of American physiology. That larger
study seeks to test the hypothesis that one can identify a distinctively
"American" (or at least "Anglo- American") style of physiology, characterized by
decentralized models of biological control hormones. The initial focus here is
physiology at Chicago, partly because the research there carried out by A. J.
Carlson seems to run against the grain of this alleged "American style" but also
because of an accelerating activity in the history of science at Chicago as that
university approaches its centennial celebration in 1992--thus allowing a
comparative study of physiology with the other branches of the history of
biology being studied there. If this exploratory study works out, a broader
research program will be pursued.