* 8911404
* Structure-Function Analysis of the EcoRI DNA Methylase
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/1989,06/30/1991
* Norbert Reich, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 06/30/1991
* USD 136,000.00

This proposal addresses a fundamental problem in biochemistry-the nature of
specific protein-DNA interactions. The general goal is to elucidate how the
EcoRI methylase catalyzes transfer of methyl group from S-adenosylmethionine
(AdoMet) to the second adenine in the double stranded sequence: 5' GAATTC3'.
Specific goals are to characterize: (1) the kinetic mechanism, (2) the chemical
mechanism, (3) the contributions toward specificity deriving from individual
enzyme-substrate interactions, (4) the structure of the methylase-DNA complex.
These goals will be addressed with steady and presteady state kinetics, pH
analyses, and modified DNA substrates. Specific chenical modification and
genetic substitution of amino acids will be used with the kinetic studies to
implicate specific residues in catalysis and substrate binding. The
applicability of DNA-footprinting assays to determine the methylase-DNA complex
topology and binding affinity will be tested. Collaborative crystallographic and
1H N.M.R. analyses of the methylase-DNA complex are ongoing. DNA methylases are
essential for the in vitro manipulation of DNA and play a critical role in the
regulation of gene expression in eukaryotes. Yet no structural and little
function information is available for any DNA methylase. The proposed work is
aimed at obtaining this information for the EcoRI methylase, a member of this
important class of enzymes.