* 8911032
* "Equilibrium Selection"
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1989,07/31/1992
* Raymond Battalio, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/1992
* USD 150,686.00

A central question in economics is how markets coordinate the behavior of
anonymous decision makers in a many person decentralized economy. A successful
answer to this question requires understanding how anonymous decision makers
behave in environments that exhibit strategic independence. In most economic
environments, it is not possible to prescribe, describe, or predict a decision
maker's behavior or the market outcome without a theory of interdependent
decisions. Unfortunately, existing theories of interdependent decisions predict
multiple equilibria. The purpose of this project is to build a general theory of
interdependent decisions based on carefully designed experiments. This theory is
based on the concept of equilibrium refinements. Equilibrium refinements
determine when an outcome that is already expected would be implemented by
rational players. The project develops a theory of interdependent decisions that
not only identifies the outcomes that are self- enforcing when expected but also
identifies the expected outcomes. More specifically, the investigators define a
class of repeated market games which generalizes the coordination games used in
their previous research by formalizing the concept of an anonymous decision
maker. These markets games capture the essential aspects of the equilibrium
selection problem on a decentralized economy. A laboratory environment is used
to study the market games and to test a theory of repeated market games. The
project formalizes the intuition that asset markets coordinate behavior by
defining a set of admissible equilibria based on pre-play behavior by the
participants, develops a theory of game form auctions, and considers whether the
Folk theorem generalizes to repeated market games. The theory of repeated games
is tested in the laboratory. The experiments consider alternative indexes of
market activity, first best disequilibrium outcomes, alternative market
institutions, incomplete information, and aggregate demand management by a large
decision maker. This project is important because it provides extends theory and
provides new empirical evidence on the way decisions are coordinated in
decentralized economies. The results of the research will permit economists to
make more precise, testable predictions about actual economies with
interdependent decision making.