* 8911782
* Homotropic and Heterotropic Modulation of Nicotinic         Acetylcholine Receptors
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1989,02/28/1995
* Gregory Weiland, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Continuing grant
* None
* 02/28/1995
* USD 178,803.00

Communication between cells in the nervous system is mediated chemically by
neurotransmitters, which are released from presynaptic nerves and interact with
specific receptors on postsynaptic cells. The chemical acetylcholine mediates
neurotransmission in the peripheral and central nervous systems, interacting
with nicotinic acetylcholine receptors, notably at neuromuscular junctions, in
autonomic ganglia, and in certain areas of the brain. The function of the
nicotinic acetylcholine receptor is to bind acetylcholine and transduce this
binding into a depolarization of the postsynaptic membrane via the rapid opening
of an ion channel. Receptor activation can be modulated physiologically and
pharmacologically by a number of mechanisms. Acetylcholine itself modulates
receptor activation homotropically via various desensitization processes, and
other transmitters can modulate receptor function heterotropically either by
interacting directly with the receptor or through intracellular second messenger
systems. This research project will investigate the molecular mechanisms of
these modulatory processes and the interactions between them. The neuropeptide
substance P appears to heterotropically modulate nicotinic receptor activation
by interacting with an allosteric binding site on the receptor. Available
evidence suggests that modulation plays a physiological role in the regulation
of catecholamine release from the adrenal gland. Although these experiments
focus on the mechanism of action of substance P and its effect on agonist-
induced desensitization, heterotropic modulation by receptor-coupled second
messenger systems will also be investigated. These mechanisms will be studied in
various model nicotinic receptor systems including cell lines and purified
receptor-enriched membranes, representing both muscle- and neuronal-type
nicotinic receptors. Nicotinic receptor responses will be studied over a broad
time scale, using both biochemical and biophysical techniques. Elucidation of
the mechanisms of these modulatory processes will contribute to the
understanding of the physiological and pharmacological regulation of the
activity of this important receptor.