* 8911067
* Causes and Effects of Variation in Behavior Perception
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1989,01/31/1992
* G. Daniel Lassiter, Ohio University
* Standard Grant
* Jean B. Intermaggio
* 01/31/1992
* USD 106,740.00

The problem of how people come to organize and comprehend the information
contained in another person's continuous or ongoing stream of behavior is an
issue that is of fundamental importance to several areas of psychology. These
include social, cognitive, and clinical as well as to other disciplines such as
sociology, communication, and political science whose focus is also concerned
with issues related to the nature of social action and interaction. Despite this
fact relatively little theory and research has been devoted to the behavior
perception problem. The overall goal of this research is to further illuminate
the nature of the behavior perception process and at the same time establish its
prominent role in a variety of psychological phenomena. More specifically,
several causes and effects of variation in how an individual divides or utilizes
another person's ongoing behavior into meaningful actions will be explored. An
initial set of studies examines the relationship between the number of actions
perceivers divide a behavior sequence into (i.e., their utilization rate) and
their subsequent memory for the action.related details of that sequence. A
second set of studies examines the relationship between utilization rate and
causal attribution. A final set of studies examines the relationship between
utilization rate and affect. The studies will make use of experimental as well
as statistical (i.e., path analytic) procedures to test hypotheses derived from
recent theory and data. The results of this project will yield new and important
knowledge concerning the manner in which people acquire, retain, and utilize
social information. The research has important implications for various models
of mental health that draw heavily on the social perception/cognition
literature.