* 8911361
* 3rd Engineering Foundation Conference on "Reaction          Engineering for New Materials and Processes"
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/1989,08/31/1990
* Mark Davis, United Engineering Trustees, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 08/31/1990
* USD 24,786.00

Reaction engineering deals with the quantification of molecular interactions at
solid surfaces, transport phenomena, dynamics and control of reacting systems
and the interplay of all. The application of reaction engineering principles is
essential in experimentation, scale-up, and design for chemical, biochemical,
petroleum, electro-chemical, and other processes. Reaction engineering is an
interactive discipline whose initial applications were confined to the petroleum
and chemical industries. Current utilization of these principles is spreading to
the biotechnology, electronics, and specialty chemical industries where the
emphasis is upon new materials. This Third Engineering Conference in reaction
engineering will be conducted in the "Gordon Conference" style and will
concentrate on new materials and processes. The first meeting in 1983 attempted
to assess the state of chemical reaction engineering and the second one in 1987
placed emphasis on new frontiers in reaction engineering. This third meeting
will look at the production of new materials and will specifically cover four
areas: (1)catalyst design, (2)ceramics, electrical, optical and magnetic
materials, (3)the role of chemical reaction engineering in bioprocessing, and
(4)polymers and composites. It is hoped that the meeting will achieve timely and
creative exchange of ideas, will broaden participant viewpoints, will increase
industry-academic interaction, and will improve the education and exposure of
young researchers.