* 8911242
* Mathematical Sciences: Spectral Properties of Schrodinger   Operators and Hyperbolic Manifolds
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1989,08/16/1989
* Peter Hislop, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* William Y. Velez
* 08/16/1989
* USD 12,475.00

Professor Hislop's project in mathematical physics will investigate the
resonances of Schrodinger operators with periodic potentials and an external
electric field, and the relation between resonances and the meromorphic
structure of the S-matrix for these and more general two- and N-body Stark
Hamiltonians. (As used here, the term resonance refers to a pole of the
meromorphic continuation of the resolvent of an operator through the continuous
spectrum.) The techniques involved include commutator methods, semiclassical
analysis, and geometric resolvent equations. These techniques will also be used
to study the spectrum of the Laplacian on a class of non-compact hyperbolic
manifolds. Geometric conditions will be sought implying the absence of
eigenvalues and the exponential decay of eigenfunctions. The research here
envisioned involves the analysis of sophisticated mathematical techniques for
the modeling of physical systems, especially at the microscopic level where
intuition can lead one astray. Instead of representing physical quantities by
numbers, one is forced to use instead functions and operators on spaces of
functions. The Hamiltonian of a system is an operator that corresponds roughly
to energy. Its spectrum is a set of real numbers defined mathematically that
have the physical interpretation of possible energy levels of the system.
Physics and mathematics play off one another in analyzing the spectrum of a
given class of Hamiltonians. Another context in which operators arise naturally
is geometry. Any surface (or higher-dimensional analogue) on which coordinates
can be assigned in a sufficiently smooth manner has associated to it an operator
called the Laplacian. (In the case of a surface, the spectrum of the Laplacian
may be thought of as giving frequencies of natural modes of vibration.)
Professor Hislop will investigate the spectral theory of geometrically defined
operators using techniques developed in the mathematical physics part of his
project.