* 8911721
* Environmental Monitoring and Photodocumentation Equipment   for West Indies Laboratory
* BIO,DBI
* 10/15/1989,03/31/1992
* Elizabeth Gladfelter, Fairleigh Dickinson University
* Standard Grant
* James L. Edwards
* 03/31/1992
* USD 50,200.00

West Indies Laboratory (WIL) of Fairleigh Dickinson University (FDU) is a
scientific teaching and research facility located in the northeastern Caribbean
Sea on the island of St. Croix. For 18 years biologists, ecologists and
geologists (from institutions throughout the U.S. and the world) working at WIL
have significantly added to our knowledge of (1) the structure and function of
shallow water tropical marine systems, particularly coral reefs and seagrass
beds, and (2) the biology, ecology and paleo-ecology of tropical marine
organisms. In a period of increasing pressure on nearshore environments and
organisms from both local human impacts and also global environmental changes,
an understanding of these natural systems is critical. This project provides
funds to purchase (1) instruments to record long term physical oceanographic and
atmospheric data and (2) photodocumentation equipment: a dissecting photo-
microscope and underwater video system. The strengths of the research effort at
WIL continue to be the combination of field with laboratory studies and
multidisciplinary approaches to questions. However, present research efforts are
hindered by lack of long term environmental data. A reliable program of
monitoring and storage of environmental data combined with the ability to
document biological, ecological and geological phenomena photographically will
be of considerable value to present research at the laboratory as well as future
research programs. The results of much of this research can be useful both as a
predictor of possible future changes in nearshore tropical environments, as well
as information upon which to base management decisions.