* 8911038
* The Ecological Genetics of Daphnia pulex
* BIO,DEB
* 10/15/1989,03/31/1994
* Michael Lynch, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 03/31/1994
* USD 536,000.00

Because of its amenability to experimental manipulation, and the availability
of methodologies for genetic analysis, the microcrustacean complex Daphnia pulex
provides an outstanding model system for the study of the interfaces between
population genetics, mating systems, molecular evolution, and ecology. The
proposed work is concerned particularly with the mechanisms that constrain the
tempo and mode of microevolutionary change. Each form of reproduction is thought
to have unique advantages and disadvantages. For example, species which
reproduce by parental gene exchange generate variable phenotypes each
generation. These species can be adaptive in variable environments, but they
suffer from inbreeding depression, a significant problem in colonizing
environments. Species which reproduce without parental gene exchange are
believed to be ideal colonizers, but they appear in some cases to be lacking in
evolutionary flexibility and to be doomed to rapid extinction due to the rapid
build-up of mutational load. Unfortunately, there are few good empirical data on
any of these matters. The proposed work will quantify these types of tradeoffs
to gain insight into the mechanisms of evolutionary change at the molecular and
phenotypic levels. Results should have broad implications for a number of
problems in applied biology including plant and animal breeding, pest and
disease organisms, and the extinction process.