* 8911536
* Zooplankton Behavioral Response to Planktivorous Fish
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/1989,01/31/1992
* Bruce Frost, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 01/31/1992
* USD 110,213.00

A simple, but natural, marine pelagic predator-prey system affording an ideal
model for experimental investigation of the effect of fish predation on
zooplankton behavior exists in Jackles Lagoon in the state of Washington. This
model predator- prey system will be used to test, by direct experimentation, the
hypothesis that diel vertical migration by zooplankton is a tactic for evading
predators. This will be done by manipulation of populations of a planktonic
copepod, Acartia hudsonica, and its natural predator, the planktivorous fish
Gasterosteus aculeatus, in enclosures. Experiments and supplemental field
observations will establish the conditions under which migration behavior is
induced in the copepod population by fish predation, and to identify the
specific mechanisms of induction. This is the first experimental test of the
predation hypothesis and the results will have wide implications, not only for
understanding diel vertical migration behavior of pelagic oarganisms in lakes
and seas, but also for addressing more general aspects of predator-prey
interactions, such as refuge use by prey, in aquatic pelagic ecology. %%%
Predator-prey interactions involving vertebrates in pelagic systems are poorly
understood for many reasons including the difficulty in obtaining replicate
samples, differential movements of predators and prey in sheared circulation,
and mismatches in the "living volume" occupied (scale mismatch). If the
predators are confined to a volume that can be studied from the point of view of
prey, the volume is generally so small that behavior of the predator is
substantially altered. A volume large enough to be realistic for the predator
cannot be sampled adequately for prey. In Jackles Lagoon, however, the
planktonic community is low in diversity, and alteration of behavior on the part
of prey has been noted in response to increasing and decreasing concentrations
of predators. For many years it has been suggested that diel vertical migration
by crustacean prey in pelagic marine systems is a response to visually searching
predators. This study will quantitatively test that supposition.