* 8911511
* Inventories and Business Cycles in Major Industrialized     Countries
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1989,08/31/1992
* Kenneth West, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Lynn A. Pollnow
* 08/31/1992
* USD 57,256.00

Economists have long recognized the important role for inventories in explaining
business cycles. Abramovits, for example, argued in 1950 that inventories were a
key factor for U.S. business cycles. A little later Mathews emphasized that
business cycle turning points, especially downturns, are to a large extent
accounted for by changes in inventory investment. Recently, this has been
documented for the U.S. with up-to-date statistics, by Blinder in 1981 and
Blinder and Holtz-Eakin in 1986. In an atheoretical accounting sense, over half
the peak to trough fall in GNP in post-1929 U.S. recessions has typically been
attributable to changes in inventory investment. No general agreement exists,
however, as to why inventory investment is so pro-cyclical. This provides the
motivation for the present research which seeks to integrate models of inventory
behavior with theories of the business cycle. The role of inventories in
business cycles will be evaluated using data from seven industrialized countries
- Canada, France, West Germany, Italy, Japan, the U.K. and the U.S. -
emphasizing the countries for which the data are best - Canada, Japan, the U.K.
and the U.S. The research will first consider how representative is the well-
documented U.S. experience on the behavior of inventories over the cycle. It
will then estimate structural inventory models, for aggregate economies as well
as for two-digit manufacturing. Broadening the data used for inventory analysis
to include those from countries other than the U.S. seems likely to help us
discern general patterns, increase our power to discriminate between otherwise
indistinguishable hypotheses, and sharpen our estimates of key parameters.The
results should be of interest to a wide audience, not only "inventory"
specialists.