* 8911552
* Cytotoxicity of Shark Leukocytes
* BIO,MCB
* 12/01/1989,09/30/1993
* E. Churchill McKinney, University of Miami School of Medicine
* Continuing Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 09/30/1993
* USD 304,000.00

The overall goal of this laboratory is to understand the immune and host
defense capabilities of the shark in an effort to clarify the evolutionary
origin of the complex immune system apparent in higher vertebrates. Thus far,
three shark leukocyte mediated cytotoxic reactions have been identified:
mitogen- induced, spontaneous macrophage-mediated, and antibody-dependent
cellular cytotoxicity. The first goal of the proposed research is to
characterize shark cell surface molecules, particularly those which participate
in spontaneous cytotoxicity, using antibodies reactive with shark cell membrane
molecules. Ten anti-shark leukocyte monoclonal antibodies have been generated,
and others will be produced in the course of these studies. In addition, three
anti-human and one anti-Xenopus monoclonal antibody crossreact with shark cells.
These studies will define the cell membrane molecules necessary for cytotoxic
reactivity. A second goal is to isolate the effector cell which mediates
antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity by density gradient sedimentation
and rosetting, using shark antibody coated erythrocytes. The relative efficiency
of the three types of shark antibody to participate in this reaction will be
determined. Results from this study will define one of the most primitive
systems in which antibody directs the specificity of cellular reactivity. A
third goal is to determine whether sharks are capable of generating cytotoxic T
lymphocytes following both in vivo and in vitro immunization with modified self
or allogeneic leukocytes. These studies will determine whether animals as
primitive as sharks use lymphocytes characterized by specificity and MHC
restricted interactions in host defense functions. Nurse sharks evolved more
than 70 million years ago, and have been successful as a species. Their host
defense capabilities permit prolonged life spans, and in captivity, they are
relatively free from infectious disease. Yet their immune capabilities are
severely circumscribed in comparison to that of more recently evolved
vertebrates. The results of this research should make major contributions to our
basic knowledge of the immune mechanisms of the shark. A better understanding of
immune-like mechanisms in a wide range organisms is important as a basis for
rational approaches to maintaining the diversity of organisms on earth.