* 8911462
* Collaborative Research on the Role of PDP Systems in the    Study of Cognition
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/1989,08/31/1992
* David Kirsh, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Ronald J. Overmann
* 08/31/1992
* USD 24,736.00

Dr. Robert Cummins of the University of Arizona and Dr. David Kirsh of the
University of California, San Diego, are analyzing and comparing two radically
different approaches to the study of cognition and intelligence, the orthodox
"computational" approach, on the one hand, and the "new connectionist" or
parallel distributed processing approach on the other. The orthodox
computational approach takes mental processes to be analogous to the processes
in a programmed digital computer. Drs. Cummins and Kirsh are undertaking a
systematic analysis and comparison of these paradigms in a scientifically and
philosophically informed way. The goals of this project are 1) to compare the
research methods and explanatory goals of the connectionist and computational
approach to cognitive science; 2) to articulate the underlying conception of
cognition, intelligence and mentality that drives exponents of each approach;
and 3) to assess the possible impact on cognitive science of the major shift of
resources into connectionist research that is currently taking place. The
investigators will carry out site visits to major centers of connectionist and
orthodox computational research. They are targeting two specific research areas
for investigation on these visits: speech perception ( a strength of
connectionism) and problem solving (a strength of the orthodox approach).