* 8911439
* Institute in Parallel Computing for FY 1989, 1990, and 1991
* CSE,OAC
* 09/30/1989,12/31/1992
* Jack Dongarra, Argonne National Laboratory
* Interagency Agreement
* Maxine Hynson
* 12/31/1992
* USD 248,034.00

This award supports two-week institutes in parallel computing, one in 1989 and
one in 1990. The objective is to give approximately 25 graduate and post-
doctoral researchers each year a fundamental understanding of parallel
computing. There will be a series of lectures on topics including parallel
architectures for scientific computation, software tools to aid in implementing
parallel algorithms, use of graphics representations in the construction of
parallel programs, and vectorization. Participants will then experiment with
test problems and with a specific application that they have brought with them
to the institute. Ample time will be provided on the diverse multiprocessors in
Argonne`s Advanced Computing Research Facility. Some class time will also be
spent discussing the communications facilities available for local and remote
access to these machines. The institutes will provide an excellent opportunity
for university researchers to acquire knowledge and experience in the area of
parallel computing. After the institutes are over, researchers will continue to
use the machines in the Advanced Computing Research Facility to conduct
experiments in parallel computing. Thus the institutes will have the long-term
benefit of increased understanding of the applications for which specific
computer architectures are best suited. Two institutes of this kind have already
been held, one in September 1987, the other in September 1988. These institutes
were viewed as an outstanding success by both staff and participants.