* 8911146
* The Relation Between Consistency and Accuracy of Eyewitness Testimony
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1989,11/30/1992
* Ronald Fisher, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Martin
* 11/30/1992
* USD 74,223.00

In the typical crime, victim or bystander eyewitnesses are interviewed several
times under varying conditions. Usually the first time is shortly after the
crime by a uniformed police officer; a second time can be an hour or two later
by a more experienced detective likely at a more leisurely pace and at a
different location. A third time may be several days or weeks after the incident
usually by a prosecuting attorney in his or her office. Depending on the case,
additional rounds of pre- trial or trial interviews may occur several months to
years later. In all, the typical witness is interviewed about a half dozen times
by different people, under different conditions, and for radically different
purposes. Despite variability in these interviews, inconsistency in
recollections is very effective in discrediting a witness. Yet, we know little
about what such inconsistencies indicate about the accuracy of a witness's
testimony. Should judges or juries give greater credibility to witnesses who are
consistent? How relevant is consistency of testimony to the accuracy of
recollection? Drs. Fisher and Cutler plan to examine the relationship between
eyewitness consistency of recollection and accuracy through undertaking three
laboratory experiments. Their model postulates that the relationship between the
two can be either strongly and positively correlated, weakly correlated, or even
negatively correlated, and the experiments derived from this model test this
relationship empirically. Each of the experiments manipulates legal relevant and
model-driven variables (e.g., encoding quality, similarity of recall conditions,
peripheral versus central information). For purposes of generalizability, in the
first two experiments, a criminal event is witnessed; whereas in the third
experiment a non-criminal event is observed. These investigators hypothesize
that the relationship between accuracy and consistency will vary. This
counterintuitive finding would be of considerable value to an understanding of
eyewitness behavior and testimony. More generally, the work should advance
knowledge about (1) the effects of retrieval operations on recollection, and (2)
the significance of consistency of recall.