* 8911830
* Strontium and Not Salinity May Limit the Distribution of    Mollusc Larvae
* GEO,OCE
* 12/01/1989,05/31/1992
* Judith McDowell, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 05/31/1992
* USD 122,021.00

Molluscs are a group of commercially valuable species found notably in coastal
and nearshore areas which include the clam and snail families. Because of the
decline in harvest of many of these valuable species, basic research which
attempts to explore which environmental variables are most important in
regulating the success and distribution of these species is of significant
interest. This research by Dr. McDowell of the Woods Hole Oceanographic
Institute will explore the role of strontium and salinity in regulating the
growth and development of molluscs. Salinity has traditionally been thought to
play a major role in structuring both benthic and planktonic estuarine
communities. Whereas this may be true for many invertebrate organisms, recent
evidence suggests that the development and survival of molluscan embryos may be
limited more by the concentration of strontium in seawater than by the capacity
to maintain homeostasis under salinity stress. Two pieces of information have
led to this deduction: 1) as a conservative element in seawater, strontium
concentration should convary with salinity, and 2) strontium is required for a
brief period near its oceanic concentration during embryonic mineralization of
shell of all molluscs tested to date. It follows that molluscs must have evolved
mechanisms for maximizing the potential for exposure of their embroyos to high
strontium levels. These investigators will conduct laboratory experiments
designed to disentangle the effects of salinity stress and the requirement for
strontium during molluscan development. The objectives of this study are the
following: 1) to determine the strontium dose-response curves for embryonic
shell formation as a function of salinity in four molluscan species representing
a range of habitats and requirements for formation of mineralized tissues, 2) to
compare the strontium dose-response curves to the capacity of embryos and larvae
to volume regulate over ontogeny, and 3) to compare strontium levels with
embryonic development in field-collected seawater. The study represents the
first attempt in delineating how the stringent requirements for strontium during
embryogenesis may have influenced evolution of present-day distributional
patterns of molluscan populations.