* 8911946
* US-UK Collaborative Research:  High Resolution Electron     Microscope Studies of Hydride Compounds
* O/D,OISE
* 11/15/1989,10/31/1992
* Patrick Herley, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 10/31/1992
* USD 11,700.00

This award will support an ongoing collaborative project on the topic of high
resolution electron beam studies of hydride compounds, with Dr. Patrick Herley,
State University of New York at Stony Brook and Dr. W. Jones, Physical Chemistry
Department, University of Cambridge, England. In recent studies of the solid
state properties of light-metal hydrides, borohydrides and alanates, these
investigators have shown that nanometer sized metallic particles can be produced
in situ in the electron microscope by beam decomposition. Such particles are of
considerable research interest because theoretical work indicates that, as the
size of a metal or metal oxide particle decreases, unusual magnetic, electronic
and optical behavior should result. This research effort has produced lattice
images with atomic resolution of oxide-free copper and aluminum microparticles
approximately 2-5 nanometers in diameter. Such particles are important
commercially in the electronics industry as surface coatings and pastes for use
in thin-device contacts in the manufacture of denser microcircuits. Likewise,
high quality, electron-transparent single crystals of the alkali metals have
been prepared and their plasmon spectra have been probed using electron-energy-
loss spectroscopy. The importance of understanding the exact correlation between
particle size and such properties as crystal perfection and surface electronic
properties at an atomic level on catalytic activity cannot be overemphasized.
This award will enable Dr. Herley to continue productive interaction with Dr.
Jones and to use the unique High Resolution Electron Microscope facilities at
Cambridge for these studies, which they propose to extend to other important
metals, for example, silver, zinc and cadmium.