* 8911844
* Particle Capture and Selection by Marine Planktonic         Ciliates
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/1990,06/30/1992
* Scott Gallager, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 06/30/1992
* USD 214,000.00

Planktonic ciliates, primarily oligotrichs and tintinnids (Subclass
Choreotrichia, Orders Choreotrichida and Oligotrichida) are important grazers of
phytoplankton, heterotrophic flagellates, and to some extent, bacteria in the
sea. Recent studies suggest that they graze a significant portion of the primary
production in the smaller size categories. Some, perhaps most, of these
planktonic ciliates have feeding behaviors which cannot be accounted for by
simple filter feeding models. Using a combination of scanning electron
microscopy, high-speed videomicroscopy, and manipulation of particle
characteristics, prey capture and selection by oligotrichs and tintinnids can be
experimentally investigated and analyzed. The questions to be addressed are:
What are the relative roles of sieving (filter feeding), direct interception,
hydrodynamic processes, and active scan and trap mechanisms in particle capture
by the oral membranelles? How do the physiochemical properties of particles
(size, density, surface charge and hydrophobicity) affect particle capture? Does
post-capture selection occur? Does variation in particle capture mechanisms or
selectivity occur among these ciliates? The integrated approach, which includes
functional morphology, hydrodynamics and biophysics, will be useful in
elucidating the feeding biology of marine planktonic ciliates.