* 8911778
* Decisionmaking and Civil Jury Verdicts in Personal Injury   Cases
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/1989,01/31/1992
* Robert MacCoun, Rand Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Lisa Martin
* 01/31/1992
* USD 163,300.00

Over the years, empirical research on juries has focused almost exclusively on
the criminal jury. Very little is known about decisionmaking by juries in civil
litigation. This is unfortunate since the role of the jury in civil litigation
is a matter of ongoing debate. Critics claim that civil juries are
unpredictable, inequitable, and incapable of coping with complex litigation.
Recent legistive proposals for modifying the civil jury system are predicated on
untested assumptions about jury behavior. This study will identify and test some
important empirical questions about decisionmaking by civil juries in the area
of personal injury cases. There is some indication that civil jury verdicts in
personal injury cases are less favorable for organizational defendants than for
individual defendants. Critics cite this pattern in support of the hypothesis
that jurors are influenced by the defendant's financial resources, labelling it
a "Deep Pockets" effect. However, there are a number of alternative explanations
for this defendant identity effect. This project will conduct three mock jury
experiments to attempt to replicate the defendant identity effect and to test
competitively several alternative models in order to better understand the norms
and values that underly jurors' liability and compensation judgments in tort
litigation. The first two experiments will examine individual juror judgments
using written trial scenarios, while the third experiment will replicate and
extend the results of those studies using deliberating mock juries and a
realistic videotaped trial reenactment. This research will yield a rich and
diverse collection of data on civil juror and jury decision processes which will
add to our knowledge about juror judgment in personal injury cases. Not only
will the testing of alternative theoretical models expand scientific knowledge
in this area, but a better understanding of the basis for jury verdicts will
contribute to a more informed policy debate. In addition, the deliberation
content analyses will help to identify ways in which trial procedures can be
improved to assist citizens, jurors, and perhaps judges in tackling the
complexity and uncertainty of fact-finding in civil litigation. Of broader
social psychological relevance, the research will permit examination of
relatively unexplored attributional issues and the factors that influence the
relative salience of distributive justice norms.