* 8911657
* The U.S. Government Response to Terrorism:                  Public Information and the Political Agenda
* EDU,EES
* 07/15/1989,06/30/1991
* Tony Atwater, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* None
* 06/30/1991
* USD 12,000.00

The research has as its goals to: 1) Comprehensively and systematically examine
"public information" communicated by the U.S. State Department during three
recent incidents of international terrorism; 2) Analyze the topics and political
emphasis of such public information with respect to the existing
administration's political agenda on pertinent international matters; 3)
Describe the media's use or non-use of public information communicated by the
U.S. State Department and the media's use of governmental sources during three
incidents of international terrorism; 4) Analyze topical emphasis and slant of
media reports on terrorist incidents with respect to State Department press
material and the administration's political agenda on foreign affairs; 5)
Examine the nature of news treatment which the leading mass media sources, in
the U.S., gave to reports disseminated on each terrorist incident and; 6)
develop a model to describe the process by which the U.S. government responds
informationally to terrorism and the media's reaction in reporting such
information. The proposed study entails a two-year program of research
incorporating 1) documentary and archival research, 2) content analyses of print
and broadcast media and 3) in-depth personal interviews. The preliminary
activities will provide the essential investigatory and background research to
design a more specific and manageable proposal for funding the primary study.
The research activities for the planning grant period will involve three stages:
1) preliminary documentary and archival research; 2) preliminary personal
interviews with governmental and media officials; and 3) A substudy of the
primary research program that will entail content analyses of print and
broadcast coverage of the Achille Lauro hijacking.