* 8911278
* Genetic Analysis of Complex Membrane Protein Insertion
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1989,01/31/1993
* Colin Manoil, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 01/31/1993
* USD 288,450.00

The aim of this research is to provide a better understanding of how membrane
proteins acquire their final structures. The experiments analyze two >E.> >coli>
cytoplasmic membrane proteins of simple and complex topological structures, the
>trs> serine chemoreceptor and >lac> permease. The research aims to help
elucidate both how the transmembrane topological structures of these proteins
are generated and how the topological structures fold in three dimensions into
globular structures. This research tests new genetic strategies for elucidating
the topological structures of cytoplasmic membrane proteins. It also aims to
analyze nonfunctional mutants to identify the sequence features of transmembrane
segments that enable them to direct the establishment of topology, and to
identify any cellular components with which the transmembrane segments interact
in this function. The analysis relies on the use of "sensor" proteins whose
enzymatic activities reflect the normal cellular location of the membrane
protein domain to which they are attached in hybrid proteins. The research
analyzes how the topological structure of >lac> permease folds into a globular
structure using mutants that are defective in the process. Such mutants will be
identified as a subset of mutants unable to transport lactose, or constructed
>in> >vitro> by altering amino acid residues found to be conserved in evolution.