* 8911809
* ROW:  Oligocene-Recent Plate Reconstructions of the Pacific-Antarctic Ridge, the Macquarie Triple Junction, and the     Australia-Pacific Plate Boundary
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/1989,02/01/1992
* Joann Stock, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Bilal U. Haq
* 02/01/1992
* USD 57,635.00

The southwestern Pacific-Antarctica ridge and the Pacific- Antarctica-Australia
(Macquarie) triple junction region are now some of the tectonicly least well
known areas of the world's oceans. Published plate reconstructions of the
eastern Southeast Indian Ridge and the Pacific-Antarctica ridge span time
intervals 5 to 10 million years in length. In some cases these lack an accurate
assessment of the uncertainties in the reconstructions, or were based on sparse
bathymetric coverage. Recently, detailed features of the seafloor have been
revealed by observations of geoid anomalies (Geosat data). More detailed
reconstructions, spanning time intervals of 1 or 2 m.y. can be obtained from the
magnetic anomaly record adjacent to the Pacific-Antarctic Ridge and the
Southeast Indian Ridge, and the uncertainties in these reconstructions will be
dramatically decreased with the inclusion of bathymetric control from Geosat
data. The PI will reanalyze existing marine magnetic, bathymetric, and Geosat
data form magnetic and fracture zone data point, to complement existing results
from both of these areas, in order to produce a more detailed set of poles and
stage poles of reconstruction for times since about anomaly 13 (36 Ma). These
reconstructions can be used to decipher in more detail the complex history of
the seafloor near the Macquarie triple junction and along the southernmost
Pacific-Antarctica ridge in regions that have not been well surveyed by ship.