* 8911828
* A Directional Theory of Multiparty Systems
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/1989,12/31/1991
* George Rabinowitz, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 12/31/1991
* USD 44,996.00

Democracy rests on the idea that citizens can influence the politics of
government through elections. The usual way in which this is thought to occur is
that voters and candidates for office have positions on political issues and
voters choose the candidate whose position is closest to their own. This theory
is called the proximity model because liking for candidates is based on
"closeness" on the issues. Two important assumptions of the proximity model are
(1) that people have specific positions on issues and (2) that the positions on
each issue can be arrayed along a continuum. For example, on the issue of
defense spending, each person has an exact level of spending he or she most
prefers. But is this how voters think and behave? Observers of politics have
stressed that many people do not care greatly about issues and their views are
often vague. If this is the case, then the traditional proximity model may not
be appropriate for understanding the way in which issues influence electoral
choice. According to the proximity model, for example, candidates should take
positions near the average voter in their district and the candidate that comes
closest to the average voter should win the election. Yet in the U.S. Congress
many representatives are more extreme than their districts and have defeated
opponents who were closer to the average voter. The proximity model cannot
explain these outcomes. The researchers for this investigation have developed a
different theory about the way in which issues influence feelings toward
candidates. They argue that most issues are presented to the mass public with
two alternatives - - should defense spending be reduced or not, should there be
a death penalty or not, should there be new taxes or not. While other possible
alternatives surely exist, two alternatives usually capture the political
dialogue at any given time. More formally, in this model voters choose the
candidate who advocates the direction on the issue that they prefer and presents
it most effectively. This project will extend the investigator's research that
they have done in the United States to multiparty systems. The theoretical
component of the project will involve deriving mathematically the consequences
of the directional model for the behavior of multiparty systems. The empirical
component will center on analyzing electoral competition in Norway. The
researchers selected Norway because it is a fairly typical multiparty system and
because appropriate questions to test the two theories will appear on the 1989
Norwegian election survey. The entire cost of the survey will be borne by the
Norwegian government. To date, theories of issue voting have focused almost
exclusively on two-party political systems. This is a serious limitation because
most of the democracies of the world are multiparty proportional representation
systems. This research will enhance our understanding of how parties attempt to
position themselves strategically and what this means for the nature of
political competition in democracies.