* 8911850
* Acoustic Telemetry Experiments with Squid
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/1989,01/31/1992
* Francis Carey, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 01/31/1992
* USD 150,142.00

In the Azores, the squid (cephalopod) Loligo forbesi is large enough to carry
smaller versions of the transmitters that have been used on pelagic fish such as
swordfish. The technique can be applied to squid in their natural habitat with a
minimum of effort spent for development of new instrumentation. The squid will
be followed in course and depth for a period of several days. Diel vertical
migrations, associations with the bottom and with sound scattering layers, and
response to the thermocline will be investigated. A program of controlled
experiments on squid held in tanks will allow evaluation of effects of the
implanted transmitters on survival and behavior, and will provide opportunities
to extend a series of measurements of intra-mantle pressure and respiration to a
squid that is an order of magnitude larger than those previously studied. The
investigation will probe the limits of the application of telemetric techniques
to studies of this poorly understood, difficult to sample, biologically and
economically important group of nektonic animals. %%% Squid in the vicinity of
the Azores are an economically important resource and are large enough to be
tagged with acoustic telemeter devices. The daily behavior of Loligo forbesi can
be used to understand how the animal finds enough food to support its high
respiration and growth rates. Experiments with squid kept in tanks in the Azores
will show the extent to which the tag and tagging process cause mortality, and
the variability in respiration rate and intra- mantle pressure of this mobile
nektonic predator.