* 8911410
* Mathematical Sciences: Iterative Methods for Initial Value  Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/1989,01/31/1992
* Charles Gear, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Alan Izenman
* 01/31/1992
* USD 125,189.00

The numerical solution of transient problems is central to the solution of many
scientific and engineering problems. Often the differing time scales make it
necessary to solve very large systems of mildly nonlinear equations, which is
possible only with methods derived from iterative linear equation solvers. The
objective of this research is the application of new iterative method techniques
to transient problems, stressing the implementation on parallel computers. Two
approaches are considered here, one to solve a set of implicit difference
equations that are usually nonlinear, and the other to develop methods of the
waveform type, which is iteration applied to a functional formulation of the
transient problem. The methods to be employed consist of the analysis and
algorithms developed for both initial value problems and for the iterative
solution of linear algebraic equations. Large scale problems are of particular
interest, and require, especially for 3D simulations, iterative methods on new
processors. This work emphasizes the use of currently developed software
technology for immediate use in the scientific and engineering communities. The
significance will be to improve efficiency of algorithms for solving large scale
transient problems on vector and parallel processors.