* 8911249
* The Controversy Over Human Antiquity in North America
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/1989,12/31/1991
* David Meltzer, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* Ronald J. Overmann
* 12/31/1991
* USD 20,000.00

How long had the Indians inhabited North America prior to the coming of
Columbus? In the late 1850's, European researchers had determined that human
antiquity reached back to the Pleistocene era. The hypothesis was then advanced
that humans had, through parallel development, also inhabited North America
through the same time span. Evidence was gathered in the 1880's to support this
hypothesis. Yet in 1890, this theory came under withering attack. The dispute
which continued until 1927 dissolved into a complex, wide-ranging and frequently
bitter argument that far eclipsed the archaeological issues at hand and
profoundly affected the participants and the emerging discipline of archaeology.
Today, this dispute is little understood because the quarrel itself was never
fully public. Under this grant, Dr. Meltzer will analyze the rich unpublished
archives of disputants whose roles up to now have been largely unexamined. By
examining these archives and combining the information gleaned from these
sources with his own previous archival research and ongoing analysis of
published documents, Dr. Meltzer will produce the first comprehensive record of
the controversy. It will then be possible to understand how and why this
controversy was created, sustained, and ultimately resolved--questions which are
now unanswerable for want of adequate documentation. In turn, this will allow an
evaluation of the internal "scientific" and external "social" accounts for this
episode, and whether the two sorts of accounts are separable. This was a pivotal
episode in North American archaeology, but the significance of its study even
goes beyond the history of the field. American archaeology is again embroiled in
controversy over human antiquity. Looking back will help pout in historical
perspective the obstacles that still bedevil the subject, and thereby close the
gap between the near and deeper past and between science and the history of
science.