* 8911339
* Geometries for the Behavioral Sciences
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1989,07/31/1992
* Jean-Claude Falmagne, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Jasmine Young
* 07/31/1992
* USD 125,000.00

Researchers in many of the social and behavioral sciences often need to analyze
the data of a complex experiment into a few essential features or trends, in
order to ascertain the essential dimensions of variations in the phenomenon
under investigation. Methods involving the mathematics of geometry can be very
helpful in this regard, because they can provide the experimenter with
potentially enlightening graphic representations of the data. There has been
relatively little development of truly geometrical methods tailored to those
fields. Useful techniques have been developed (e.g., factor analysis,
multidimensional scaling) which are sometimes labeled `geometrical'. However,
these techniques are based on extremely strong models (i.e., based on very
restrictive assumptions), in which the geometry of the representing structure
plays only a minor role. Moreover, the fundamental assumptions of these models
are not easily testable, so that it is never quite clear how much of the results
of the analysis have been forced upon the experimenter by the method itself.
This research will remedy this situation and provide a collection of purely
geometrical models suitable for a very general experimental setting in use by
social and behavioral scientists. The experimental method is a variant of the
so- called `method of triads', but the interpretation of the data differs
drastically from traditional ones. The mathematical developments are largely
based on the methods and concepts of modern geometry. One of the advantages of
this approach is that the models tend to be weaker than traditional ones (i.e.,
to involve less restrictive assumptions) while being easily testable.