* 8911987
* Identification of Sequences Necessary for the Regulation and Function of p33 in Carrot
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1989,01/31/1993
* Mary Tierney, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 01/31/1993
* USD 238,400.00

Extensin mRNA and protein in plant cell walls have been shown to increase in
response to wounding, ethylene, pathogen infection and exposure to fungal and
plant cell wall elicitors, suggesting a protective function for this cell wall
protein. This project studies another cell wall protein in carrot storage roots
and soybean, called p33, that also increases in wounded tissue and also plays a
role in normal plant development. The recent identification of a number of
proline/hydroxyproline-rich protein genes which share sequence homology with the
carrot p33 sequence suggests that p33 may represent a new class of structural
cell wall proteins. Promoter deletion analysis is used to identify DNA sequences
which are responsible for the synthesis of p33 in wounded carrot roots. These
studies will allow the cis-acting regions which modulate p33 expression in
wounded tissue and allow determination of whether these same sequences are used
to regulate the expression of p33 during normal plant development. Deletion
analysis of specific regions of the carrot p33 sequence will be used to identify
possible "domains" within the p33 protein necessary for its function and
interaction with other cell wall components. These domain deletion studies will
represent a new approach to identifying sequences which may be necessary for the
function of structural cell wall proteins in higher plants.%%% The cell walls of
higher plants are dynamic structures which undergo changes in composition and
structure in relation to cell age, tissue type and environmental stimuli. Much
of the analysis of the structural protein component of the cell wall has dealt
with extensin, a hydroxyproline-rich glycoprotein, and the genes which encode
it. This study centers on a newly discovered cell wall protein which plays a
role in normal plant growth.***//