* 8911077
* Planning Award to Plan for the Enhancement of Computer      Science Programs at UMES
* CSE,EIA
* 06/01/1989,05/31/1991
* Robert Yearby, University of Maryland Eastern Shore
* Standard Grant
* Beverly P Baker
* 05/31/1991
* USD 50,000.00

The projects and strategies that UMES will consider for a five-year plan are
divided into five categories: * enhanced faculty/student research * enhanced
teaching methodologies * enhanced faculty development * enhanced
hardware/software facilities * exploration of new linkages The establishment of
a centralized resource center to accommodate the research interest and projects
of all the Computer Science faculty and students would contribute immensely
toward creating a research-friendly environment. A unique way of implementing
this idea is through the establishment of a research conference laboratory. This
special laboratory would be available to faculty and graduate students in
Applied Computer Science to implement research activities. It would be equipped
with a conference room for small group meetings, cubicles for individual study,
special equipment such as personal computers and peripherals, and a
sophisticated graphical workstation (e.g.:a SUN or and IRIS). Consolidating
faculty research coverage in the areas of artificial intelligence and
computational mathematics would encourage greater cooperation and sharing of
available facilities thereby making research efforts more cost effective.
Student comprehension can be significantly increased by supplementing the
traditional lecture with specialized laboratories for each of the Computer
Science courses. This coupled with specialized support laboratories for the
preparation of media and analyzing research results seems to be a good strategy
for enhancing teaching methodologies. These specialized laboratories are to be
utilized in conjunction with the ongoing research. In building an adequate
computer facility, they will consider: acquisition and maintenance of a state-
of-the art mainframe computer system, an adequate number of workstations in
terminal rooms, a terminal and/or a PC in each CS faculty office, a local area
network (LAN) to accommodate software development and exchange among faculty,
access to global networks and the installation of several computer graphics work
stations. Several linkages to Universities, HBCU's, governmental agencies,
private industries and foundations will be attempted for the purpose of
obtaining helpful suggestions and advice on maintaining a program of excellence
in computer science. This program will be one that answers the challenge and
impact upon the Nation's ability to attract sufficiently talented youth to major
in computer science. Moreover, it will serve as a magnet to attract women and
minorities to enroll at UMES in advanced degree programs in computer science