* 8911121
* Topics in Dynamic Games and Implementation Theory
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1989,12/31/1992
* Eric Maskin, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 12/31/1992
* USD 100,799.00

This project continues research on methods that are extremely useful for
rigorously analyzing economic dynamics, strategic behavior and social choice.
The specific research topics are (1) the nature of equilibrium in repeated games
where actions are not observable or where there is a mixture of long- and short-
run players; (2) renegotiation- proof equilibria in repeated games; (3) Markov
equilibrium; and (4) implementation theory. The research on repeated games is
important because the Folk Theorem, one of the most widely used methods for
finding mathematical solutions to repeated games, depends on the assumption that
players observe a relationship between the actions of the other players and the
outcomes of the games. The purpose of the project is to study the nature of
equilibrium in repeated games when the outcomes observed by the players are
imperfectly correlated. In a repeated game, cooperation derives from the
potential of players to punish non-cooperative behavior. This threat of
punishment breaks down, if agents can avoid the punishment by renegotiation. The
project continues to study ways of finding equilibria in repeated games that are
renegotiation-proof. This line of research is very important because imposing a
requirement that equilibria be renegotiation-proof reduces the number of
possible outcomes to repeated games in this way enabling economic theorists to
make more precise predictions about the outcomes of dynamic economic processes.
The project's research on Markov strategies offers another way of reducing the
number of possible outcomes of dynamic economic models. The research is based on
the idea that strategies depend on only a small set of relevant past variables
rather than on the entire history of the game. This project formulates for the
first time a general definition of these restricted or Markov strategies and
studies their characteristics. Implementation theory is concerned with the
question of when it is possible to design a game or "mechanism" whose equilibria
have properties that are desirable with respect to a given criterion of social
welfare. Traditional implementation theory assumes that the outcome can be
enforced by a central authority. This project extends implementation theory to
situations where some individuals' actions cannot be observed by anyone else.
This project should be supported because it makes fundamental contributions to
economic theory. Economic analysis has been hindered by the fact that many
dynamic economic models have huge sets of equilibria. The results of this
research could enable theorists to make more discriminating forecasts of the
outcomes of these models.