* 8912712
* Comparative Analysis of Women and Men Lower-Court Judges
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/1990,02/28/1993
* Darrell Steffensmeier, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Martin
* 02/28/1993
* USD 90,294.00

Research on judicial careers and behavior is a relatively young specialty in
social science that so far has focused mainly on trial and appellate court
judges. The nation's lowest courts, district courts, have been the least studied
despite their numbers and significance to ordinary citizens. The office of
lower-court judge is a powerful position that is central to the functioning of
the legal system. Traditionally, it has been a male semi-profession but recently
a growing number of women have been entering this field. An understanding of
judicial attitudes and decisionmaking in this non-traditional occupation has
both theoretical and practical potential. This project involves an analysis of
the occupation of the lower- court judge in terms of work demands and the
enactment of and adaptation to the job. A random sample of female and male
judges in both rural and urban counties in Pennsylvania will be studied. Central
to the analysis will be (1) a description of the social backgrounds of job
occupants and gender differences; (2) gender differences/similarities in work
history and career paths leading to and away from the judge role; and (3) gender
differences/similarities in judicial attitudes and orientations. Using a
combination of face-to-face interviews, courtroom observations, and analysis of
archival data describing caseloads and community characteristics, a theory of
the minor judiciary will be built and refined. The opportunity to assess gender-
based differences in work orientations and behavior in an identical job for men
and women office-holders provides a unique perspective. This study will yield an
extensive and rich data base on the minor judiciary. In addition, it will
contribute to the sparse literature on judicial careers, gender and work, and
men and women in elective offices. Applying theory and research on gender and
work to the work experiences of lower-court judges will offer not only a fresh
approach to theory building in the area but also a broader view of judicial
careers and behavior that should add significantly to our understanding of the
judiciary.