* 8912135
* Interagency Agreement No. NPS-IA-1100-9-0001/DPP89-12135 Modification No. 3
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/1989,06/30/1991
* David Wright, National Park Service-Harpers Ferry Center
* Interagency Agreement
* Anthony Hopkins
* 06/30/1991
* USD 53,000.00

Since 1986, public interest in Antarctica has increased dramatically. In
response commercial tour operators have expanded their antarctic operations,
particularly in the Antarctic Peninsula region. Because many of the tourists are
U.S. citizens, the demand for visits to U.S. Antarctic Stations also has
increased. The National Science Foundation, as manager of the U.S. national
program in Antarctica, is attempting to meet the demands of taxpaying tourists
without significant impact to the research program. Because the National Park
Service has extensive experience in planning and managing tourists at parks and
other sites throughout the United States, NSF has sought their assistance to
develop programs that will provide tourists with informal access to U.S.
stations without increasing pressures on limited U.S. resources in Antarctica.
Under the terms of this interagency agreement, the National Park Service will
help NSF formulate, plan, and present interpretive programs and other visitor
activities and will provide NSF with the following: o a video tape
(approximately 15 minutes long) to be shown to tourists visiting Palmer Station.
o interpreter services at Palmer Station between January and March 1990. o
planning and other services as determined by both agencies.