* 8912585
* Spin Excitations in Nuclei (Physics)
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/1989,12/31/1992
* Richard Lindgren, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* John W. Lightbody, Jr.
* 12/31/1992
* USD 356,380.00

A nuclear physics program on spin excitations of the nucleus will be carried
out by intermediate energy inelastic electron, proton, and pion scattering. New
initiatives will be taken towards the study of short range correlations.
Complementary studies will focus on unnatural parity states such as "stretched"
excitations where the dominant coupling between the probe and the nucleus is the
nuclear spin density. Not only can we test models of structure calculations but
also test selected effective interactions within the DWIA model of inelastic
pion and proton scattering. In addition (e,e') measurements are being extended
to higher momentum transfer for selected excitations in order to study the
importance of higher-order effects such as meson exchange currents, relativistic
effects, and short range correlations. Electromagnetic studies of charge density
transitions in light nuclei, through photon and electron induced multi-nucleon
knockout reactions. Presently, a highly modular plastic scintillation hodoscope,
together with a charged particle magnetic filter for background reduction and
lead-scintillation shower counters for electron/photon-neutron discrimination,
is under development as a large angular acceptance, high efficiency, medium
energy resolution (time-of-flight_ neutron detector for use at LEGS, LAMPS,
Bates, and eventually CEBAF.