* 8912992
* Experimental Investigation of the Strength Stiffness and    Deformaton Capacity of Slender Reinforced Concrete Walls
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/1989,06/30/1992
* Sharon Wood, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Manpreet K. Singh
* 06/30/1992
* USD 194,785.00

During the past 20 years, the satisfactory behavior of many reinforced concrete
buildings during damaging earthquakes has been attributed to the presence of
structural walls. Structural walls provide stiffness to the building systems,
and control the drift and damage in the buildings. A critical concern for the
design of structural walls in seismic regions has been the specification of
reinforcement details to insure ductile response. The performance of buildings
in Vina del Mar during the March 1985 Chilean earthquake appears to contradict
professional opinion, because the buildings performed well and the reinforcement
details were essentially nonexistent. This research project develops methods for
determining the strength, effective stiffness, and deformation capacity of
reinforced concrete walls. Walls are used as the primary lateral-load resisting
system in many reinforced concrete structures, yet many fundamental concepts
have not been verified experimentally. The experimental phase of the project
involves lateral load tests of reinforced concrete walls. Major variables
include the geometry of the cross section, amount of web reinforcement, type of
loading, and amount of confinement reinforcement. Walls subjected to static load
reversals and dynamic loading. The analytical phase of the project uses the
observed response and the measured response of the experiments to develop a
hysteresis model suitable for reproducing nonlinear response in shear and
flexure. Methods are developed to determine the strength, likely mode of
failure, and effective stiffness of structural walls during the design process.