* 8912072
* Asymmetric Information
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1989,01/31/1993
* Andrew Postlewaite, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 01/31/1993
* USD 143,599.00

This project deals with economies in which there is asymmetric information. It
consists of three parts. The first part develops a general framework for the
study of markets when agents have imperfect information. A general equilibrium
model is developed in which agents have private information. A novel measure is
used of the significance of the information held by economic agents. The project
establishes the conditions under which a large number of agents ameliorates the
inefficiencies due to the presence of asymmetric or private information. It
investigates the extent to which outcomes which are simultaneously nearly
efficient and incentive compatible can be outcomes of markets. The second part
examines the problems of undertaking projects in environments in which
individuals' valuations are privately known and individuals cannot be forced to
participate. The last section explores the effect of allowing communication
prior to the play of a Bayesian game. Most analyses of games with asymmetric
information ignore this possibility. Allowing communication can expand the set
of equilibria and, if refinements of Bayes-Nash equilibria are used, can shrink
the set of predicted outcomes. This project should be supported because the
issues addressed are important. The research in the first part on general
equilibrium models of agents with private information could provide a unifying
framework for the different theories of imperfect information. The preliminary
results from this line of research find that even a small amount of private
information can cause surprisingly large inefficiencies in economies with large
numbers of economic agents. The second part should provide useful insights into
the many problems in which a group has to take a collective action and allocate
individual costs or benefits of that actions. The most pervasive example of such
a problem is whether to undertake a public project and, if undertaken, how the
costs of the project are to be distributed among the members of the group. The
third part extends Bayesian game theory by allowing communication prior to the
play of the game. This is important because Bayesian game models are used in
nearly every part of economics to model problems in which agents may have
different information and the preliminary results by the investigator show that
pre-play communication can have a very significant effect on the outcome of the
Bayesian game.