* 8912046
* Collaborative Research on Long Paleoenvironmental Records   from Cave Sediments
* SBE,BCS
* 11/15/1989,04/30/1992
* George Brook, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 04/30/1992
* USD 51,079.00

Growing international interest in global change has stimulated development of
longer records of natural conditions in order to better compare naturally
controlled change with the processes induced or accelerated by human activity.
Scholars increasingly have gone underground in recent years, examining sediments
in caves to determine whether pollen and microfossils in those deposits can
provide long-term records of environmental conditions. This project will
continue analysis of materials gathered in ten caves from seven different
African nations. Preliminary analyses have estimated the dates of some of these
materials to 350,000 years before the present. By continuing the process of
estimating the age of materials and associating those materials with specific
types of vegetation in regions surrounding the caves, project leaders should be
able to more completely and more accurately reconstruct ecological conditions at
the cave sites over long time periods. These reconstructions will then provide a
basis for more accurate estimation of climate and other natural conditions in
those regions. This research is significant because it will provide considerably
more information about paleo-ecological conditions in different parts of Africa
over hundreds of thousands of years. These data will complement long records
gathered for other locales and dated using other methods of measurement, thereby
providing an improved basis for examining the nature and processes of natural
environmental change throughout the world since the Pleistocene epoch. This
research also will increase knowledge about the paleoecological reconstruction
methods used in this study and about the limitations in the use of cave
sediments as sources of information about natural environmental conditions,
knowledge that will help scholars examining environmental change in both
historic and current timeframes.