* 8912274
* The Inclusion of Parental Interviewers in the Rochester     Youth Development Study
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1989,06/30/1990
* Terence Thornberry, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Martin
* 06/30/1990
* USD 64,869.00

The Rochester Youth Development Study, funded primarily by the Office of
Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention, is a longitudinal study of the
causes and correlates of delinquency. Using a sample of 1,000 youth that over-
represents individuals at high risk for serious delinquent careers, the design
of the project calls for interviews of the child and one of his or her parents
at six-month intervals over a three-and-a-half year period. The purpose of the
research is to examine the factors associated with initiation, maintenance, and
cessation of delinquent behavior and drug use. Pro-social behaviors are also
identified that potentially buffer youth from delinquent careers. The overall
conceptual framework for the study is based on an interactional theory of
delinquency that focuses on the structural organization of family and peer
networks. Data are organized around six general concepts: attachment to parents,
commitment to school, belief in conventional values, associations with
delinquent peers, adopting delinquent values, and engaging in delinquent
behavior. This grant will support wave three of the parent interviews in the
Rochester study. Due to reductions in support from the Office of Juvenile
Justice and Delinquency Prevention, the study budget was reduced by 27 percent,
which necessitated eliminating wave three of the parent interviews. The absence
of this wave of parental interviews would substantially weaken the scientific
value of the overall research effort and the panel design especially since the
end of 8th or 9th grade is an important transition point in parent-child
relationships that may be associated with later delinquency. The NSF
contribution will reinstate the parent interviews to the data collection. The
use of parental interviews is unusual in delinquency research and permits a
direct examination of interactional and socialization effects. The interviews
with parents will enable the investigators to examine such issues as whether and
when attachment to parents operates to inhibit antisocial behavior as well as
whether antisocial behavior affects attachment uniformly across different
parenting types. Not only will the study provide a rich and unique data set
available to others for secondary analysis but it will contribute significantly
to scientific knowledge and enlightened public policy about delinquency and its
causes.