* 8912275
* Experimental Stream System at the Sierra Nevada Aquatic     Research Laboratory
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/1989,11/30/1991
* Daniel Dawson, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* James L. Edwards
* 11/30/1991
* USD 175,000.00

The University of California at Santa Barbara maintains a field station in the
eastern Sierra Nevada mountains for research and teaching in the field sciences.
The Sierra Nevada Aquatic Research Laboratory (SNARL) serves as a base for many
scientists working in east-central California and western Nevada. In addition,
SNARL protects a variety of terrestrial and freshwater habitats for teaching and
research use. This project will provide funds to construct fifteen medium- sized
experimental stream channels to augment the existing stream and pond system at
SNARL. The new channels will fill an important gap in the scale of experimental
units available at SNARL, which currently has only small laboratory and field
channels and a series of large field channels which were formed by division of
an existing natural stream. The new, medium-sized field channels will allow
investigators to examine the effects of spatial scale on the outcomes of
experimental manipulations. The channels will simulate the physical, chemical
and biological characteristics of natural streams while providing sufficient
replication for rigorous experimental designs. Although the existing stream
channels at SNARL do not provide sufficient replication for most experiments,
they are still a realistic and important component of the battery of
experimental units at the site. Therefore, the project also provides funds to
repair the concrete control structures on the existing experimental stream
system.