* 8912384
* US-Korea Cooperative Research on Nonlinear Behavior and     Marginal Safety of Low-Rise Reinforced Concrete Shear Wall  Systems Against Interacting Ground Motions
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1990,07/31/1993
* Franklin Cheng, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 07/31/1993
* USD 20,360.00

This proposal requests funds to permit Dr. Franklin Y. Cheng, Department of
Civil Engineering, University of Missouri-Rolla, to pursue with Dr. Chang-Koon
Choi, Department of Civil Engineering, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and
Technology (KAIST) for a period of 24 months, a program of cooperative research
on nonlinear behavior and marginal safety of low-rise reinforced concrete shear
wall systems against interacting ground motions. Low-rise civilian buildings
comprise the overwhelming percentage of building construction in the U.S. and
Korea. For such structures with reinforced concrete walls, the height-to-width
ratios are small. Under seismic loads, these walls experience shear deformation
rather than the bending experienced by walls in taller structures. Research
currently in vogue deals mainly with bending deformation of high-rise structures
within the elastic limit. The present cooperative research, on the other hand,
will consider the amount of reserve strength between the elastic limit and
failure for walls of low height-to-width ratios. Structural behavior in this
range is nonlinear, and new analytical models must be developed to predict the
behavior of new and repaired structures. These models will be tested and
verified against experimental results. Damage studies will be based on
experimental behavior and calculated results. In addition, building code
specifications will be assessed. Considerable progress has been made in
predicting the behavior of high-rise structures subjected to multicomponent
seismic input. Much remains to be done toward predicting the behavior of low-
rise structures, improving their ability to withstand earthquake loads, and the
strength of rehabilitated structures. The collaborators on this project are well
suited to undertake such work. The U.S. PI's previous work has dealt with a
model of macro-element formulation which reliably predicts the response of
structural systems but does not yield detailed information on localized
deformations of individual walls. The Korean PI has experience in micro-element
analysis which can be used for observing localized deformations. Their models
are complementary for examining the relationship between system and element
deformations. The solution to the problems addressed by this project would be
beneficial to the United States and Korea. This project is relevant to the
objectives of the U.S.-Korea Cooperative Science Program which seeks to increase
the level of cooperation between U.S. and Korean scientists and engineers
through the exchange of scientific information, ideas, skills, and techniques
and through collaboration on problems of mutual benefit.