* 8912398
* The Physics of Highly Correlated Electron Systems, The      International Conference, September 11-15, 1989 Santa Fe, NM"Award in Indian Currency".
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/1989,07/31/1990
* Jack Crow, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 07/31/1990
* USD 13,500.00

Description: This project supports travel of five Indian scientists to the
Internatrional Conference on the Physics of Highly Correlated Electron Systems
planned for September 11-15, 1989 in Sante Fe, NM. The focus of the conference
will be on f-and d-electron systems. Topics of interest will include 1. Anomalus
f-and d-electron systems 2. Mechanisms in high Tc and heavy fermion
superconductors 3. Magnetic ordering and coorelations. 4. Fluctuating valence 5.
Crystals field effects and 6. Heavy fermion phenomena. The conference will bring
together researchers working on various aspects of both d-and f-electron
metallic systems and provide an interactive environment for the exchange of
ideas. The fifth Conference in this area was held in Bangalore, India during
January 1987 and was quite successful and resulted in Proceedings "Theoretical
and Experimental Aspects of Valence Fluctuations and Heavy Fermions, Eds; L. C.
Gupta and S. K. Malik," published by Plenum, NY, in 1987. Scope: This conference
is the first in the U.S. in this field since 1981, with 5 conferences between
1981 and 1986 held in Europe or Japan. There are advantages to the meeting being
held in the U.S. where more young researchers from the U.S. and other countries
can attend. The participation of Indian scientists is expected to enrich the
meeting because of the active research in India. Dr. R. Vijayaraghavan, Dean of
Physics Faculty, Tata Institute of Fundamental Research, is the Coordinator of
the Indian group.