* 8912105
* Construction and Equipping of a Technical Research          Laboratory, at the Southwestern Research Station
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/1989,02/29/1992
* Wade Sherbrooke, American Museum Natural History
* Standard Grant
* James L. Edwards
* 02/29/1992
* USD 47,100.00

Since 1955 The Southwestern Research Station, a research facility of The
American Museum of Natural History, has been promoting and facilitating
investigations by natural scientists who work in the American Southwest. Each
year well over a hundred scientists, from around the country and overseas, come
to the Station to study volcanic rock structures, birds, reptiles, amphibians,
spiders, insects, plants and mammals. These scientists are attracted to the
Station by the scientific facilities, the researcher community, and the richness
of the unique biota of the Chiricahua Mountains and surrounding desert areas.
The Station, located on a 90 acre site at 5400 feet elevation, is the uppermost
private land in Cave Creek Canyon (one of the most outstanding birding
localities in North America) on the east side of the Chiricahua Mountains. It is
surrounded by U.S. Forest Service property (Coronado National Forest). The
scientific significance of the site for field researchers results from the
ecological diversity of habitats and the taxonomic diversity of organisms that
may be found within a few miles of the facility. This project will improve the
technical facilities of the Research Station in order to meet the needs of
modern field scientists. With increasing frequency, scientist are relying on
sophisticated technological developments to probe nature. The existing buildings
and equipment are suitable for many types of traditional research collecting.
But physiological ecology, biochemical taxonomy, and photomicroscopy are
important modern tools for field scientists. Currently the Station lacks a
laboratory where ambient temperature can be controlled. The project will rectify
that situation through the construction of a small modern building, and by
equipping it with microscopes, balances and temperature controlled chambers.