* 8912626
* US-Federal Republic of Germany Cooperative Research on the  Properties and Reactivity of Metal Clusters
* O/D,OISE
* 02/01/1990,10/31/1991
* Karl Gingerich, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 10/31/1991
* USD 13,518.00

This award supports Dr. Karl A. Gingerich to collaborate with Dr. Winfried
Schulze and Dr. D. M. Kolb of the Fritz Haber Institute of the Max Planck
Gesellschaft, Berlin, FRG, in spectroscopic studies of the reactions of metal
clusters ranging in size from two atoms to colloidal particles. With Dr.
Schulze, he will investigate the dependence of the electronic and vibrational
energy levels on cluster size, the stability of neutral and charged clusters and
of their specific reactivity using a wide variety of modern research techniques.
Specific systems to be studied include clusters of lithium, iron and nickel, and
their interactions with nitrogen and carbon monoxide in low temperature matrices
and in the gas phase. With Dr. Kolb, he will measure the optical spectra of
molecules such as Germanium, Aluminum and Gallium. These molecules have been or
are being studied by equilibrium mass spectrometry at Texas A &amp; M to obtain
their bond energies. Dr. Schulze's group is concerned with the preparation,
characteri- zation and reactions of metal clusters. They have extensive
experience in optical and vibrational studies of matrix-isolated metals and
metallic clusters. Also, they have refined the gas aggregation technique to
generate metal clusters in narrow size distributions and in high intensities,
including colloidal sizes. Dr. Kolb's group is concerned with fundamental
aspects of matrix isolation spectroscopy of metal atoms and small clusters,
using optical spectroscopy as their principal analytical tool. A major objective
of their work is to improve fundamental understanding of matrix effects on
electronic transitions and geometry. Dr. Gingerich's research has involved using
equilibrium mass spectroscopy to study the bond energies of small inorganic
molecules, most of them diatomic metals and small metallic clusters that are
important in catalytic processes. Through collaboration, he will gain more
experience in the preparation and spectroscopic study of metal clusters larger
than the ones he has been investigating. He also will learn techniques for
studying their reactivity and catalytic action. In view of the development of
laser spectroscopy and the extablishment of a Surface Science Center at Texas A
&amp; M, this experience will lay the groundwork for extending his research on
metal clusters into catalysis and surface science oriented studies.