* 8912552
* Expectations and Indeterminacy of Monetary Equilibria in    Experimental Economics
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/1989,12/31/1991
* Shyam Sunder, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Lynn A. Pollnow
* 12/31/1991
* USD 164,557.00

What people do (i.e., work, save, or spend) depends in part on what they expect
the future to be. Their actions, in turn, influence what actually happens in the
future. Rational expectations models of economic behavior are based on a key
requirement that a person's expectations about the future be consistent with the
logical consequences of their current decisions. A better understanding of many
macroeconomic phenomena has been gained by the development of rational-
expectations equilibrium models. Nonetheless, current economic theory leaves
some crucial questions unanswered. Specifically, economic models in which
multiple pairs of mutually consistent actions and expectations exist yield
ambiguous predictions and policy prescriptions. This problem could be resolved
if it were known how people learn from expectations. For example, in current
models of the dynamics of hyperinflation, it impossible to know, with any
reasonable precision, the impact of reducing government deficits on inflation.
In order to better understand the causes of inflation and to discover effective
counter measures, it is necessary to learn much more about how people form
expectations. The purpose of this project is to develop innovative laboratory
methods and to apply them to the analysis of expectation formation, inflation,
and government deficits.