* 8912128
* The Physics of Semiconductor Devices, Fifth International   Workshop , December 10-15, 1989, New Delhi, India
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1989,08/31/1990
* Joseph Loferski, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 08/31/1990
* USD 35,400.00

Description: This project supports participation by twelve U.S. scientists in
the Fifth International Workshop on the Physics of Semiconductor Devices, to be
held in New Delhi, India, December 10-15, 1989. The Indian organizers are
Professor S. C. Jain, retired director of the Solid State Physics Laboratory in
the Department of Defense, New Delhi, and Dr. S. Radhakrishna, of the Indian
Institute of Technology, Madras. The conference/workshop, as was the case in the
earlier four workshops, will deal with itegrated circuits, VLSI, submicron
technology, MOS, bipolar devices, solar cells, high power rectifiers, light
emitting diodes and similar devices. It will deal with developments in design,
manufacture and use of such devices. It is expected that approximately 300
persons will attend including about 60 from foreign countries including Western
Europe, the U.S. and Canada, Australia, Japan, the USSR and Eastern Europe, as
well as scientists from developing countries in South and East Asia. Scope: The
PI has been the project director for the U.S. delegations to three of the past
four conferences, and the Indian scientists, Dr. Jain has been the chairman of
all the conferences. These have resulted in proceedings covering the important
papers presented at the meetings. This workshop is likely to be quite successful
and productive, and the proceedings should add to the scientific literature in
this important area. Increased cooperative research is very likely to result
between the two countries in this important area.