* 8912068
* Chemistry and Genetics of Antibody Catalysis
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/1990,10/31/1993
* Donald Hilvert, The Scripps Research Institute
* Continuing grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 10/31/1993
* USD 300,000.00

Recent experiments have demonstrated the feasibility of using transition state
analogue inhibitors to generate monoclonal antibodies that catalyze chemical
transformations. This strategy provides us with unique tools for investigating
chemical catalysis in proteins, as well as the means to create entirely new
enzymatic activities for use in research, medicine and industry. Here, a
combined chemical and genetic approach is proposed to study and improve the
properties of one such antibody, a catalyst for the stereospecific conversion of
chorismate into prephenate. Specifically, we plan to clone and sequence the
genes for the chorismate mutase antibody 1F7 and engineer them for intracellular
expression in a strain of the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae that lacks the
normal gene for chorismate mutase (essential for tyrosine and phenylalanine
biosynthesis). We will optimize the levels of expression and assembly of 1F7 to
reconstitute the defective biosynthetic pathway and thereby allow the host cells
to grow in the absence of exogenously added tyrosine and phenylalanine. We will
also exploit this system to perform classical genetic selection on the antibody
in order to improve its chemical efficiency. Thus, the host cells containing
first-generation 1F7 will be grown under conditions such that only those cells
survive that produce an improved version of the catalyst by random mutation. In
these experiments we will be monitoring, in essence, the evolution of a protein
catalyst not previously optimized by natural selection. Detailed
characterization of the resulting 1F7 variants will enhance our understanding
not only of how enzymes work but how they come to be the way they are. This
combination of chemistry, immunology and molecular genetics provides a general
strategy for developing highly efficient protein catalysts for biomedical and
industrial applications. It is being funded by the Division of Chemistry and
Molecular Biosciences through the Chemistry of Life Processes Initiative.