* 8912432
* Initial Value Problem Theory of Cyclogenesis and the        Predictability of Flows
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/1989,12/31/1992
* Brian Farrell, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Tracy L. Rozell
* 12/31/1992
* USD 274,160.00

The overall goal of this project is to better understand the development of
synoptic scale weather systems, which may ultimately lead to improved weather
forecasts. The principal investigator's previous work has focused how the
structure of the flow, or "initial value", contributes to subsequent development
of perturbations. He will extend this research along two lines. The first thrust
is to continue his investigations into the physical mechanism(s) responsible for
cyclogenesis; the other is to explore the predictability of large scale
atmospheric flows. Observational evidence suggests that deformation, as well as
shear, in the background atmospheric flow plays an important role for certain
types of cyclogenesis. The principal investigator already has shown the effect
of shear in the background flow on the energetic development of cyclones. He
will extend this work to look at the effect of confluence and difluence on
perturbations in the flow. While the subject has been studied extensively,
theoretical estimates of the predictability of the atmosphere still vary widely
as do the results from numerical weather prediction experiments. The reason
appears to be variability in the predictability of the flow regimes, that is,
certain types of flows are inherently more predictable than others. The
principal investigator will explore the growth of error in numerical models and
attempt to distinguish between those flows which are predictable and those which
are not as a function of flow characteristics.