* 8912400
* Etching of Silicon Carbide by Reactive Gases
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/1989,09/30/1993
* Dennis Hess, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Maria Burka
* 09/30/1993
* USD 251,160.00

The etching properties of silicon carbide (SiC) are of interest in two distinct
technologies. First, its electrical properties make it a promising semiconductor
for integrated circuit (IC) devices for high temperature operation. Second, its
resistance to radiation damage and to attack by atomic hydrogen have prompted
active consideration of SiC as a protective liner for plasma-facing components
of fusion reactors. Therefore there is both chemical and nuclear engineering
interest in this material. The objectives of the proposed research are to
determine the conditions under which silicon carbide is etched by reactive gases
(hydrogen, fluorine, and chlorine atoms) and to determine the mechanism of the
surface reactions responsible for etching. Etching condition refer top the
nature of the gaseous reactant, its pressure, the SiC temperature and the
intensity and energy of energetic ions impinging on the reacting surface. This
problem will be approached using a high-pressure (up to 1 Torr) rf plasma
reactor and a low-pressure (up to 0.0001 Torr) molecular beam reactor. The
problem is attacked at two levels. The first is a fundamental mechanistic study
using the molecular beam-mass spectrometric method. The second is by plasma
etching in a reactor representative of realistic integrated-circuit production.
The molecular beam technique provides information ont he molecular nature of
reaction products and their residence times on the surface. Such data can be use
to elucidate the elementary reactions occurring on the surface and the kinetics
of each of these steps. In order to take full advantage of the fundamental
mechanistic information provided by the molecular beam method, it is necessary
to relate these experiments to etching studies carried out at pressures normally
used to fabricate ICs. This connection will be accomplished by performing
etching studies in an rf glow-discharge reactor which is capable of both
downstream atom etching and direct plasma etching. Comparison of etching results
from these two discharge modes can provide insight into the role of the plasma
in etch processes and will also link the mechanistic molecular beam results to
etching under conditions of technological utility.