* 8912248
* Equipment for the Seward Marine Center, a High-Latitude     Research Facility
* BIO,DBI
* 10/15/1989,09/30/1992
* Susan Henrichs, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* James L. Edwards
* 09/30/1992
* USD 48,670.00

The Seward Marine Center (SMC) is the farthest-north university marine station
in the United States. It is ideally situated to support studies of circumpolar,
North Pacific, Gulf of Alaska, and Bering Sea organisms requiring water
temperatures ranging from 3-10oC. Further, the SMC is the proposed site of
several interdisciplinary studies of ocean-atmosphere interactions and sea-
surface interannual variability. There is increasing international concern about
high-latitude manifestations of global warming and atmospheric ozone
destruction, and an increasing National emphasis on arctic and subarctic
research mandated by the Arctic Research and Policy Act. These developments will
increase demand for SMC research facilities. This project provides funds to
purchase materials for renovating and upgrading the seawater supply system at
the SMC. The renovations will include installation of two new, 8-inch- diameter,
600-foot-long seawater intake pipes and one new pump. The Institute of Marine
Science, which operates the SMC, will match the NSF award by covering the costs
of labor and additional materials, the renovations are urgently needed because
the present system often fails and lacks adequate backup. Further, the capacity
of the present seawater system is barely adequate for research being conducted
now; anticipated increasing need for the facility in the next 5 years cannot be
met without the proposed renovations.//