* 8912224
* Durability and Integrity of Marble Cladding for High-Rise   Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/1989,12/31/1992
* Julie Mark Cohen, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Ken Chong
* 12/31/1992
* USD 108,897.00

Marble, a nontraditional cladding material for high-rise structures, has been
treated primarily as a design issue by architects. During recent years,
improvements in the cutting process have allowed the thickness of the cladding
panels to decrease markedly. This has led to a dramatic increase in the use of
this form of cladding. It has also led to recent nation- wide problems with
marble cladding on buildings that are no more than twenty years old. The
observed problems of the marble cladding include severe and permanent bowing of
the material that starts soon after the buildings are completed, and the
eventual failure of some of all anchorages of the cladding to the building. In
addition to disastrous economic consequences for the building owners and the
marble and curtain wall industries, there are potential risks to life associated
with high-rise construction that may be dangerously increased in the future.
There is a controversy among experts about the cause of the permanent bowing and
the effect of the restraints provided by the anchorages. This research will
investigate the alleged causes of permanent deformation, thru-thickness
temperature differentials and moisture. The results of the research will include
recommendations for building code specifications for an engineered solution to
the marble cladding reliability problem, as well as the development of an ASTM
Standard for Subcommittee E6.55 on the Performance of Exterior Building Wall
Systems.