* 8912241
* A Multi-Frequency Sonar Study of the Monterey Canyon and    Fan
* GEO,OCE
* 11/01/1989,10/31/1992
* William Ryan, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Bilal U. Haq
* 10/31/1992
* USD 327,346.00

The PI has developed a side-scan sonar system for imaging the seafloor. This
system has 30 and 72 kHz side-scan transducers and a 3.5 kHz down-looking
transducer. This is a state-of-the-art system that has been under development
since 1986. The use of side-scan and multibeam systems has increased in the
academic community in the past few years and there is a need to understand and
to quantify the images produced by these systems. The PI proposes to collect a
variety of sonar data sets during a 28-day cruise to the Monterey canyon area.
The objective of the program is to operate the new sonar system in a previously
well-mapped and generally predictible geological environment to learn the types
and extent of new information that can be obtained from this type of remote
sensing. This project will begin to replace the subjective methods presently
used to describe and map seabem landforms and their sediment cover with
quantitative techniques. Existing data in the area includes: DeepTow and Gloria
II sonar imagery, seismic reflection data, sediment cores, total Seabeam
bathymetric coverage, about 30,000 bottom photographs, and a number of
submersible dives. The area is also the site of current and long-term
observations by NOAA, the USGS, the Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institute,
and others. Thus, this area is a good location to compare and ground-truth the
various bottom sensing systems.