* 8912938
* Topographic Analysis for Distributed Hydrological and       Erosional Modeling of Landscapes
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/1989,05/31/1991
* John Wilson, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 05/31/1991
* USD 11,000.00

Of central importance to hydrologic and soil erosion modelling is the
development of an adequate representation of terrain. Such a representation must
be capable of yielding precise estimates of elevation, slope, and aspect at any
point. Little progress has been made in solving this problem because of its
complexity, however. Present models for predicting effects of land use practices
and agricultural management practices on nonpoint source pollution, for example,
are limited by their inability to adequately consider three-dimensional effects.
Based on the idea that terrain can be represented in the form of discrete
polygons, each bounded by two contour segments and two interpolated streamlines,
the investigators will develop a technology to handle spatial variability of the
attributes in large watersheds and river basins. This project will refine and
begin testing of an established hydrological model that integrates algorithms
developed for more specific models. This innovative study aims to develop
methods that encompass three-dimensional effects and that are more tractable,
accurate, and practical for use by engineers, soil scientists, and other
practitioners than are current methods. Explanation of means of representing
terrain, and the central statistical questions that must be dealt with in
working out this representation, will contribute to the development of
geographic information systems. These methods have the potential to facilitate
progress toward modelling the effects of management and land use practices on
nonpoint source water quality and quantity. The techniques developed may also be
applicable to subsurface water movement and to related groundwater applications,
which in turn are likely to be essential considerations in the development of
reliable remedial measures.