* 8912459
* U.S.-China Cooperative Research (Materials Science):        Computer Simulation of the Deformation of Short Range       Ordered F.C.C.
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/1990,12/31/1992
* Richard Arsenault, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Jones Tsuchitani
* 12/31/1992
* USD 16,180.00

This is a two.year collaborative project between Richard J. Arsenault, Director
of the Metallurgical Materials Laboratory at the University of Maryland, and San
Patu of the Shenyang Institute of Metal Research, Shenyang, China. The project
is sponsored by NSF and the Chinese Academy of Sciences. The investigators will
undertake a new computer development to determine the effect of a non.random
arrangement of solute atoms on the strength of an alloy and also to determine if
a non.random arrangement is destroyed due to pulling, bending, or twisting. The
strengthening of metals by additions to form alloys (the mixing of the atoms of
one metal with atoms of another metal) has been practiced for at least 4,000
years. However, an understanding of how this strengthening occurs is still
lacking. Several years ago it was proposed that the non.random arrangement of
additional atoms within the metal would lead to strengthening, but it has been
suggested that the non.random arrangement (i.e., the strengthening) could be
destroyed when the metal was actually bent, twisted, or pulled. Using high speed
computers, it is now possible to construct a metal alloy in which the locations
of all the atoms are known. Therefore, it is possible to have a random or
non.random arrangement of the additional atoms in the metal. Then it is possible
to calculate the strength, again by the use of the high speed computer, with
various arrangements of the additional atoms. While the method of calculating
the strength by the use of high speed computers has been developed during the
last 20 years by Professor Arsenault's group, the proposed collaboration with
the Chinese Academy of Sciences will undertake research on a new aspect: the
effect of non.random arrangement of the additional atoms on the strength.