* 8912362
* Mathematical Sciences: Studies in Automorphism Groups and   Operator Algebras
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1989,12/31/1992
* William Arveson, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Kevin Clancey
* 12/31/1992
* USD 202,239.00

Professors Arveson and Voiculescu will investigate several areas of
noncommutative analysis involving von Neumann algebras, quantized index theory,
C* - algebras, Fredholm modules, and noncommutative random variables. Arveson's
part of the project involves the index theory and classification theory of
semigroups of endomorphisms of factors, and the structure of the C* - algebras
associated to such semigroups. Voiculescu will continue his research on
quasicentral approximate units relative to normed ideals and their relationship
to Fredholm modules, and on the noncommutative probability theory of free
products. He will look further into the relation between nuclear C* - algebras
and the approximation theory of operators. This mathematical research project is
concerned with various constructions and techniques involving operators on
Hilbert space. Operators may be thought of as a species of enriched numbers.
They obey the same rules of arithmetic as numbers except that the result of
multiplication depends upon the order in which the factors are taken, and not
every nonzero operator has an inverse. It has proven to be a very fruitful
exercise, both in theoretical physics and in pure mathematics, to see what
happens when numbers are replaced by operators in a given context. Professor
Arveson, for instance, is studying systems that arise when time-dependent
numbers are replaced by time-dependent operators. One of Professor Voiculescu's
ongoing investigations involves a noncommutative version of probability theory
in which random variables are treated as if they were operator-valued rather
than number-valued.