* 8912792
* U.S.-Sweden Cooperative Science:  Demographic Change in     Nineteenth-Century Sweden
* O/D,OISE
* 12/01/1989,12/31/1994
* Katherine Lynch, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 12/31/1994
* USD 20,250.00

This award will support a collaborative project in historical demography between
two groups of U.S. and Swedish researchers. The U.S. group will be led by Dr.
Katherine Lynch, Department of History, Carnegie Mellon University. The Swedish
group will be headed by Dr. Lars-Goran Tedebrand, Department of Historical
Demography, University of Umea. The project involves an interdis- ciplinary
study, using a unique historical-demographic data base being built at the
University of Umea, Sweden. Research by group members, to be undertaken in
collaboration with historians and statisticians at Umea, will use individual-
level vital registration and household data to test propositions about infant
and child mortality, changes in the incidence and timing of life-course events
and other important demographic consequences associated with the dual processes
of industrialization and social modernization in the nineteenth century. The
Demographic Data Base, housed at the University of Umea, is one of the most
important data bases available to historical demo- graphers, currently
containing information on over 220,000 individuals, mainly for the nineteenth
century. The value of the Data Base lies particularly in the fact that it
contains a wide variety of information on named individuals as they passed
through the events of birth, marriage, death and migration; and, in addition,
stores information on those same individuals' families. The Data Base
information on individuals, drawn from Sweden's nearly unique "church
examination records," thus captures both the longitudinal and cross-sectional
features of demographic life much as modern vital registration and census
records do. In addition to analyzing the data to develop predictors of infant
and early childhood mortality, the researchers will exchange innovative computer
software designed at Carnegie Mellon University to display and manipulate
additional demographic time series data. Both the US and Swedish teams are
highly qualified to carry out this research. The results are likely to have a
substantial impact on progress in the fields of historical demography and social
history, both from a substantive and methodological point of view.