* 8912756
* Plasma and Microwave Physics of ECR Sources
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/01/1990,03/31/1994
* Michael Mauel, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 03/31/1994
* USD 193,739.00

This new research effort is to experimentally and theoretically investigate the
physics of plasmas created by electron cyclotron resonance (ECR) microwave
plasma sources. The results of this research will expand understanding of
microwave generated plasmas and may enable the design of improved sources to be
used for anisotropic, plasma reactive-ion etching or other types of plasma
processing of surfaces. The project is divided into three stages. In the first
stage, very detailed laboratory measurements will be made of a relatively small
cavity ECR source with simple cylindrical boundary conditions. A three-axis,
computer- controlled probe diagnostic will be used to generate three-dimensional
images of the applied electromagnetic field within the plasma, the plasma
density and Langmuir probe characteristics, and the plasma particle and energy
effluent. In the second stage, a precise model of the interaction between the
microwave fields and the plasma will be developed and then implemented
numerically enabling a one- to-one comparison between measurements and
experiment. The objective of the microwave-plasma model is to develop a steady-
state and ultimately self- consistent description of (1) microwave propagation
and absorption through the source cavity, and (2) plasma particle and power
balance along a magnetic field-line. Finally, in the third stage, a modified ECR
source cavity will be designed in collaboration with IBM in order to optimize
particular plasma parameters of mutual interest. This new source cavity will be
constructed and tested using the three- axis probe diagnostic, thereby,
evaluating the success of the model as a design tool. Funds for the theoretical
modeling portion of this project are being provided by IBM.