* 8912010
* Isostasy of Slow Spreading Ridges:  A Detailed Analysis of  Along Axis Variability
* GEO,OCE
* 11/01/1989,10/31/1990
* Robin Bell, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Bilal U. Haq
* 10/31/1990
* USD 44,563.00

The two techniques used to study the gravity signature of slow-spreading give
conflicting results. The admittance function technique compares observed spectra
of gravity and topography with the sprecta predicted from isostatic models. This
technique suggests that the topography at slow spreading ridges is supported by
an elastic plate 8-10 km thick. When gravity and topography profiles are
stacked, however, the admittance values increase apparently due to noise and
structural variations. The residual gravity technique incrementally strips the
observed gravity anomaly of its components calculated from simple assumptions of
crust and mantle structure; the result is impterpreted in terms of deviations
from the assumptions. This method fails to predict observed thinning of the
crust near fracture zones suggesting that the method is not sensitive to crustal
structure. The principal investigator will determine the limitations of the two
techniques and effects of along axis structural variability and the
dimensionality of the topography on the results. Both techniques will then be
applies to a dense bathymetric and gravity data set between 45 and 47 N on the
Mid-Atlantic Ridge. The following questions will be addressed in this analysis.
(1) What is the crustal structure of the axial rift valley of a slow spreading
ridge? (2) Is this crustal structure supported locally, regionally, or
dynamically? (3) Are the along axis variations in axial morophology reflected in
changes in the crustal structure and isostatic state?