* 8912617
* Graduate Education in Economics
* NONE,NONE
* 06/15/1989,05/31/1991
* W. Hansen, American Economic Association
* Standard Grant
* Lynn A. Pollnow
* 05/31/1991
* USD 120,000.00

Because of growing concern about the direction of economics research, the
economics profession, and graduate education, the American Economic Association
established the Commission on Graduate Education in Economics to study the
nature of the training of new PhDs entering the profession. Based on its
findings the Commission is to make appropriate recommendations concerning
graduate education in economics. This project completes the collection and
analysis of extensive survey data, undertakes several related special studies
and prepares a report bringing together the results of this research, and
develops whatever recommendations emerge out of the findings of this study. Four
central questions give focus to the study: 1. What is the content and structure
of graduate education in economics? 2. What are the linkages between the content
and structure of PhD programs, the nature of dissertation research currently
underway, and the post-PhD performance of recent PhDs? 3. Who is undertaking
graduate work in economics, and what are the trends over time in the flow of
entrants and new PhDs? 4. What are the prevailing views among members of the
profession and employers of new PhDs about graduate education in economics? The
information needed to answer these and other questions is being obtained through
questionnaires to graduate departments and surveys of faculty members, graduate
students, recent PhDs, employers and department chairmen. Existing information
is utilized from such organizations as the National Science Foundation, National
Research Council, the U.S. Department of Education, and the American Economic
Association. Special studies are undertaken by outside consultants. %%% This is
a timely and important study of graduate education in economics by the American
Economic Association, the leading professional association in economics. The
results of this project will provide the first systematic study of how the
economics profession educates, trains, and socializes its new entrants, whether
into academic life or into the private sector. The research could motivate and
guide educational reforms in graduate economics education. It also could become
a model for broad-based self analysis that other disciplines will use.