* 8912073
* Development of a Trace Element Clean Facility at the        University of Southern Mississippi Center for Marine Science
* BIO,DBI
* 10/15/1989,03/31/1992
* George Knauer, University of Southern Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* James L. Edwards
* 03/31/1992
* USD 140,000.00

The University of Southern Mississippi Center for Marine Science (CMS) is a
relatively young organization (less than four years old); however, in its short
existence, it has been very successful in establishing a quality research
program focussed on chemical and biological oceanography. Of central importance
in such work is the ability to follow trace elements in the environment. Trace
elements (such as the metals copper and zinc) can be nutrients and/or toxins,
but some of the previous work with such elements is now suspect because of the
failure of previous workers to follow presently accepted clean laboratory
protocols. For example, many determinations of oceanic primary production may be
unreliable due to trace-element contamination. This project will provide funds
to construct and equip a state-of-the-art trace-element facility at CMS. It will
encompass preparatory and culture laboratories as well as items of specialized
analytical equipment, including a nutrient analyzer, a high-speed centrifuge,
and a spectrophotometer. The laboratory will be maintained scrupulously clean,
and the most stringent protocols will be followed in order to insure the
integrity of trace-element research in it. The facility will allow on-site and
visiting researchers to continue and expand their involvement in such activities
as NSF's Global Ocean Flux Study. Equally important, the facility will be
located close to important coastal wetlands and will have direct access to the
Gulf of Mexico.