* 8912665
* U.S.-Austria Cooperative Research on the Electronic         Structure of Polymers with Narrow Energy Gap
* O/D,OISE
* 04/15/1990,09/30/1993
* Miklos Kertesz, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 09/30/1993
* USD 16,000.00

This award supports Professor Miklos Kertesz of Georgetown University to
collaborate in materials research with Professor Hans Kuzmany of the Institute
for Festkoerperphysik, University of Vienna. They share an interest in the
structure, electronic structure and vibrational spectroscopy of conducting
polymers, topics at the forefront of the electroactive materials field. They
have collaborated successfully on resolving the role of conjugation length in
the optical absorption of polyacetylene, the prototype conducting polymer. Now
they will address central issues relating to an important class of conducting
heterocyclic polymers derived from polythiophene. They will study two alternate
forms derived by ring fusion and by side group addition. The Austrian group will
use its experimental expertise to generate vibrational spectra that will be
interpreted by the theoretical Georgetown group, using its expertise in quantum
chemistry. The U.S. group has developed a calculational strategy for the
prediction of structure and energy gap of conjugated heterocyclic polymers. The
Viennese group has developed a strategy to obtain vibrational force constants
based on monomers in an empirical fashion. Research in the field of conducting
polymers lends itself to an interdisciplinary approach. The proposed research
joins the complementary expertise and skills of an experimental group in Austria
with a theoretical group in the U.S. Vibrational spectroscopy and quantum
chemical thoery together form an ideal combination of tools to resolve polymeric
structure. The results should provide insights into the nature of these new
electroactive polymers and to new structure-property relationships. This may
lead to the ability to control the variations of properties of these materials,
that is, to design new materials with desired optical and electronic properties.