* 8912441
* Support of a Biological Image Processing Center
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1989,02/28/1993
* Janet Oliver, University of New Mexico School of Medicine
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 02/28/1993
* USD 219,605.00

This award provides funds for the Image Processing Center at the University of
New Mexico. A previous NSF award provided funds for the purchase of equipment
that was used to set up the center. These funds will provide partial support of
staff salaries. Additional support will be obtained from institutional funds and
user fees. The facility serves a large and growing number of faculty who have
need of image processing as part of their research programs. The center consists
of three laboratories, one general purpose for the digital analysis of gels,
photographs and other visual materials, one for quantitative fluorescence
microscopy, and one for electron microscopy. Over the last twenty years, image
processing has developed from a relatively crude and cumbersome technique
suitable for only a few uses in astronomy, in the space program and in very
sophisticated electron microscopy. Image processing is now a basic tool with
significant impact on a variety of microscopic and other techniques in biology,
biophysics, biochemistry and other areas of research. Despite their widespread
acceptance, image processing techniques still demand relatively sophisticated
understanding of computation to be of maximum benefit to their users. When
coupled with the expense of the computational tools required, this means that
image processing is often beyond the intellectual and financial means of
investigators who might benefit from its use, but for whose research programs it
is not absolutely essential. The existence of central facilities funded through
a mixture of institutional funds, user fees and, where appropriate, direct
grants provides a solution to this difficult situation. Though only a few years
old, this facility is already well on the way to establishing itself as an
important ingredient of numerous research programs at the University of New
Mexico.