* 8912515
* US-Sweden Cooperative Research:  Hyperbolic Geometry and    Quasiconformal Mappings
* O/D,OISE
* 10/15/1989,03/31/1991
* Ravi Kulkarni, CUNY Queens College
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 03/31/1991
* USD 19,995.00

This award will support Dr. Ravi Kulkarni, Department of Mathematics, Queens
College, City University of New York, to spend nine months at the Mittag-Leffler
Institute in Stockholm, Sweden. This institute, which has a century-old
tradition in classical analysis, is sponsoring a special academic year on the
topic of "Hyberbolic Geometry and Quasiconformal Mappings." During this year,
Dr. Kulkarni will carry out collaborative research with two Finnish
mathematicians, Drs. Seppo Rickman and Pekka Tukia, University of Helsinki, who
will be directing this special program at the institute. Dr. Rickman has carried
out a pioneering work in quasiconformal and more generally quasiregular
mappings. Through this work it has become increasingly evident that this
"quasiregular" direction is a right generalization of the classical geometric
function theory. Notably Rickman obtained complete generalizations of the
classical Picard's theorem in higher dimensions. Recently he has also obtained
strong forms of the Nevanlinna-Ahlfors defect relations in higher dimensions.
Dr. Tukia also has a worldwide reputation due to his extensive work on the
extension properties of quasiconformal mappings and geometric features of the
classical theories of fuchsian and kleinian groups. During his stay at the
institute, Dr. Kulkarni will focus on the following: (1) the structure of moduli
spaces of Riemann surfaces (2) the study of topological aspects of fuchsian and
kleinian groups and their generalizations (3) mobius structures. The results of
this research should make a significant contribution to understanding this area
of geometric analysis.