* 8912657
* US-Switzerland Cooperative Research:  Utilization of Viral  Replicases for Selective Amplification of Foreign mRNAs     in Transgenic Plants
* O/D,OISE
* 11/15/1989,10/31/1993
* Jozef Bujarski, Northern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 10/31/1993
* USD 15,270.00

This award supports Professor Jozef J. Bujarski for cooperative research with
Profesor Jerzy Paszkowski of the Institute of Plant Sciences, Swiss Federal
Institute of Technology, Zurich. They are collaborating in developing a process
for amplifying selected gene transcripts in plant tissues so that large amounts
of particular gene products will be produced. Their novel approach is to use
replicases of plant RNA viruses for replication of other mRNAs. Their goal is to
produce model systems to investigate virus replication and interaction of
replicase with host proteins. The proposed research requires expertise in two
different areas: the molecular biology of plant viruses and plant tissue
culture. Dr. Bujarski is an expert in the molecular biology of bromoviruses and
the mechanisms involved in the replication of their genomes. The Swiss lab is a
world leader in direct gene transfer, and Dr. Paszkowski has substantial
experience in the transformation and regeneration of plants, especially tobacco.
The molecular cloning will be done primarily in the U.S. lab, and transformation
of protoplasts and regeneration of transgenic plants will be done in
Switzerland. The joining of critical complementary expertise will bring
substantial mutual benefits to the two research groups. The long term goal of
this research is to understand molecular mechanisms of expression and function
of genes in plant cells. This should make it possible to selectively amplify or
inhibit the expression of desired genes in plant cells. One of the major
problems of expression of genes in transgenic plants is obtaining sufficient
levels of mRNA. If this novel approach is successful as a way to amplify
messages in a bromovirus/tobacco system, it will be of great utility for
virtually all applications of transgenic plants and basic virology research and
will greatly assist the development of virus-based tools in plant genetic
engineering.