* 8912772
* RUI:  The Making of an Entrepreneurial University:  MIT's   Relations with Industry 1900-1975
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/1989,08/31/1990
* Henry Etzkowitz, SUNY College at Purchase
* Standard Grant
* Ronald J. Overmann
* 08/31/1990
* USD 40,000.00

In recent years, societal interest in the transfer of technology from university
to industry has made the development of appropriate linkage mechanisms to
industry a major issue at a broad range of research universities. Dr. Etzkowitz
is documenting the origins and legitimation of university-industry linkage
mechanisms such as consulting, research contracts, centers and formation of new
firms. He is investigating these issues in the context of the experience of MIT,
one of the first and certainly among the most heavily involved of research
universities which have sought industrial connections. Dr. Etzkowitz is
examining the circumstances that gave rise to linkages between MIT and industry
and is analyzing how the relationships that developed modified MIT's academic
role, changed the functions of the institution; and affected the way that
industry interacted with MIT. The integration of such activities into the
academic enterprise was often problematical even at an institution like MIT
which is ostensibly devoted to the support of industry. A series of
controversies over industry relations took place at MIT that will be the focus
of this study. The historical examination of these issues and how they were
resolved at MIT can provide a framework for understanding contemporary conflicts
over university-industry ties and provide guidelines for their resolution.