* 8912697
* Electrophilic Dinitrogen and Hydrocarbon Activation by      Fluoroalkylphosphine Complexes
* MPS,CHE
* 11/15/1989,10/31/1993
* Dean Roddick, University of Wyoming
* Continuing Grant
* Margaret A. Cavanaugh
* 10/31/1993
* USD 130,450.00

In this project supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic
Chemistry Program, Dean M. Roddick of the University of Wyoming will synthesize
transition metal complexes which contain perfluoralkyl tertiary phosphine
ligands. These ligands are electron withdrawing and will render the metal and
ancillary ligands of the complexes electron poor, which will lead to a new kind
of chemical reactivity and new approaches to the activation of coordinated
dinitrogen, for example. The coordination and reactivity of nitrogen is funda-
mental in the process of "fixing" nitrogen from the atmosphere for useful
purposes such as the production of fertilizer. The metal complexes may also have
applications as catalysts for carbon-hydrogen bond activation, which is an
important step in the conversion of hydrocarbons, especially methane, to more
useful fuels such as methanol. The ligands employed will be
1,2-bis(diperfluoroalkylphosphino) ethane, primarily the perfluoroethyl
compound, and analogous phosphines. The resulting electrophilic complexes of
these ligands will then be investigated for hydrocarbon activation and
dinitrogen coordination. One such complex formed, toluene-
(dinitrogen)molybdenum(perfluoroalkylphosphine), and various analogues, will be
examined for the electrophilic reactivity of the coordinated dinitrogen with
nucleophiles such as organo- lithium and hydride reagents. The metals to be
emphasized in these studies are chromium, molybdenum and tungsten. The syn-
thetic studies on the perfluorophosphines will continue with the aim of finding
more effective ligands.