* 8912612
* Triple Quadrupole/SID and Pentaquadrupole Mass Spectrometers
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/1989,01/31/1992
* Robert Cooks, Purdue Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Kathie L. Olsen
* 01/31/1992
* USD 250,000.00

This is a proposal to explore the applicability of the new method of surface-
induced dissociation (SID) to biological problems. In this experiment,
biological compounds will be ionized by one of the newer desorption ionization
methods and the ionized compound of interest selected in the first stage of a
tandem mass spectrometer. Collisions with a solid surface will then be used to
dissociate the selected biological compound and its structure will be deduced by
recording an SID daughter spectrum by scanning the second analyzer. The
advantages of this approach over conventional tandem mass spectrometry will be
evaluated by acquiring a triple quadrupole instrument which incorporates
capabilities for ion/surface as well as gas phase collisions. The new instrument
will replace a triple quadrupole in the PI's laboratory, providing a mass range
(4000 vs. 1000 daltons) better suited to the study of biological compounds. In
evaluating the capabilities of SID, emphasis will be placed on peptide
sequencing. A wide variety of other biologically important problems will also be
addressed including the analysis of DNA adducts with carcinogenic hydrocarbons,
structures of cell wall oligosaccharides, as well as monitoring products
generated in bioreactors. In addition to the use of SID for biological
compounds, ion/molecule reactions which are selective for particular functional
groups will be explored. The capabilities of the new instrument will be made
available to Purdue scientists who have particularly significant problems.
Utilization will be coordinated through the Campus-wide Mass Spectrometry
Facility, and interdisciplinary facility which coordinates access to and
utilization of mass spectrometers on campus.