* 8912170
* Effects of National Security Controls on Unclassified       Scientific and Technical Research and Communication
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/1989,08/31/1993
* Mark Frankel, American Association for the Advancement of Science
* Standard Grant
* Rachelle D. Hollander
* 08/31/1993
* USD 236,144.00

Issues of openness, secrecy, and sharing in the communication of scientific and
technical information are central both to scientific progress and to individual,
group and societal control. Beginning in the late 1970s, the United States
enacted export laws and administrative regulations governing the transfer of
technology to countries that could be potential adversaries. Since these laws
defined "technology transfer" to include dissemination of scientific and
technical information, policy makers applied them to presentations of
unclassified reports and attendance of certain foreign nationals at technical
meetings; institutions receiving grants signed contracts allowing agencies to
review and edit papers prior to publication. Many representatives of the
scientific and engineering communities voiced opposition to these policies,
viewing them as violative of free speech and destructive to the open environment
in which science can flourish. Little systematic research has been done on the
impacts of these controls, however. This project will provide information about
the effects of national security controls on the conduct of unclassified
scientific research and the dissemination of its results. With oversight from a
balanced advisory group, the project team will undertake a telephone survey of
2,000 active scientists and engineers, research managers, leaders in scientific
societies, and journal editors to: (1) determine the extent to which they
understand the restrictions; (2) assess how they balance values of openness with
protection of national security, and (3) document the impact of restrictions on
research practice and dissemination. The project's findings, including policy
recommendations, will be made widely available through a monograph, articles,
symposia, and press releases. This project is being undertaken by a well-
qualified team of researchers and advisors; institutional support is very good.
The research and dissemination plans are appropriate; results will provide rich
data about the impacts of secrecy policies on research. Results will be relevant
to both researchers and policymakers. Support is recommended.