* 8912044
* Brookings Panel on Economic Activity: 1990-1991, Washington,DC at the Brookings Institution
* SBE,SES
* 01/15/1990,06/30/1992
* William Brainard, Brookings Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 06/30/1992
* USD 150,027.00

The Brookings Panel on Economic Activity aims to focus macroeconomic research on
problems confronting the U.S. economy. The Panel strives to fulfill this purpose
by generating, discussing, and publishing high quality, relevant and timely
research of macroeconomic significance. Its first commitment is to produce
quality research, and the Panel's method of operation is designed with that goal
foremost in mind. Its published research undergoes a much more intensive process
of review, criticism, discussion and editing than conventional journals can
provide. In this process and in the selection of topics and authors, the
directors of the Panel are aided by the Panel Advisers, a group of experts
spanning a broad range of philosophical views and methodological preferences.
The Panel does not pursue highly abstract and purely theoretical modeling of
economic relationships which cannot be treated against data and actual
experience. But subject to that constraint, its notion of relevance is broad. It
includes research to explore fundamental characteristics of the economy and how
it responds to policy, as well as more applied research aimed at clarifying and
quantifying economic relations. In recent years, Panel research has increasingly
explored topics related to trade, exchange rates, and financial markets as well
as inflation, unemployment growth, interest rates, and the conduct of fiscal and
monetary policies. Panel topics have anticipated the recent interest in supply
effects through papers on investment, productivity, saving, labor supply, and
the effects of taxes and other policy measures on them. Funding for this
conference series should be renewed because of the high quality, timely research
it generates on macroeconomic policy. One indicator of the success of the
Brookings Panel is the impact of the journal that publishes the conference
proceedings. A recent study found that the Brookings Papers on Economic Activity
ranked second out of 108 journals in impact adjusted citations per article.
Impact adjustment was done by counting a citation in a high-ranked journal more
than a citation in a low-ranked journal. Controls were also employed for journal
size and age.