* 8912658
* Collaborative Research on a Panel Study                     of Confidentiality and Data Access
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1989,02/29/1992
* Miron Straf, National Academy of Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Lisa Martin
* 02/29/1992
* USD 118,807.00

In recent decades, uses of publicly collected data have expanded greatly. Data
on individuals from censuses, sample surveys, and administrative records are
used increasingly by those who study employment, income, education, housing,
crime, health, and other issues relevant to national policy. To a considerable
degree, these uses have been made possible and encouraged by the data providers
--the federal agencies that collect and disseminate the data. Key to the
expansion of access has been the increasingly common practice of issuing public-
use microdata files; that is, files containing individual data records with
identifiers such as name and address deleted. The availability of such files
permits researchers to design statistical analyses to fit their analytic
interests and specific requirements. The amount of detailed information that can
be made available is, however, limited by the data providers' obligation to
protect the confidentiality of data. Considerable confusion and
misunderstanding, however, often arise in discussions of access and
confidentiality because of poorly developed and often idiosyncratic definitions
of confidentiality, anonymity, privacy, and informed consent--all of which tend
to be confounded. The Committee on National Statistics of the National Academy
of Sciences and the Social Science Research Council are jointly convening a
panel of experts to study these issues and to provide a set of recommendations
to federal agencies for better handling issues relating to data access and
confidentiality. The purpose of the panel is to advise the research community
and providers of data on how access may be improved with appropriate safeguards
to preserve confidentiality and without undue risk of adverse effects on public
cooperation. The scope of the investigation principally focuses on statistical
data about people. The panel plans also to address confidentiality of data from
business establishments and other legal entities, to the extent that similar
questions are raised about such data. Special workshops will be convened on
disclosure limitation techniques and informed consent within a broader
consideration of legal, ethical, and science policy issues.