* 8912514
* The Ecology and Conservation of Lion-Tailed Macaques in a   South Indian Rainforest, A Cooperative Project at Ohio StateUniversity, award in U.S. and Indian Currencies
* NONE,NONE
* 11/15/1989,10/31/1990
* Frank Poirier, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 10/31/1990
* USD 12,110.00

ABSTRACT NARRATIVE Description: This proposal supports the collaboration of Dr.
Frank E. Poirier, Ohio State University in a National Science Foundation
dissertation research project with Ms. Shaily A. Menon an approved PhD candidate
at Ohio State University. The Wildlife Institute of India at New Forest, Dehra
Dun, directed by Dr. H.S. Panwar, has stated his Institute will collaborate in
this research effort by giving Ms. Menon professional guidance from faculty
members, assistance in obtaining the necessary permissions required in the
pursuit of her research and providing library and computer facilities during the
progress of her research. The proposed research is to be conducted in two parts.
The first will be to test the hypotheses about habitat selection by the lion-
tailed macaque, Macaca silenus, an endangered species of ______________ monkeys.
The second part of the study will use the predicitive capabilities of Geographic
Information System to suggest conservation strategies for a newly established
wild-game preserve in India. The Wildlife Institute will carry out follow-up
research and implement wildlife management plans suggested by the study. Scope:
This doctoral dissertation research, by a female Indian national in South Indian
rain forests with the cooperation of the premier wildlife organization in India,
into the scientific ways and means to aid, protect an endangered species, has
the possibilities, if successfully concluded, to overshadow difficulties that
have traditionally hampered U.S. researchers conducting anthropological research
in India, in addition to possibly providing the basis for further research and
management prospectives toward possibly alleviating the environmental conditions
that have brought a primate species to be declared endangered. This proposal
does meet the objectives of the Science in Developing Countries Program to
provide incremental support to dissertation improvement research in the
furtherance of the exchange of scientific knowledge and in making contributions
to the scientific infrastructure of a developing country.