* 8912841
* High-Resolution Imaging of Solar Activity
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/1989,02/29/1992
* Richard Shine, Lockheed Missiles and Space Company Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Sherry O. Farwell
* 02/29/1992
* USD 202,900.00

Studies of solar activity and solar flares are funded by this grant during the
current solar maximum (MAX '91) using observations to be obtained at the Swedish
Solar Observatory (SSO) on LaPalma in the Canary Islands. These data will allow
the study of magnetic fields, velocities, and energy release down to 200 km
scales. The goal is to further our understanding of solar flares and active
regions by studying the evolution of the magnetic field and the details of the
energy release process at the highest possible spatial resolution. The data will
be collected initially using an existing ultra-narrowband tunable filter imaging
system which has been developed for the Solar Optical Universal Polarimeter
(SOUP) and the Orbiting Solar Laboratory (OSL). After the SOUP filter becomes
committed to the model will be left at the SSO for the duration of the Solar
Maximum observations. The 1024 x 1024 pixel CCD camera and data system have been
developed by the OSL project and Lockheed Independent Research Funds. Based on
an observing run made at the SSO in the Fall of 1988, it is expected that these
observations will provide long sequences of at least several hours with spatial
resolution between 200 and 300 km. This grant will support observations in 1989,
1990 and 1991, a one man-year level of data analysis per year, and some minor
equipment specific to this effort. Additional support for graduate students and
visiting scientists involved in the data analysis will come from Lockheed
Independent Research funds. Most of the equipment will be borrowed from other
programs or provided by Lockheed. The primary goal of these observations is to
understand how magnetic flux emerges, evolves, combines, and disappears down to
200 km scales. The development of field configurations and sheared magnetic
structures in active regions will be tracked with measurements of magnetic
fields, horizontal and vertical flows, and chromospheric structures in active
regions will be tracked with measurements of magnetic fields, horizontal and
vertical flows, and chromospheric structures. These will permit more accurate
estimates of the magnetic energy buildup in complex active regions. Energy
release in flares, micro-flares, and non-explosive magnetic events will be
observed in detail. The causes for many of these phenomena may become apparent
with observations of very high resolution.//