* 8912795
* US-West Germany Cooperative Research On Automating Robotic  Assembly Workplace Planning
* O/D,OISE
* 01/15/1990,12/31/1990
* Richard Francis, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 12/31/1990
* USD 5,610.00

This award supports Professors Richard L. Francis and Sencer Yeralan of the
University of Florida for collaborative research in industrial engineering with
Professor Horst W. Hamacher of the Department of Mathematics, University of
Kaiserslautern, Federal Republic of Germany. The objective of their
collaboration is to develop algorithms and software to help implement the
automation of robotic assembly workplace planning. Professors Francis and
Yeralan will be involved with the engineering aspects of the project, including
some computer modeling and PC graphics, contacts with industry, expertise on
robots and some theoretical analysis. Professor Hamacher will be involved with
combinatorial mathematical modeling of the robotic operations and related
computer implementation of algorithms. In electronic manufacturing, many kinds
of printed circuit boards have parts to be inserted by a robot, and the
insertions can be made in any sequence. Likewise, one is free to choose
locations of bins or feeders to contain the parts. The choice of assembly
sequence and the location of the bins can greatly affect the total assembly time
and thus the manufacturing productivity. Using ideas in combinatorics and
location theory, these investigators will develop algorithms to determine a best
assembly sequence and best bin locations. The algorithms will be implemented
with software operable on a PC. The collaborators will also examine related
problems where set-up times are dominant, and problems involving the
distribution of parts to bins. The results are expected to be applicable in a
variety of manufacturing contexts involving robots.