* 8912527
* US-Sweden Cooperative Research:  Mathematical Studies of    Dopamine and Microdialysis
* O/D,OISE
* 01/15/1990,12/31/1992
* Joseph Justice, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 12/31/1992
* USD 13,650.00

This award will support collaborative research between Dr. Joseph Justice, Emory
University, and Dr. Urban Ungerstadt, Department of Pharmacology, Karolinska
Institute, Stockholm, Sweden. The objective of the research is to investigate
dopamine neurochemistry and to better characterize microdialysis, a new method
of monitoring the chemistry of dopamine and other neuro-transmitters,
metabolites and related compounds. The two laboratories cooperating in this
project are the leading ones involved in the rapidly emerging technique of in
vivo dialysis. This technique has already been shown to be useful to examine the
chemical composition of the extracellular fluid of the brain. The proposed
research will continue the investigation of the effect of dialysis on the
surrounding tissue, investigate ways to relate the chemical information obtained
to the synaptic region, and specifically examine the role of uptake of
catechola- mines in dopaminergic neurons. The project will involve mathema-
tical modeling of the dopaminergic nerve terminal. New data from the two
laboratories will be incorporated into the model. Uptake and inhibition of
uptake will be a particular focus of effort. In addition, the microdialysis
sampling methodology in use in both laboratories to study dopamine will be
characterized. The charac- terization will consist of a mathematical analysis of
the diffusion profiles created during sampling of the extracellular fluid. This
will provide important new information about a technique that is being
increasingly used in many laboratories in the United States and Europe.