* 8912137
* Implementation of the Convention on the Regulation of       Antarctic Mineral Resources Activities
* O/D,OPP
* 06/01/1989,09/30/1990
* Robert Craig, Keystone Center
* Standard Grant
* Guy  G. Guthridge
* 09/30/1990
* USD 100,409.00

In June 1988, 20 nations (including the USA) negotiated and signed a Convention
on the Regulation of Antarctic Mineral Resource Activities. Each nation is now
considering ratification of the convention. If ratified by 16 of the 20 signing
nations, the convention will govern exploration for and exploitation of
antarctic minerals. Currently no mechanism is in place to govern such
activities. In the USA, ratification requires consent by a two-thirds vote in
the Senate and approval by the President. The proposal is to design and conduct
a workshop at the Keystone Center concerning the implementation of the
convention. The workshop will examine the convention in light of its potential
ratification and implementation in the United States. The dialog will enable
interested groups to interact with involved Federal agencies and to discuss the
impacts of implementation. Included will be evaluation of the likelihood of
future mineral development in Antarctica, assessment of the potential
difficulties and environmental concerns related to antarctic mineral resource
development, and identification of possible new responsibilities for Federal
agencies. The goal will be to promote communication and information exchange
between interested groups and Federal agencies as the agencies begin to consider
strategies to implement the minerals regime. The Keystone Center will prepare
and distribute a report. A steering committee shall set the agenda for the
workshop and decide upon the participants. The steering committee shall be made
up of eight people consisting of four Federal agency employees representing
agencies involved in the development of the convention and/or implementation
legislation and four non-Federal persons representing groups having interests in
the outcome of any Federal legislation concerning the convention. The four
Federal agencies represented shall be National Science Foundation, Department of
State, Department of Interior (Minerals Management Service) and Department of
Commerce (NOAA). The eight committee members will be develop the agenda and list
of invitees to the workshop on a consensus basis. The Keystone Center, a
nonprofit organization founded in 1975, has a proved record of providing neutral
fora for policy formulation in the areas of natural resources, science,
technology, and health. Robert W. Craig, its founder and president, manages its
two major programs in science and public policy and science school development.
His background also includes industrial design and planning, humanistic studies,
and leadership of expeditions to some of the world's highest mountains.
Recently, he served on the National Science Foundation's U.S. Antarctic Program
Safety Review Panel. He has a master's degree in philosophy. Mr. Craig will
direct the workshop. Michael T. Lesnick conducts training in conflict management
and has taught natural resource conflict management theory. He holds a Ph.D. in
natural resource policy and environmental dispute resolution. Dr. Lesnick will
be co-director of the workshop.