* 8912871
* Status Inconsistency and Political Attitudes Revisited:     The Case of Middle-Class Blacks
* EHR,HRD
* 07/15/1989,10/31/1990
* Theodore Davis, Jr., University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* None
* 10/31/1990
* USD 12,000.00

Middle class Blacks are often classified as status inconsistents because their
racial status is lower than their socioeconomic status. It is asserted that
individuals with social status imbalances resolve their resulting psychological
stress and tension through liberal political behavior. This research project is
to provide support for this assertion by examining the political attitudes of
middle class Blacks relative to those of middle class whites and lower class
Blacks. This project will contribute to this area of study by showing that there
are times when status inconsistents resolve the psychological stress and tension
produced the adding cognition, other times by altering cognition, and still
other times by changing cognition. The PI hopes to show that there are times
when class or ethnicity plays a major role in the formulation of middle class
Black's political attitudes, but that does not mean that status inconsistency is
not a factor in the formation of their public opinion. This PI believes that
this was just another way of reducing the stress and tension of the status
imbalance. The research design for this project will consist of survey and data
analysis. A questionnaire will be designed to solicit individual response to a
number of social, political and economic questions. The subjects will be
residents of new Castle Country, Delaware.