* 8912095
* Making Sense of Science
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/1989,07/31/1990
* Andrew Pickering, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Ronald J. Overmann
* 07/31/1990
* USD 40,041.00

Dr. Pickering is exploring a pragmatist understanding of scientific knowledge
and practice, an understanding that recognizes the orientation of science to
technical goals and that explores the implications of this recognition. The
research will involve detailed case studies of important episodes in the history
of science. Two such studies already exist: a study of Luis Alverez's decision
to build a large hydrogen bubble chamber and a study of Giacomo Morpurgo's
search for fractional charges on matter--quarks. He is already engaged in a
third dealing with William Rowan Hamilton's extension of complex-number theory
from number pairs to triplets leading eventually to his "quaternions." Under
this research grant, he will complete this third study and examine two more:
those of Lavoisier and Faraday. Besides the case studies, Dr. Pickering will
draw out the implications of the pragmatist analysis for central topics in
philosophy, sociology and historiography of science. His analysis will
acknowledge a trans-situational structure of scientific practice, thus setting
itself off from the ethnomethodological insistence on the radically situated
nature of practice, while at the same time it draws attention to the open-
endedness and uncertainty of science, thus setting itself off from 'closed'
explications of science in terms of method, reason or social interests. The
pragmatist approach cuts across traditional disciplinary approaches to science
and promises to shed new light on topics such as rationality, realism,
incommensurability and the social construction of science. It offers a new and
significant perspective on what the world and human practice in it is like.