* 8912915
* Computers in Mineral Industry Planning, Engineering and     Management, Indo-U.S. Workshop, January 1991, Calcutta,     India, Group Travel Award in U.S. and Indian Currencies
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/1990,02/28/1993
* Raja Ramani, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 02/28/1993
* USD 74,094.00

Description: This project supports participation of 15 U.S. scientists in a
joint Indo-U.S. Workshop on computer in mineral industry planning, engineering
and management planned for January 1991 in Calcutta, India. The Indian
coordinator is Dr. D. K. Sinha, Director, Indian School of Mines, Dhanbad,
India. The activities will include a three-day seminar, visits to mining
operations and mining management/engineering offices in India, to be followed by
a two-day round table discussions on emerging research needs. The seminar will
include presentations on recent developments in mineral industry, and education
and training of engineers and managers. In the round table, joint Indo-U.S.
research projects will be outlined for future collaboration. Topics to be
discussed will include: automated data acquisition in mineral exploration,
statistical modeling for quality estimates of mineral resources and reserves;
factors affecting mine planning, development and operation; economic and risk
analysis aspects of mining; mineral processing; maintenance and scheduling;
remote control, automation, robotics and artificial intelligence systems; and
applications of national data bases for safety and health, productivity and
regional and national planning. Scope: This workshop brings U.S. and Indian
scientists and engineers to discuss an area of importance to both countries. The
idea of the workshop was recommended by the Indo-U.S. subcommission on Science
and Technology in its most recent meeting (November 1987). The project is likely
to enhance future collaboration between academic and industrial organizations in
the two countries and to allow for the exchange of information developed
independently in India and the U.S.