* 8912968
* U.S.-Western Europe Cooperative Science: The Geometric Phase in Quantum Mechanics
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/1989,02/28/1991
* Jeeva Anandan, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 02/28/1991
* USD 19,374.00

This award will support Dr. Jeeva Anandan to carry out collaborative research in
theoretical physics with two European scientists: Professor Leo Stodolsky, Max
Planck Institute for Physics and Astrophysics, Munich, Federal Republic of
Germany and Professor Garry Gibbons, Department of Applied Mathematics and
Theoretical Physics, University of Cambridge, England. The importance of
geometric ideas in physics cannot be over emphasized. The geometrical
reformulation of special relativity by Minkowski, for example, enabled Einstein
to create a new relativistic theory of gravitation, namely general relativity.
Recently, a new geometric concept was discovered in quantum theory, which is
independent of space-time or gauge field geometries and depends on the Hilbert
space inner product only. This began with the discovery of a nonintegrable phase
factor by Berry. Although hundreds of papers have been written on the geometric
phase, since the pioneering work of Berry, there are still a number of deep
fundamental unanswered questions, which Dr. Anandan proposals to investigate
during the period of proposed research. These questions concern 1) covariant
formulation of the geometric phase 2) formulation in the Heisenberg picture 3)
invariant formulation of the geometric phase 4) experimental observation of the
Fubini-Study metric 5) geometric phase for equations that are second order in
time 6) the classical analog of the non abelian geometric phase 7) connection to
the gravitational phase and 8) physical applications. At the Max Planck
Institute for Physics and Astrophysics, Dr. Anandan will work with Dr. Stodolsky
on both the geometric phase and on a new relativistic gravitational effect on
charged particle interferometry. At Cambridge University he will continue to
study with Dr. Gibbons the non adiabatic geometric phase. The results of this
research should make an important contribution to the understanding of the
geometric phase in quantum mechanics.