* 8912923
* Request for Support to Equip a Center for Image and Motion  Analysis at the University of Texas Marine Science          Institute, Port Aransas, TX
* BIO,DBI
* 10/15/1989,03/31/1992
* Ronald Benner, University of Texas Marine Science Institute of Port Aransas
* Standard Grant
* James L. Edwards
* 03/31/1992
* USD 42,748.00

The Marine Science Institute of the University of Texas, with continuous use by
resident research staff since 1946, is the oldest marine laboratory on the Texas
Gulf Coast. The Institute has excellent facilities, and eight new research staff
have been hired in the past three years. This project will provide funds for two
essential pieces of multi-user equipment currently lacking at the site: an image
analysis sytem and an inverted epifluorescence microscope. These items are
needed by scientists studying marine bacteria, phytoplankton, zooplankton and
ichthyoplankton to help characterize field-collected samples to estimate
biomass, productivity, trophic relationships and species diversity. Computer
enhanced video images provide several improvements to traditional enumeration
and characterization of samples, with the added advantages of greater accuracy
and faster processing. Image analysis in combination with fluorescence
microscopy and appropriate stains or labelled probes can be used to rapidly
characterize size, trophic level, taxonomy and physiology of marine microbes.
The Institute will house the equipment in a newly created center for image and
motion analysis. The center will provide a unique opportunity for both visiting
investigators and resident staff to characterize and analyze preserved samples
or prepared slides using image analysis, or to study the behavior of living
organisms using motion analysis.