* 8912776
* U.S.-Austria Cooperative Research on Virtual Shared Memory  for Distributed-Memory Machines (Computer Science)
* O/D,OISE
* 04/15/1990,10/31/1993
* Ken Kennedy, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 10/31/1993
* USD 16,800.00

This award supports Professor Ken Kennedy and others in his group at Rice
University to maintain collaboration in computer science research with Professor
Hans Zima now of the University of Vienna. The Rice University team has been
working for several years on a programming environment for distributed-memory
machines as part of the "ParaScope" project. Simultaneously, Professor Zima has
been building a similar static data partitioning system, called SUPERB, for the
SUPRENUM project. During a sabbatical visit at Rice, the collaborators developed
an enhanced system that moves toward dynamic partititioning that increases
adaptability. Their design uses annotations to a FORTRAN program written in a
data partitioning language. The user provides the annotation. The underlying
compilation system then translates the FORTRAN program to a distributed memory
program that employs the data assignment strategy specified by the annotations.
Lack of efficient compiling programs for parallel and distributed hardware
stands in the way of effective use of the new distributed computing resources by
scientists in many disciplines. The principal research of the Rice group in this
area is supported by an NSF grant to a Science and Technology Center there.
Maintaining active collaboration with Professor Zima, now that he has returned
to Europe, will be an inexpensive and valuable enhancement to the Texas-based
work.