* 8912928
* Products and Characteristics of Ozone Induced Oxidative     Coupling of Phenols and Aromatic Amines in Water
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/1989,02/29/1992
* Joseph Gould, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Edward H. Bryan
* 02/29/1992
* USD 148,008.00

This is an award to support research to determine the nature of chemical
compounds that are produced when ozone is used to treat water that contains
phenols and aromatic amines. Ozone reacts with aromatic organic compounds,
rapidly cleaving the ring double bonds to yield non-aromatic products that
typically are of lower toxicity and more biodegradable than the precursors. In
this project, a series of studies are planned that will characterize the
products formed during ozonation under conditions that simulate its use for
treatment of water that has been polluted with phenolic compounds. Analytical
methods that will be used to characterize the products of ozonation include use
of gas chromatography/mass spectroscopy for volatile compounds of low molecular
weight and adaptive methods using mass spectroscopy for non-volatile compounds
of high molecular weight. Work will include determination of the toxicity of
intermediate and final compounds formed by use of their impact on exertion of
the biochemical oxygen demand and by their toxicity toward Daphnia Magna. Use of
ozone for total oxidation of organic water pollutants is generally not cost-
effective, however its use to convert toxic compounds of limited
biodegradability into those which are readily biodegradable may be an effective
way of obtaining the advantages that accrue to use of ozone in treatment of
water and wastewater.