* 8912726
* Composites for Aerospace Applications, Indo-U.S. Workshop,  Bangalore, India, December 1989, Group Travel Award in      Indian and U.S. Currency
* O/D,OISE
* 11/01/1989,10/31/1990
* Junuthula Reddy, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 10/31/1990
* USD 32,500.00

ABSTRACT NARRATIVE Description: This proposal requests funding for the travel
and subsistence of ten U.S. scientists to a one-week U.S - Indian Workshop on
Composites for Aerospace Applications to be held at the Indian Institute of
Science in Bangalore, India in December,1989. The cooperating principal
investigators are Dr. J.N. Reddy of VPI and Professor A.V. Krishna Murty of the
Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore. Dr. Murty is the initiating scientist in
India. Upon his receipt of approval from his government to organize a conference
in this scientific field, Dr. Murty invited Dr. Reddy to coordinate and lead the
U.S. delegation. The list of invited U.S. participants was proposed by Dr. Murty
and was included in his proposal submitted to the cognizant Indian government
agency, the Department of Science and Technology. The workshop will provide
opportunity for about thirty papers to be delivered and discussed. The papers
will be published in book form as a state-of-the-art work on the various topics
on composite materials and structures and their application to aerospace
structures. Scope: The purpose of the workshop is to foster a detailed exchange
of recent advances related to the development of novel composite systems,
thermo-mechanical models, computational schemes and design methodologies for
advanced composite materials for space applications. The workshop will bring
together scientific research scientists from the universities and private
institutions of the two countries to work together in the areas of composite
material systems and structures. The direct and rapid exchange of information,
by individuals from both the public and private sectors of the two countries, in
the areas material science, mechanics, analytical modeling, advanced techniques
and software for use in practical designs, and fabrication and manufacturing
will provide a cross-disciplinary exposure of information that meets a major
objective of the U.S. - India Cooperative Science Program. The workshop is also
intended to assist in the concept formulation of future collaborative research
proposals.