* 8912110
* Equipment Acquisitions in Support of Research at the        Alabama Marine Environmental Sciences Consortium
* NONE,NONE
* 10/15/1989,03/31/1992
* Kenneth Heck, Marine Environmental Sciences Consortium
* Standard Grant
* James L. Edwards
* 03/31/1992
* USD 31,863.00

The Marine Environmental Sciences Consortium (MESC) is Alabama's maine science
research and education center. Founded in 1971, MESC includes 21 colleges and
universities and is part of the state's system of higher education. Teaching and
research activities of the MESC take place principally at the Dauphin Island Sea
Lab (DISL), a 36 acre campus located on Dauphin Island, 30 miles south of
Mobile, Alabama. Here resident MESC faculty, scientists from MESC member schools
and visiting investigators carry out individual and cooperative research
efforts. Research activities at the MESC are currently centered on understanding
(1) the relative importance of salt marsh, seagrass and unvegetated bottom
habitats to the production of fishes and invertebrates in nearshore waters in
the northern Gulf of Mexico, and on (2) exchanges of energy between estuaries
and the open Gulf waters, with special attention given to understanding the
influence of estuarine waters on the productivity of offshore "hard bottom"
fishing grounds. To further enhance the growing research program at the MESC and
to stimulate additional interactions with visiting scientists, this project
provides funds for the purchase of a Carbon/Nitrogen/Sulfur (CNS) analyzer, a
high-speed refrigerated centrifuge, and high capacity ultra-low temperature
freezer. These items are essential to the continued growth of the process-
oriented component of the MESC research program. The CNS analyzer is
indispensable for measuring the total carbon, nitrogen and sulfur composition of
particulate organic matter. The addition of CNS capabilities will facilitate the
development of projects aimed at understanding the relative importance of
natural inorganic and organic nutrient additions to estuaries compared with
those caused by man's activities. The addition of the refrigerated centrifuge
and ultra-low freezer will make possible several pending research projects
designed to examine chemically-mediated responses during larval recruitment and
feeding in estuarine and near-coastal environments.