* 8912618
* Query Optimization in Object-Oriented Database Management   Systems with Encapsulated Behavior
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/1989,02/29/1992
* Goetz Graefe, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 02/29/1992
* USD 97,011.00

Object-oriented database systems with behavioral encapsulation support powerful
data abstractions but are generally slow. Conventional database systems provide
efficient query processing, but limited data modeling facilities. This research
project seeks new techniques that combine the power of abstract data types with
database optimization technology into a semantically powerful and efficient
query and command processing system. If behavior is encapsulated, a central
query optimizer cannot reason about semantics, behavior, and cost over an entire
query. The key to performing optimization of queries over encapsulated types is
in revealing such information to a trusted system component, and in ensuring
that the behavior will not change between the points of revelation and
evaluation. Since syntactic analysis of type and behavior definition may yield
only limited performance improvement, the type implementor will be able to
reveal other relevant information. The project includes the definition of an
object-oriented data language, an algebraic query language that permits
optimization, a revealing mechanism, an extensible optimizer, and a software
prototype to validate the investigated concepts and ideas. The goal of the
research is to develop a key technique that will allow object-oriented database
systems with encapsulated behavior to attain performance comparable to
extensible relational systems, thus making such systems viable alternatives for
managing large data volumes.