* 8912136
* Technical Support for the U.S. Antarctic Program            Environmental Review
* O/D,OPP
* 07/15/1989,09/30/1995
* Robert Reed, Oak Ridge National Laboratory
* Contract Interagency Agreement
* Robert Cunningham
* 09/30/1995
* USD 1,313,382.00

The proposed award is an interagency agreement between the NSF and the
Department of Energy for the support of the Division of Polar Program's
environmental reporting responsibilities by the Oak Ridge National Laboratory
(ORNL). Included within those responsibilities are the following tasks which
will be performed for the NSF by ORNL: 1) Preparation of Supplemental
Programmatic Environmental Impact Statement for the U.S. Antarctic Program. This
comprehensive supplemental EIS will update and make current the programmatic EIS
published in 1980. 2) Preparation of Environmental Assessments or other
appropriate environmental reviews when necessary. If it is determined from the
assessment that an Environmental Impact Statement is necessary that work will
also be done by ORNL. 3) Preparation of annual U.S. Antarctic Program pollution
control compliance plan reports for inclusion in NSF pollution control
compliance plans as described by Executive Order 12088. These reports will be
drafted and revised in consultation with NSF. The initial amount of $300,000
provides funds to begin all three tasks in Fiscal Year 1989, but is reduced from
the requested level to account for the limited time remaining before the end of
the fiscal year.