* 8912975
* Critical Zones in Global Environmental Change
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1989,02/28/1991
* Robert Mitchell, Clark University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 02/28/1991
* USD 184,376.00

The ways in which human activities are altering natural processes of
environmental change and the impacts of that change on humans are not evenly
distributed across the globe. Because of special combinations of human and
natural attributes, some locales are especially prone toward accelerated
processes of change induced by human-environmental interactions. This project
will begin the establishment of a methodological framework for the systematic,
comparative study of human-environmental interactions in five parts of the world
where the situation has been assessed as especially critical -- the Mexico
Basin, part of the Amazon basin, the North Sea, the Aral Sea, and a part of the
Himalayas. Case studies will be undertaken in each of these locales to identify
and evaluate the human forces that are altering natural processes of
environmental change, the growing societal awareness of these impacts, and the
nature of societal responses to those changes. Common research approaches will
be used in all case studies to ensure comparability of results. The work will be
coordinated by a central research team of scholars with complementary skills and
by an international board of advisors, but much of the research will be
conducted by scholars based in and familiar with each of study areas. The
research also will be coordinated with related activities of study groups of the
International Geographic Union. This research will lay the groundwork for an
important series of intensive, comparative case studies of human-environmental
interaction in five critical parts of the world. The research beginning in this
phase of the analysis and likely to continue in future years will provide
significant new insights about human and natural processes in the study areas
themselves, but more importantly, the research will provide generalizable
knowledge about global patterns and processes of human impacts on and responses
to natural environmental change. The study will also establish a framework for
replication in other locales in order to further increase understandings about
this critical topic.