* 8912957
* US-Austria Cooperative Research:  Comparison of Photons-,   Electron-, and Ion-Induced Desorption from Surfaces
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/1990,06/30/1993
* Norman Tolk, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 06/30/1993
* USD 15,850.00

This award supports Professors Norman Tolk and Royal Albridge, Jr., of
Vanderbilt University to continue their productive collaboration in experimental
surface physics with Professors Wolfgang Husinsky and Gerhard Betz of the
Institute of General Physics of the Technical University of Vienna, Austria.
They are carrying out cooperative investigations of the microscopic electronic
mechanisms responsible for the final states of particles which are emitted from
surfaces due to bombardment of photons, electrons and ions. Their goal is to
gain basic understanding of the way in which energy from directed beams may be
absorbed, electronically localized and ultimately transformed at various
surfaces into internal and kinetic energies of the emitted particle. The
Viennese group is a world leader in the detection and characteri- zation of
sputtered particles produced by ion-surface collisions using optical techniques,
in particular, laser-induced fluorescence. The Vanderbilt group has been
studying the strictly electronic desorption processes associated with electron
and UV photon bombardment of solid surfaces. Through collaboration, they have
demonstrated that it is possible using laser-induced fluorescence techniques to
identify specific excitonic and defect channels through which incident beam
energy flows as it breaks bonds in the surface and near-surface bulk in pure
crystalline materials. They have also begun studies of the effect of thin
adsorbed layers on desorption induced by electronic transitions.