* 8912831
* Liquid Jet Impingement Cooling of Strip Metals
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/1989,08/31/1993
* Frank Incropera, Purdue Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* MILTON J LINEVSKY
* 08/31/1993
* USD 299,974.00

A major objective of the proposed investigation is to address fundamental issues
related to the cooling of high temperature, high heat flux surfaces by liquid
jet impingement. Such issues concern the delineation of regions associated with
single phase forced convections, forced convection nucleate boiling, and film
boiling on a heated plate exposed to a single jet or an array of jets.
Transitions from one region to another are strongly influenced by jet
hydrodynamic condition (turbulence intensity and velocity profile), by the
transition from a laminar to turbulent boundary layer for flow on the plate, and
by the interactions of such flows for an array of jets. Photography will be used
to identify nucleate, transition and film boiling, while local heat transfer
measurements will be used to determine convection coefficients in single and
two-phase flow regimes. Parameters to be studied include hydrodynamic and
geometrical features of the jet and jet arrays, plate speed and surface
conditions, and the presence of noncondensibles in the liquid. Where possible
transition and convection heat transfer coefficient data will be correlated. In
an attempt to predict heat transfer data for the single phase forced convection
and film boiling regions, finite-difference and integral solutions of the
conservation equations will be developed. To assess the applicability of basic
results inferred from laboratory studies, flow visualization experiments will
also be performed at Inland Steel Corporation's hot rolling mill, and scaling
considerations will be addressed by contrasting results obtained in the
laboratory and the mill. A model which uses laboratory generated data to predict
the thermal response of strip steel under mill conditions will be developed, and
predictions will be compared with available data. In recent years, cooling by
means of low turbulence, liquid jets has become widely used in the processing of
primary metals such as steel and aluminum. However, currently the knowledge base
required to support the establishment of optimal design and operating conditions
is limited, and recourse must be made to trial-and-error procedures. In a single
application, cooling of hot metals simultaneously involve regions of single
phase forced convection, forced convection nucleate boiling, and film boiling,
and the attendant temperature history of the metal strongly influences its final
mechnical and metallurical properties. To develop tools for establishing optimal
design and operating conditions, it is essential that flow and heat transfer
processes associated with jet impingement be well understood. This research
program should provide such a knowledge base.