* 8912993
* Sex Determination and Dosage Compensation, Conference       and Workshop, October 31-November 3, 1989, Bangalore, India,Group Travel Award in U.S. and Indian Currencies
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/1989,08/15/1989
* Stanley Gartler, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 08/15/1989
* USD 40,143.00

Description: This project supports travel of twelve U.S. scientists to the
International Conference and Workshop on Sex Determiantion and Dosage
Compensation, to be held in Bangalore, India, between October 31 and November 3,
1989. The Indian organizer is Dr. H. Sharat Chandra, Chairman, Microbiology and
Cell Biology Department at the Indian Institute of Science (IISc), Bangalore.
Ten speakers from Western Europe, and 35 senior scientists from India are also
expected to participate, in addition to approximately 50 graduate students from
Indian Institutes. Six major topics are to be covered: Genes controlling early
events in sex determination; dosage compensation; genes controlling later events
in sex determination; chromosones and sex; imprinting; and evolution of sex
determination and dosage compensation. The participants will exchange
information on these topics as they apply to the Drosophila and to mammals.
Scope: The U.S. and Indian organizers are eminent scientists in the field of
genetics and are from institutes with excellent reputations. IISc has one of the
oldest biochemistry departments in the world, and has some 120 graduate students
in life sciences. A conference on a related topic organized at the IISc in
Bangalore in 1981 was acclaimed as being very successful and was reported on in
Nature (1982). This meeting is cosponsored by the Indian National Science
Academy, and the Department of Atomic Energy of the Government of India in
addition to the IISc. The meeting is likely to lead to enhanced collaboration,
in the fields of genetic and microbiology, between U.S. and Indian scientists,
and to provide for exchange of information in this rapidly changing area of
science.