* 8912637
* US-Western Europe Regional Workshop on Technological        Innovation in Construction; April, 1990; Zurich,            Switzerland
* O/D,OISE
* 01/15/1990,06/30/1991
* Daniel Halpin, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 06/30/1991
* USD 13,750.00

This award supports the participation of approximately ten U.S. engineers in an
international workshop on technological innovation in construction, to be held
in Zurich, Switzerland in April, 1990. The meeting is coorganized by Professor
D. W. Halpin of the Construc- tion Engineering Department of Purdue University
and Professor Robert Fechtig, head of the Construction Division of the ETH in
Zurich. Professor Halpin edited a report for the Office of Technology Assessment
on the competition between countries in the International Architecture,
Engineering and Construction market. This report demonstrated that there are
philosophical differences in how construction is viewed both from a market
structure perspective and from a market penetration point of view, and that this
may explain why the U.S. is lagging behind in competitive performance. U.S.
firms consider construction to be a service oriented industry in which the
designer and construction contractor play the role of "technology broker."
European and Japanese contractors see construction as both a product and service
oriented activity in which the firm not only delivers the technology but is the
developer of the technology. The key issues confronting the international
construction industry today are the utilization of new technologies in the
design and production of constructed facilities, and the change of
organizational and contractual structures to be more responsive to international
markets. The proposed workshop will address these issues by providing a forum
for international experience transfer in advancing construction technology and
increasing the understanding of mechanisms for technological innovation in
construction. The conclusions and recommendations of the meeting will be widely
disseminated throughout the U.S. through the International Construction Task
Force of the Construction Industry Institute.