* 8912631
* US-Austria Cooperative Research:  Analysis of Data          Structures for Digital Search
* O/D,OISE
* 02/01/1990,07/31/1993
* Wojciech Szpankowski, Purdue Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 07/31/1993
* USD 9,332.00

This award supports Dr. Wojciech Szpankowski of Purdue University to collaborate
in computer science research with Drs. Peter Kirschenhofer and Helmut Prodinger
of the Department of Algebra and Discrete Mathematics of the Technical
University of Vienna. They are developing theoretical methods for the analysis
of algorithms and data structures, drawing from several areas of applied
mathematics. They plan to apply these methods to an in-depth analysis of the
average case behavior of digital search algorithms. Collaboration is necessary
because the problems they want to attack require diverse expertise in several
fields of mathematics. The primary responsibilities of the Austrian
collaborators in this project involve their expertise in asymptotic
approximation and combinatorial analysis, while Dr. Szpankowski contributes
expertise in stochastic modelling and general problem formulation. The analysis
of algorithms and data structures is a rapidly developing area in theoretical
computer science with a strong impact on practical problems. The cost of
performance of algorithms, including such factors as the storage requirements of
data structures and the execution time of certain subroutines, is usually
described in terms of worst case behavior and average case behavior. Digital
tree search is one of the main approaches to data storage and retrieval. The
proposed research on average case behavior of digital search trees will
contribute to improved choice and design of data structures and the new
analytical techniques will have relevance in other areas.