* 8912366
* Synthesis and Characterization of Model Oxides and Mixed    Metal Oxides
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/1990,06/30/1993
* Abhaya Datye, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* Farley Fisher
* 06/30/1993
* USD 244,000.00

"Model" oxides are nonporous, submicron-sized particles with regular shapes
(spheres or cubes) prepared by metal evaporation. They are low-surface-area
analogs to the high- surface-area oxides used as heterogeneous catalysts or
catalyst supports. The simpler geometry of the model oxide powders permits
better characterization of bulk and surface structures. In this work, the
structure and catalytic reactivity of model alumina powders are compared to
those of the high-surface-area alumina used industrially. Since defects are
thought responsible for much of the activity in disordered alumina, they will be
introduced into the model alumina (using neutron bombardment and other
techniques) and their effects on catalytic activity will be observed. A series
of model oxides (alumina, silica, titania) are also used as supports for other
dispersed phases (oxides and sulfides) and the structures of the overlayers, the
mechanisms of solid-solid wetting, and the natures of the ceramic-ceramic
interfaces are studied. An attempt is also made to extend the metal evaporation
techniques to the preparation of powders of mixed oxides, initially of aluminum
titanate. This work provides fundamental information that can be used in the
design and engineering of ceramic materials and heterogeneous catalysts. It also
elaborates the effects of atomic-scale defects on catalytic activity and ceramic
bonding. Synthesis of new ceramic materials is also a possible result of this
work.