* 8912907
* Mathematical Sciences: Functional Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 12/01/1989,11/30/1993
* Marc Rieffel, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Kevin Clancey
* 11/30/1993
* USD 104,205.00

Professor Rieffel's project involves a synthesis of ideas from differential
geometry and the theory of operator algebras. He will study from several
viewpoints the process of deforming geometric structures by passing to an
algebra of functions or to a Lie algebra and then smoothly changing the
multiplication. Specific subjects of investigation include quantum groups,
deformation quantization, and Yang-Mills theory. Fundamental to Rieffel's work
is the notion that certain algebras of operators can profitably be viewed as
noncommutative analogs of familiar geometric objects. One might for instance
begin with the two-torus, the surface of an inner tube. All of the information
about the shape of this object is contained in the algebra of complex valued
functions on it. Two such functions are the ones that measure phase as one goes
around the torus the long, respectively the short, way around. These functions
generate the algebra of continuous functions on the torus in a certain universal
way. Replace them by two (unitary) operators, a species of generalized
functions, that instead of commuting when multiplied, commute only up to a
phase. As the phase varies, the operator algebras generated by these
projectively commuting unitaries form a family of noncommutative tori, creating
a setting in which geometric ideas can be formulated and studied without
reference to a geometric object in the usual sense.