* 8912793
* Redistribution and Land Use Policies in Systems of Local    Jurisdictions
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1989,01/31/1992
* Thomas Romer, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 01/31/1992
* USD 107,699.00

The ability of individuals to move from one jurisdiction to another is generally
seen as a constraint on the amount of redistribution that each jurisdiction
within a system of governments can undertake. This project looks more closely at
this proposition by elaborating and applying a positive theory of income
redistribution by local governments in a federal system. A model of multi-
community equilibrium is developed in which the population of each community is
endogenously determined and tax rates are chosen by majority vote of residents
of each local jurisdiction. This model is extended and used to address such
questions as: When both central and local governments redistribute, how do
changes in redistribution by the central government affect the amount of
redistribution done locally? How do changes in intergovernmental grants affect
local redistribution? How will consolidation of local governments affect
redistribution? It has been argued that the use of the property tax to finance
local public expenditures provides an incentive for localities to use zoning
restrictions to prevent entry by households who would pay less in taxes than the
cost of the public services they consume. It is alleged that housing to serve
low- and moderate- income households is not built, and housing that is built is
unnecessarily costly and uses excessive amounts of land. In response to these
concerns, state courts in the last decade have taken an increasingly active role
in "fair share" zoning in which a locality is directed to accept its fair share
of regional low- and moderate-income housing. The investigators extend their
model of the conditions under which communities adopt zoning policies that
prevent entry by low-income households to study how various fair share rules
affect housing prices, community composition, and the types of land-use
restrictions that communities adopt. This research contributes to our
understanding of intergovernmental relations. It provides new insights into the
way local governments respond to different political and economic institutions.
It eventually will lead to a comprehensive model of U.S. federalism that can be
used to explain patterns of intergovernmental grants and address timely policy
issues.