* 8912221
* "Reductionism and the Reduction of Mendelian Genetics"
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/1989,08/31/1991
* C. Kenneth Waters, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Ronald J. Overmann
* 08/31/1991
* USD 50,000.00

Philosophers of biology are among the most vocal critics of the view that
scientific theories can be treated as sets of sentences. Many of them have taken
up a rival view, the semantic view of theories, which holds that theories should
be treated as collections of abstract models. Philosophers of biology have also
challenged the idea that Mendelian genetics is being reduced by molecular
biology. These anti-reductionist arguments are nearly always developed by
treating theories as sets of sentences. Dr. Waters, under this research grant,
will develop what is long overdue: a new conception of theoretical reduction
based on the semantic view of theories. This new conception of reduction will be
based on the idea that reducing entails providing deeper, but not necessarily
simpler explanations. Dr. Waters will use this new conception to show how
Mendelian genetics is being reduced by molecular theory. Thus, this project
entails presenting new accounts of the theories of Mendelian and molecular
genetics explicitly in terms of the semantic view, developing a new conception
of theoretical reduction, diffusing standing objections to reductionism about
genetics, and applying these results to show how molecular biology is improving
and deepening our understanding of Mendelian genetics.