* 8912971
* A Collaborative Interdisciplinary Research Program on the   Human Dimensions of Global Environmental Change
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1989,08/31/1991
* Richard Rockwell, Social Science Research Council
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 08/31/1991
* USD 142,155.00

The growing attention focused on accelerating processes of global environmental
change have highlighted the need for increased understandings of the role of
humans as initiators of and respondents to rapid changes in natural
environmental conditions. Many independent research projects have begun or are
being planned by social and behavioral scientists, but these inquiries have
heightened the need for coordination of multi-disciplinary analyses of the human
dimensions of global environmental change. This project will foster and
integrate research on six important aspects of this topic: (1) development of a
theory and methodology for studying worldwide changes in land-use patterns, (2)
development of an epidemiology linking human health with global environmental
change, (3) examination of how institutions manage global change, (4) analyses
of how national and international security concerns are related to global
change, (5) empirical definition and measurement of "sustainable development,"
and (6) study of how science and society identify and respond to environmental
problems, expand knowledge about the processes producing these problems, and
make that knowledge more useful. The award recipient, the Social Science
Research Council, will form a new committee on Research on Global Environmental
Change to oversee this effort. That committee will commission and respond to
review articles from experts on these six issues. Committee members will prepare
synthetic articles for inclusion in a volume to present the group's findings,
and the committee will sponsor working groups to develop research projects
related to each of the issues. This project will provide a number of tangible
benefits. The volume containing review and integrative articles on the six
issues should furnish scholars with excellent summaries of present knowledge
about these critical topics and outline general approaches that are likely to
yield substantial contributions to knowledge. By coordinating the development of
research projects, the committee will reduce duplication of effort and enable
more effective generalization from independent research efforts. Furthermore,
the committee's and working groups' efforts should directly involve a much
larger number of the nation's leading social and behavioral scientists in
analyses of this critical issue than otherwise would become involved.