* 8912897
* US-West Germany Cooperative Research in Kinetic Effects in  Protein Chromatography
* O/D,OISE
* 02/01/1990,01/31/1993
* Abraham Lenhoff, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 01/31/1993
* USD 9,450.00

This award supports Professor Abraham M. Lenhoff of the University of Delaware
for collaborative research with Professor Klaus K. Unger of the Institute for
Inorganic and Analytical Chemistry of Johannes Gutenberg University, Mainz,
Federal Republic of Germany. The objective of their research is to gain a better
understanding of the role of adsorption and desorption kinetics in hydrophobic
interaction chroma- tography (HIC) of proteins. The information sought is
significant for both analytical and preparative systems. It sets a fundamental
limit for the speed of microanalytical separations, and it provides rate
information that can be important in optimizing the design and operation of
preparative columns for this form of chromatography. Two complementary analytic
approaches will be used, both involving the same proteins, surface
characteristics and solvent compositions. The first involves the use of Total
Internal Reflectance Fluorescence (TIRF) spectroscopy for the direct, real-time
measurement of adsorption and desorption kinetics and equilibria on a flat
slide. The second uses HIC with a 1.5 micron non-porous stationary phase to
examine behavior in actual column chromatography under conditions where kinetics
are likely to be rate-limiting. Comparison of the results of the two sets of
experiments will be made possible by the transport and kinetic modelling of the
respective systems. The planned cooperation combines the TIRF capability and the
modelling strengths of the Delaware group with the surface synthesis expertise
of the Mainz group.