* 8912462
* US-Czechoslovakia Research on Coupled and Forced Oscillatoryand Excitable Systems in Chemistry and Biology
* O/D,OISE
* 03/15/1990,02/28/1994
* Irving Epstein, Brandeis University
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 02/28/1994
* USD 37,793.00

The primary objective of this US-Czechoslovak cooperative research project
between Dr. Irving Epstein of Brandeis University and Dr. Milos Marek of the
Prague Institute of Chemical Technology is to examine basic qualities of
inorganic chemical and biochemical systems consisting of units that can display
oscillatory or excitable behavior. When coupled together, these units may
exhibit unusual and important properties such as growth or cessation of
oscillatory behavior or chaotic phenomena. Both theorectical and experimental
studies will be undertaken. Results should provide insight into the new
phenomena that can arise when nonlinear reaction dynamics are coupled with
concentration gradients and the effects of diffusion. Knowledge of this
phenomenon of excitability and its influences may lead to an ability to predict
the behavior of a periodically forced oscillator or pair of coupled oscillators
which would be of considerable interest to chemists and biologists studying
coupled dynamical systems. This project in inorganic and bioinorganic chemistry
fulfills the program objective of advancing scientific knowledge by enabling
leading experts in the United States and Eastern Europe to combine complementary
talents and pool research resources in areas of strong mutual interest and
competence.