* 8912746
* International Workshop on Regional Culture in Latin AmericanCities to be held in Austin, Texas in January, 1990.
* O/D,OISE
* 12/01/1989,05/31/1991
* Lane Hirabayashi, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 05/31/1991
* USD 14,400.00

This award supports an international workshop on regional culture in Latin
American cities to be held in Austin, Texas in January, 1990. The U.S. organizer
is Lane Hirabayashi of San Francisco State University. His counterpart is
Teofilo Altamirano of the Catholic University of Peru. The workshop will focus
on how migrants draw upon values and forms of social organization from their
areas of origin to facilitate adaptation to urban life. The participants consist
of ten scholars who have carried out first-hand field work in large Latin
American cities, who have a strong interest in comparative analysis, who have
not had a chance to work together or coordinate their research results and who
have emphasized countries where there is clear evidence of ethnic identification
on the part of rural-urban migrants. These countries are Bolivia, Ecuador,
Mexico and Peru and there is a representative from each one among the workshop
participants. All of these scientists and the U.S. experts have published
extensively on urban adaptation and each will write a specially commissioned
paper on the regional culture in the Latin American city of their expertise to
reflect the dynamics of rural-urban linkages. Because of the impact such studies
have on understanding the growing problem of urban migration in developing
countries, this workshop is a timely and important one for the Science in
Developing Countries program.