* 8912960
* US-Finland Cooperative Research in Calibration of a Solid   State Camera System for Engineering Measurements
* O/D,OISE
* 04/15/1990,03/31/1991
* James Anderson, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 03/31/1991
* USD 10,040.00

This award provides partial support for a long term research visit to Finland by
Professor James M. Anderson of the University of California, Berkeley. He will
spend a sabbatical with Professor Einari Kilpela at the Institute of
Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing of the Helsinki University of Technology. They
will collaborate in a joint project to test and calibrate a solid-state video
camera system for applica- tions in engineering measurements. Both investigators
have extensive experience in photogrammetry and have been working recently to
calibrate and use solid state camera systems. The U.S. group has worked on a
miniature array camera for medical applications and video camera systems for
studying freeway traffic flow. The Finnish group has recently focused on efforts
to calibrate a computer vision system of solid state array cameras for
industrial applications. Both groups have concluded that the sensors have
systematic radiometric and geometric errors that are not fully understood and
that profoundly affect the results obtained. The objectives of the collaboration
are to calibrate the camera system for engineering measurements and to develop
an improved mathematical model to compensate for systematic sensor errors. This
work is a prerequisite to successful application of these cameras to real
problems in engineering measurements. Among the potential applications for this
system are the determination of vehicle trajectories and velocities at freeway
on-ramps, the evaluation of pavement roughness, the determination of shape and
size of industrial objects such as car bodies, and the revision and updating of
topographic maps.