* 8913393
* Instability and Transition in Transient Vertical Buoyancy   Driven Flows
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/1989,08/31/1992
* Benjamin Gebhart, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* George P. Peterson
* 08/31/1992
* USD 148,877.00

Past studies of transient-driven flows for moderate heating conditions have
clarified the fluid flow and heat transfer responses in transient flows which
remain laminar. Other and more recent experiments have shown that more vigorous
heating results in many different kinds of downstream transient transport
regimes, depending on the imposed heating rate. In the developing downstream
response, both one and two dimensional transient instability and transition were
found to arise. Measurements also show that very large transient transport
effects arise locally. Conventional methods of transient instability analysis
are limited to approximations which are not suitable in some of these regimes.
The study proposed here includes two parallel components. The first is the
transient laminar flow response to the heating condition. The second is the
downstream treatment by the developing flow of small imposed and random velocity
disturbances. They will be introduced, at specific times, at a downstream
location inside the particular local flow regime of interest. Their evolution
will be followed in time or downstream, as appropriate. The subsequent
diagnostics will be of resulting disturbance growth rates and spectral
distributions. The central result will be a numerical model of disturbance
growth and behavior analysis to understand this phenomena. Buoyancy driven
transient flows arise in many important applications. Such flows are driven by
transient heating at a vertical bounding surface in a quiescent body of fluid.
These kinds of transients arise in many environmental and technological
processes. They may follow from changing radiative heating of a surface. The are
also inherent in batch processing operations, in the start up and shutdown of
equipment. They are common in electrical transients in large high density
electronic arrays. They are also very important in assessing the cooling of
internally heated elements after a power or pump failure. This research seeks to
understand the heat transfer and flow when transient heating leads to unstable
flows and to transition.