* 8913497
* Production of Heterologous Proteins by Recombinant          Sccharomyces Cerevisiade
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/1989,02/29/1992
* Alkis Constantinides, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Fred G. Heineken
* 02/29/1992
* USD 99,000.00

The object of this project is to determine and quantify the environmental
factors that influence the productivity of a cloned protein by a recombinant
yeast population. The system used as a model is Saccharomyces cerevisiae
transformed with a 2u hybrid plasmid. This is a host- vector system with
significant practical applicability due to the potential of 2u-based plasmids
for good stability and relatively high copy numbers. The effects of the
bioculturing environment on host cell physiology and recombinant productivity
will be studied for the system S. cerevisiae - 2u hybrid plasmid under the
control of constitutive and inducible promoters. The identity and concentration
of medium components, the nature of nutrient limitation in the chemostat, and
the bioreactor operation strategy will be examined systematically in order to
assess quantitatively the influence of these parameters on plasmid stability,
copy number, growth rate, and cloned protein expression rate. Saccharomyces
cerevisiae (baker's yeast) is an excellent microorganism for the production of
recombinant proteins since it is non-pathogenic to humans and has been grown at
an industrial scale for centuries. Large-scale fermentation of recombinant yeast
is currently used for the production of several valuable products, including
therapeutic proteins. The proposed research program will provide a better
understanding of the factors that influence the efficiency of recombinant
protein production in yeast using a system of commercial significance, the 2u
hybrid plasmid. This project will also suggest appropriate manipulations of the
various fermentation parameters that can result in more economic production of
biomedically important proteins through this biotechnological route. The
generation of new knowledge in this area and the potential development of
industrial operational strategies will increase the competitive edge of the
United States in biotechnology.