* 8913491
* Industry/University Cooperative Research Fellowship
* ENG,EEC
* 07/01/1989,06/30/1990
* David Klemer, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* alexander schwarzkopf
* 06/30/1990
* USD 9,355.00

This grant funds an Industry/University Cooperative Research Fellowship to
allow the principal investigator to work with two industry researchers during
the summer. The recent development of sophisticated instrumentation has allowed
for the direct characterization of microwave and millimeter-wave devices from
on-wafer measurements, eliminating the need for complex test fixtures and the
uncertainty that these fixtures introduce into microwave measurements. Wafer-
probing stations used in conjunction with standard microwave network analyzers
allow for direct determination of device S-parameters without extensive de-
embedding procedures, thus achieving accuracies heretofore impossible. Such
wafer-probing equipment has steadily increased in operating frequency, attaining
state- of-the-art measurement bandwidths of 50 GHz. The current interest in
monolithic microwave integrated circuits (MMICs) and the inherent benefits
associated with this technology -- reduced fabrication costs, increased
reliability, decreased circuit size and weight, and control of unwanted
parasitic effects -- have provided the incentive for development of advanced
measurement techniques. Accurate device models developed from direct on-wafer
measurements will allow for the predictable design of monolithic integrated
circuits to higher microwave and millimeter-wave frequencies. In particular,
careful modeling of the GaAs MESFET has received recent attention in the
technical literature. As a key active element in the design of monolithic
circuits for microwave applications, an accurate MESFET model is essential in
advanced MMIC design. FET modeling from on-wafer measurements and verification
of the accuracy of these models from independent measurements forms the focus of
the proposed work. The principal investigator is qualified to conduct this
research and a grant of $9,355 for 6 months is recommended.