* 8913359
* The IAEE 12th International Conference, New Delhi, India,   January 1990, Group Travel Award in U.S. and Indian         Currencies
* O/D,OISE
* 11/01/1989,10/31/1990
* John Weyant, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 10/31/1990
* USD 56,250.00

Description: This project supports travel of 25 U.S. scientists to participate
in the 12th conference of the International Association of Energy Economics
planned to be held in New Delhi, India in January 1990. The themes for the
conference is Energy, Enviroment and Development. Typically these IAEE
conferences draw attendance of 300 of which about half are from the Host
country. It is expected that this project would support half the U.S.
participants, those who do not have access to travel funds from other sources.
The format and content of the meeting is designed to maximize the effective
exchange of research results and information. Most of the panels will be devoted
to questions of direct interest to both U.S. and Indian investigators. The
discussions are expected to indentify specific areas for future joint research.
Scope: Both India and the U.S. share certain concerns in dealing with energy
production and utilization including the enviromental effects, and the economic
impacts. The oil imports are a major part of the foreign trade in the two
countries. The impact in India and other developing countries of the cost of oil
is likely to grow as quantities and prices increase. The rural energy situtation
in developing countries has hardly been improved by the recent drop in oil
prices. The conference will benefit participants from developed and developing
countries by allowing exchange of relevant information on problems and potential
solutions that may also alleviate the deterioration of the enviroment. The
Indian coorganizer Dr. R.K. Pachauri is the current president of IAEE and
director of the Tata Energy Research Institute which is a relatively young but
very active and respected research organization. It is likely that this meeting
will produce significant results in terms of publications, exchanges of
information and developments of joint research.