* 8913324
* U.S.-Korea Cooperative Research:  Comparative Stratigraphic/Paleontological Studies of the Cretaceous Period in the     Colorado Plateau and the Jindong Formation of South Korea
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/1989,08/31/1992
* Martin Lockley, University of Colorado at Denver-Downtown Campus
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 08/31/1992
* USD 11,239.00

This proposal requests funds to permit Dr. Martin G. Lockley, Department of
Geology, University of Colorado at Denver, to pursue with Dr. Seong-Young Yang,
Department of Geology, Kyungpook National University, Korea, for a period of 24
months, a program of cooperative research to complete the study of the dinosaur
track-bearing beds of the Cretaceous, Jindong Formation of South Korea. The
study is broad based, involving the analysis of the stratigraphy, depositional
environments, and paleontology of the Jindong Formation. Previous work by Dr.
Yang has revealed that there are in excess of 150 track-bearing layers in a
formation that is a little more than 300 meters in thickness. Current
information suggests that the Jindong Formation has a greater concentration of
dinosaur tracks than any comparable deposit. This site represents a unique
lacustrine depositional environment. Previous studies have demonstrated that the
Korean tracks represent a very unusual dinosaur community in which brontosaurs
and large ornithopods frequented the same area. Most other tracksites worldwide
show these two groups to be mutually exclusive. This project will provide a
unique research opportunity for the U.S. scientist. It also will allow him to
compare the results of his studies of dinosaur tracks in the Colorado plateau
region with those obtained in studies of the Jindong Formation on the southern
coast of South Korea. The U.S. and Korean collaborators are highly respected
scientists who have a record of successful collaboration. This project will
allow them to combine their knowledge and skills for mutual benefit. This
project is relevant to the objectives of the U.S.-Korea Cooperative Science
Program which seeks to increase the level of cooperation between U.S. and Korean
scientists and engineers through the exchange of scientific information, ideas,
skills, and techniques and through collaboration on problems of mutual benefit.
Dr. Yang's participation in the project is supported by the Korea Science and
Engineering Foundation (KOSEF). This project will add an international
cooperative dimension to Dr. Lockley's research under NSF Grant No. EAR-8618206.