* 8913150
* US-U.K. Cooperative Research:  Statistical Mechanics of     Fluids in Micropores
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/1989,09/30/1992
* Keith Gubbins, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 09/30/1992
* USD 13,740.00

This award will support continued collaboration between Dr. Keith Gubbins,
Cornell University, and Professor John S. Rowlinson, Physical Chemistry
Laboratory, Oxford University, England. The objective of the research is to
study the behavior of fluids in micropores at the molecular level, using the
methods of statistical mechanics and computer simulation. This collaboration
grew out of studies of liquid drops, started independently at Cornell and
Oxford, and has continued actively over the last few years. The investigators
will use statistical mechanical theory and molecular simulation to develop a
fundamental understanding of the phenomena associated with adsorption in
micropores, including selective adsorption of a particular component, phase
transitions, layering transitions, and hysteresis. The role of such variables as
the type of fluid and solid material, nature of the surface and pore size, pore
shape, and state conditions (temperature, pressure, and composition) will be
studied. The validity of classical thermodynamic relations such as the Kelvin
equation will be examined. The investigators will then use the results of this
work to suggest the molecular design of advanced adsorbents for particular
applications, including selective extraction of particular constituents of
mixtures, the storage of natural gas at low pressure, and improved desiccant
materials. Both the U.S. and British investigators are at the forefront of work
on statistical mechanics of combined fluids and have made important
contributions to this industrially relevant area of research.