* 8913743
* Fabrication and Characterization of Selectively Contacted   Dual Channel Switching Transistors Using III-V Modulation-  Doped Heterostructures -  Ft. Monmouth
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/1989,01/31/1991
* Mukunda Das, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Arthur R. Bergen
* 01/31/1991
* USD 17,000.00

This research proposal is concerned with the MBE-growth of III-V heterostructure
material, and fabrication and characterization of a novel selectively contacted
dual channel modulation-doped field-effect transistor based on the same
material. The research will be carried out under a collaborative arrangement
between the PSU Center for Electronic Materials and Processing (CEMP), and the
Electronic Technology and Devices Laboratory (ETDL), U.S. Army Electronics
Research and Development Command, Fort Monmouth, NJ. This effort will be the
third year of continuation of this project under the joint NSF and U.S. Army
Research Program. A PSU senior graduate student working under the PI will
continue to utilize the extensive microelectronics facilities at the ETDL in
collaboration with its technical staff for the fabrication of the identified
test device structures. The research efforts will involve optimization of the
AlGaAs/GaAs heterostructure layer growth, wafer fabrication of this new test
device structures, and their electrical characterization. The aim is to
determine the mechanism of operation and performance limitations of this new
device as a novel switching component, and expand the basic understanding
concerning 2-D carrier transport within a heterostructure quantum well both in
laterl and vertical directions.