* 8913606
* Crustal Genesis and Mineralization in the Eastern Dharwar   Craton, South India, Award in U.S. and Indian Currencies
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/1989,06/30/1993
* Gilbert Hanson, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 06/30/1993
* USD 62,266.00

Description: This project supports collaborative research by Dr. V. Rajamani,
Jawaharlal Nehru University (JNU) New Delhi, India and Dr. G. Hanson, SUNY,
Stony Brook, NY. The research continues work done previously on the Kolar Schist
Belt, and begins studies of the Ramagiri and Kadiri Schist Belts to the north of
the Kolar Schist Belt. Previous studies suggest that the Kolar Schist Belt is a
suture which separates two Archean gneiss terranes with different geologic
histories. Also within the belt the amphibolites from the eastern and western
sides have different isotopic and incompatible element characteristics
suggesting their development from independent sources. The proposed studies will
attempt to study the adjacent belts to learn of the tectonic processes leading
to the present composition and formation of these belts. The area is known to
have mineral deposits of ecomonic significance. Scope: The two teams from JNU
and SUNY Stony Brook have collaborated for several years under previous NSF
grants with considerable success and with significant resulting publications.
That work has also formed the research dissertations for several Ph. D. students
at both institutions. It is highly likely this project will continue this
strong, productive cooperation. Funding: This project is being funded under two
grants: 1. JNU New Delhi: FY89 $91,143 in Indian rupees 2. SUNY Stony Brook:
FY89 $10,571 in Indian rupees + US $13,800 FY90 $11,143 in Indian rupees + US
$13,800 FY91 $11,714 IN Indian rupees + US $13,800