* 8913361
* U.S.-Australia Cooperative Research:  Yeast Camp-dependent  Protein Kinase Substrate Specificity
* O/D,OISE
* 03/15/1990,04/30/1991
* Clyde Denis, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Carole Ganz
* 04/30/1991
* USD 12,030.00

This award will support collaborative research between Dr. Clyde L. Denis of the
University of New Hampshire-Durham and Dr. Bruce E. Kemp of the St. Vincent's
Institute of Medical Research, Melbourne. The goal of the research is to advance
knowledge of the molecular mechanisms of eucaryotic (multi- cell) gene
regulation. Recent evidence shows that gene expression is regulated by
phosphorylation, that is, enzymatic conversion of carbohydrates in metabolic
processes. However the processes and activators that are phosphorylated through
protein kinase, that is, the conversion of inactive protein in living cells to
enzymes, are not well-understood. This research will compare mammalian and yeast
protein kinase to advance understanding of the regulation of gene expression by
phosphorylation. The project represents excellent collaboration between the
Australian and U.S.- scientist. Dr. Kemp is an internationally recognized
authority on protein kinases and their substrate determinants. Dr. Denis has
used yeast extensively as an experimental system to illuminate central questions
in cellular regulation. Comparative analysis of yeast and mammalian protein
kinases should provide important new information, and advance techniques dealing
with protein analysis, recombinant DNA techniques, and genetics. Furthermore,
the study of the regulatory processes in yeast may provide knowledge that can be
exploited in commercial applications involving yeast.