* 8913622
* US-France Cooperative Research:  Kinetics and Dynamics of   Refractory Radical Reactions
* O/D,OISE
* 02/01/1990,07/31/1995
* Arthur Fontijn, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 07/31/1995
* USD 7,570.00

The award will support collaborative research between Dr. Arthur Fontijn,
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, and Dr. G. Dorth, Laboratory of Photophysics
and Photochemistry, University of Bordeaux, France. The objective of the
research is to carry out crossed molecular beam experiments, which will allow
the investi- gators to study isolated chemical reactions and to determine
precisely the threshold energy level necessary for the reactions to proceed.
Knowledge of gas-phase reactions of radicals of refractory elements is of
fundamental interest, and is required for the modeling of practical problems
including many aspects of combustion, chemical vapor deposition and upper
atmospheric chemistry. Yet, because of the difficulties inherent in obtaining
adequate concentrations of such species, their reactions have been measured by
few investigators and most studies made concern near room- temperature kinetics.
In the proposed program, selected reactions of "refractory radicals" will be
studied by two complementary approaches. Their kinetics will be measured in the
300 - 1800 K range by the unique HTFFR ( high-temperature fast-flow reactor)
and/or HTP (high-temperature photochemistry) techniques at Rensselaer. Their
dynamics will be investigated by the equally unique pulsed crossed supersonic
molecular beams (with laser evaporation of the refractory species) technique in
Bordeaux. The excitation functions from the dynamics measurements will be
converted to rate coefficient versus temperature plots using absolute values
from the kinetics work and thus allow, for single channels, extrapolation of the
kinetic results to wider temperature ranges. The kinetic work involves reactants
in thermal equilibrium excitation states, while the dynamics studies yield
state-to-state information. Differences in results can reveal important second
channels, such as are attributable to vibrational excitation. The accurate
determination of the reaction energetics in Bordeaux will provide an invaluable
aid to the interpretation of the Rensselaer results for reactions, such as those
of the alkaline earth atoms, where these data are not adequately known.