* 8913706
* II-VI Semiconductors, Diluted Magnetic Semiconductors       (DMS) and their Superlattices
* MPS,DMR
* 11/01/1989,10/31/1993
* Robert Gunshor, Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* W. Lance Haworth
* 10/31/1993
* USD 2,048,000.00

This award from the Materials Research Group (MRG) Program of the Division of
Materials Research will support a multi-investigator, multi-disciplinary
research program at Purdue University on II-VI semiconductors, diluted magnetic
semiconductors (DMS), and their sub-micron heterostructures. The unique
combination of semiconducting and magnetic properties exhibited by DMS
substances and the wide band gaps available in II-VI semiconductors offer long-
term potential for new materials and technology. The MRG activity at Purdue
University is headed by Professors R.L. Gunshor and A.K. Ramdas, and also
involves the research group of Professor J. Furdyna at Notre Dame. Comprehensive
materials preparation, design, and fabrication, as well as a range of physical
measurements and theoretical studies will be carried out under the program.
These include spectroscopic studies (Raman, Brillouin, infrared,
photoluminescence, piezo- and photo-modulated reflectivity); transmission
electron microscopy; and Faraday effect and related magneto-optic
investigations. Bulk crystals grown in the crystal growth facility as well as
sub-micron heterostructures grown in Molecular Beam Epitaxy and Atomic Layer
Epitaxy facilities will be specially prepared to address issues important in the
context of basic materials science and engineering, and with potential for
leading to new technology and devices. Collective and localized excitations
(vibrational, electronic, magnetic); the nature of the interfaces in sub-micron
heterostructures; the novel aspects of the excitations in the sub-micron
structures; exchange interaction, magnetic ordering, and the physics of quantum
wells are illustrative examples of the wide range of physical problems within
the scope of the Purdue MRG activity.