* 8913104
* Copula Contraction and Absence in Vernacular Black English, Mesolectal Creole English and Other Varieties
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1989,08/31/1992
* John Rickford, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Paul G. Chapin
* 08/31/1992
* USD 131,327.00

ABSTRACT The objective of this project is to produce a detailed analysis of
constraints on copula contraction and absence in: (1) Vernacular Black English
(VBE), as spoken in East Palo Alto, California; (2) Mesolectal Creole English
(MCE), as spoken in Guyana, Barbados, Jamaica, and the South Carolina Sea
Islands; (3) Other varieties like Russian, Twi, and child language which display
syntactically conditioned copula variation and absence. The analysis of (1) and
(2) will employ quantitative methods and the variable rule program to isolate
constraint effects in recorded casual speech samples. The VBE sample will
include thirty-two speakers, finely age-stratified to permit a close view of
age-grading and change in progress. The MCE sample will also include thirty-two
speakers, eight from each of the targeted areas. The analysis of (3), primarily
library-based, will explore the extent to which copula variability patterns in
VBE and MCE have broader typological parallels and explanations. The
significance of this project is that it will overcome a number of limitations in
existing work on copula variability in VBE and MCE which restrict the validity
of recent attempts to compare them and resolve the controversial creole origins
issue of VBE and related varieties like Samana English. %%% The project consists
of a detailed, quantitative study of certain aspects of the grammar of the
language of urban American black people (VBE), and of creole speakers in the
Caribbean and in South Carolina (MCE), and the variations in their speech
styles. The research is motivated by, and addresses, some important theoretical
issues which have arisen with respect to the historical origins of VBE, and to
its current status in relation to standard American English. The project should
result in significant advances in our understanding of VBE and the changes it is
undergoing.