* 8913226
* International conference on CAD/CAM, Robotics, & Factories of the Future, New Delhi, India, December 19-22, 1989 Group Travel Award in U.S. and India Currencies
* NONE,NONE
* 11/15/1989,10/31/1990
* Suren Dwivedi, West Virginia University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 10/31/1990
* USD 41,250.00

Description: This project supports travel by fifteen U.S. scientists and
engineers to participate in the International Conference on CAD/CAM, Robotics,
and Factories of the Future, to be held in New Delhi, India December 19-22,
1989. The objective of the conference is to bring together researchers and
practitioners in the multidisciplinary fields of design and productivity aspects
of advanced manufacturing systems involving CAD, CAE, CIM, Parametric
Programming, Artificial Intelligence, Robotics, and Factory of the Future. The
Indian organizer is Dr. R. Sagar, Dept. of Mechanical Engineering, Indian
Institute of Technology, New Delhi. The sponsors, in addition to the IIT, Delhi
include the International Society for Productivity Enhancement (USA), the IIT,
Madras, the IEEE-Delhi Section and the Department of Electronics of the
Government of India. Approximately 150 U.S. scientists have submitted papers for
presentation in the conference. Scope: This conference is a first attempt at
bringing together interdisciplinary branches of engineering and science to
address issues of productivity, thus implementing the concept of concurrent
engineering and synchronous manufacturing. The objective of scientists from
developed and developing countries is to generate ideas to foster the growth of
industry and related research activities in participating countries. The
conference is planned to be one of the largest of its kind in the world both in
scope and number of participants. It is likely to lead to increased Indo-U.S.
cooperation.