* 8913332
* U.S.-Australia Workshop on Microbial and Plant Opportunitiesto Improve Lignocellulose Utilization by Ruminants.  RussellResearch Center, Athens, GA, April 16-30, 1990
* O/D,OISE
* 04/15/1990,10/15/1990
* Lars Ljungdahl, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Carole Ganz
* 10/15/1990
* USD 0.00

This award will support a U.S.-Australian workshop "Microbial and Plant
Opportunities to Improve Lignocellulose Utilization by Ruminants" to be held at
the Richard B. Russell Agricultural Research Center, Athens, Georgia, April
16-20, 1990. The organizers are Dr. Lars G. Ljungdahl, Professor and Director,
Center for Biological Resource Recovery, University of Georgia and Dr. J.R.
Wilson, CSIRO (Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organization),
Division of Tropical Crops and Pastures, Brisbane, Australia. The workshop will
bring together U.S. and Australian experts with relevant theoretical and
experimental backgrounds in plant cell wall chemistry and biological structure
to discuss the biochemical and microbial limitations to lignocellulose
utilization in ruminants. The workshop will propose specific ways to overcome
the limitations to utilization of plant cell walls, and specific approaches to
effect changes through genetic engineering of rumen microorganisms.
Collaborative interaction between Australian and American scientists is expected
to be strengthened by workshop definition of researchable problems on which to
base and evaluate future cooperative research in this area.