* 8913856
* US-France Cooperative Research:  Structures and Properties  of Liquid Precursors for Advanced Ceramics
* O/D,OISE
* 02/01/1990,01/31/1994
* John Mackenzie, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 01/31/1994
* USD 10,210.00

This award will support collaborative research in advanced ceramic materials
between Dr. John Mackenzie, University of California at Los Angeles, and
Professor J. Livage, University of Pierre and Marie Curie, Paris, France.
Advanced ceramic materials such as high temperature superconductors and the
insulating tiles on the space shuttle are the key to future technological
advances which can improve the quality of life and make the US more competitive
in the international marketplace. In this project, Drs. MacKenzie and Livage
will combine their expertise in sol-gel science, specifically the expertise of
the French team on the physical chemistry and structures of complex liquids
which form gels, and the background of the US group in the transformation of
gels into ceramics. An exchange of postdoctoral students is proposed, as well as
a joint workshop on sol-gel derived materials. Topics to be investigated include
sol-gel systems leading to materials such as the supercon- ducting ceramics and
electronic ceramics like barium titanate. Dr. MacKenzie and his team are
currently studying the preparation of superconducting ceramics; Dr. Livage is
actively investigating the physical chemistry and structures of complex liquid
solutions used in the preparation of these materials. The results of this
research may provide valuable information for the development of new engineering
materials.