* 8913600
* Modern Quantum Field Theory.  International Collquim Bombay,India, January 8-14, 1990, Group Travel Award in U.S. and   Indian Currencies.
* O/D,OISE
* 12/01/1989,11/30/1990
* Antal Jevicki, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 11/30/1990
* USD 35,200.00

Description: This project supports participation of eleven U.S. scientists at
the International Colloquium on Modern Quantum Field Theory at the Tata
Institute of Fundamental Research in Bombay, India between January 8 and 14,
1990. The meeting is to concentrate on quantum field theory, string theory and
quantum gravity. It is intended to take stock of recent developments in the
field and appraise its present trends and future directions. Among the themes to
be focused on are: String theory (3 sessions); Conformal field gravity (2
sessions); Topological properties of quantum field theory (2 sessions); and
Quantum gravity and the cosmological constant (2 sessions). Six days of lectures
are planned, of five one hour lectures each day and seminars of shorter
duration. It is expected that about fifty scientists will participate including
twenty from outside India. Scope: The topics covered in the meeting are among
the most exciting in theoretical physics at present, the group of U.S.
scientists to participate are well chosen to represent experienced, well
established scientists as well as young promising post-doctoral fellows. The
participation of U.S., physicists would contribute greatly to a growing
interaction of Indian and U.S. scientists in the field. The Indian host
institute is a world class research organization fully suited for managing such
an activity.