* 8913578
* Social Learning in the Management of Global Environmental   Risks
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1989,02/28/1991
* William Clark, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Martin
* 02/28/1991
* USD 70,022.00

Growing awareness of the magnitude and character of environmental change on a
global scale has led to increasing concern about how individuals and
institutions will respond to such changes and develop collective responses that
reduce or eliminate harmful human actions or that alleviate the detrimental
impacts of such changes. This project will initiate a long-term research program
to evaluate the processes by which societies collectively learn about global
environmental risks. Following analysis of previous studies of the ways in which
societies have learned about these types of risks, the investigator will
identify obstacles that impeded the learning process and will propose
organizational and managerial initiatives that might reduce those obstacles. The
latter objectives will be undertaken through comparative case studies of the
roles of six critical sets of actors (scientists, governments, international
governmental organizations, nongovernmental organizations, businesses, and the
media) in social learning about three specific environmental risks (climate
change, ozone depletion, and acid-oxidant pollution) in seven nations (U.S.A.,
U.S.S.R., United Kingdom, Federal Republic of Germany, Sweden, the Netherlands,
and India). This initial project will focus on development of the general theory
and refinement of case-study analytic procedures in the U.S.A. and Germany. This
proposal will expand general understandings of the ways in which human
institutions respond to global environmental change in a number of critical
ways. It will expand general theory regarding the ways in which organizations
learn and respond to large-scale problems, and it will provide specific
demonstrations of the ways in which investigative approaches used in ecology,
economics, sociology, and geography can be integrated. While providing specific
insights about this problem in the U.S. and Germany, the project also will lay a
sounder foundation for more elaborate projects dealing with more nations and a
broader range of issues, thereby enhancing prospects for future research both by
this investigator and by others.