* 8913446
* U.S.-U.K. Cooperative Research:  Atmospheric Oxidation of   Dimethyl Sulphide
* O/D,OISE
* 12/01/1989,05/31/1993
* Anthony Hynes, Georgia Tech Research Corporation - GA Tech Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 05/31/1993
* USD 8,821.00

This award will support collaborative research in atmospheric chemistry between
Dr. Anthony J. Hynes, Georgia Institute of Technology and Dr. D.L. Bauch, School
of Chemistry, University of Leeds, England. The objective of the proposed
research is to study the kinetics and mechanisms of the atmospheric oxidation of
dimethyl sulfide using flow discharge techniques. Dimethyl sulfide is known to
be emitted by marine organisms and has been suggested to be a precursor to
aerosol and cloud formation in marine environments; it is therefore of
particular interest for the study of global climate. Experiments will utilize a
discharge flow apparatus coupled with laser induced fluorescence and mass
spectrometric detection of reactive intermediates and reaction products. Use of
calibrated laser induced fluorescence and simultaneous observation of reactant
loss and product formation should allow quantitative yields of methyl sulfide
radical and sulfur dioxide from the hydroxyl radical initiated oxidation of
dimethyl sulfide to be established. Attempts will be made to establish the
feasibility of mass spectrometric sampling for the detection of stable reaction
products. The project will benefit from the expertise of Dr. Hynes in the
development of laser diagnostic techniques in molecular beams, atmospheric
sampling and atmospheric kinetics. The British collaborator Dr. Bauch has many
years of experience in the application of discharge flow technique to the study
of oxygen and hydroxyl radical reactions. The results of this research should
contribute to the understanding of the sulphur cycle in global atmospheric
chemistry.