* 8913227
* Manufacturing Systems, Indo-U.S. Workshop for Cooperative Research and Technology Transfer, New Delhi, India, April 1990, Award in U.S. Indian Currencies
* NONE,NONE
* 01/15/1990,12/31/1991
* Suren Dwivedi, West Virginia University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 12/31/1991
* USD 80,950.00

Description: This project supports U.S. participation in a U.S.-Indo workshop on
manufacturing systems, scheduled to be held in April 1990 in New Delhi, India.
The Indian co-organizer is Dr. Rakesh Sagar of the Mechanical Engineering
Department of the Indian Institute of Technology in New Delhi. The topics to be
covered include: computer-aided design, kinematics, dynamics, simulation,
computer graphics, off-line programming, interaction between robotics, control,
vision, machine intelligence, parametric programming, variational geometry,
artificial intelligence, expert systems, robotics' design, control, maintenance
and sensory devices. Other topics related to the operation of the factory of the
future would also be included. It is expected that the workshop will result in
identifying the appropriate areas where research is needed, the facilities
available for that research in the U.S. and in India, and possible cooperative
research projects between Indian and U.S. institutions. Scope: The area of
manufacturing systems is extremely important to the U.S. for improving its
competitivness. It is also important to countries like India who need to build
efficient factories as they add to their growing industrial base. There is
significant interest in the scientific communities of both countries to develop
this multidisciplinary area. The rapid growth in the availability of important
tools including inexpensive computers and sophisticated and dedicated software
makes that development more exciting and challenging. Both countries stand to
gain from bringing their talents and expertise to advance this scientific field.