* 8913729
* The Interaction of Horizontal Transport and Photochemistry  in the Stratosphere
* GEO,AGS
* 02/15/1990,01/31/1994
* Murry Salby, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Pamela L. Stephens
* 01/31/1994
* USD 297,868.00

This project represents an interdisciplinary, collaborative effort between the
principal investigator and scientists at NOAA's Aeronomy Laboratory and the
National Center for Atmospheric Research. It consists of a study of the
stratosphere involving elements of dynamics, transport, and chemistry. In order
to understand distributions of ozone and other chemical species, the dynamical
processes responsible for mixing and transport must be understood. Of particular
interest is the role of transient eddies in the transport of chemical species
form the equatorial to polar regions. The evolution of the stratospheric flow is
quite complex: the periodic displacement and distortion of the polar vortex
results in very small-scale, asymmetric distributions of chemical species that
cannot be adequately resolved temporally or spatially by existing observing
systems. The goal of this project is to develop a high (horizontal) resolution
numerical model to further investigate this phenomenon and to identify the
physical mechanisms involved. Because the stratosphere is characterized by flows
of deep vertical extent, the co- investigators will employ a two-dimensional
model to look at the interaction between eddy transport and photochemistry. In
addition, they will explore the role of polar stratospheric clouds in altering
the photochemistry of the stratosphere. This results of this research will have
important implications for understanding of both atmospheric dynamics and
atmospheric chemistry.