* 8913656
* Development of Tandem Mass Spectrometry for Analysis of     Complex Biomolecules
* BIO,DBI
* 12/01/1989,11/30/1992
* Catherine Fenselau, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 11/30/1992
* USD 476,604.00

This award continues support of Tandem Mass Spectrometry activities at the Mid
Atlantic Mass Spectrometry (MAMS) laboratory at the University of Maryland
Baltimore County (UMBC). One of several approaches to mass spectrometry (MS),
tandem MS provides high resolution measurements of compounds with the high
molecular weights typical of proteins, nucleic acids and other biopolymers.
Efforts sponsored by this award will focus on improving techniques for analysis
of proteins and peptides using the tandem instrument; a variety of collaborative
research projects will be initiated or continued. Mass spectrometry plays an
increasingly important role in the structural analysis of biomolecules.
Information about protein sequence and structure, including naturally occurring
modifications of proteins, and similar kinds of information about
polysaccharides and other branched chain polymers are obtained with great
difficulty by other techniques. The MAMS laboratory includes facilities at UMBC
and at The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine. Both were established as
shared instrument resources for collaborative and service projects. Because of
the considerable expense of acquisition and operation of tandem MS instruments,
this type of analysis is not routinely available at most research institutions.
The UMBC facility provides the research community at UMBC and at numerous other
institutions with access to the kind of skilled mass spectrometry needed in many
areas of modern biological research.