* 8913054
* IEEE Region 10 Conference (TENCON89), NOVEMBER 22-24, 1989  Bombay, India, Group Travel in U.S. and Indian Currencies.
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/1989,07/31/1990
* Jaideep Srivastava, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 07/31/1990
* USD 44,250.00

Description: This project supports travel of fifteen U.S. scientists to the
Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers (IEEE) Region 10 Conference
(TENCON), planned for November 22-24, 1989 in Bombay, India. The Indian
Technical Co-Chairman is Dr. M. V. Pitke at the Tata Institute of Fundamental
Research (TIFR) in Bombay. The Conference theme is "Information Technologies for
the 90's, " and will deal with advances in: networks; communication systems;
signal processing; computers and applications; circuits and devices and energy.
The IEEE Region 10 comprises countries of South East Asia, far East and
Australasia, including India, Pakistan, Japan, South Korea, Taiwan, Hong Kong,
PR China, Singapore, Indonesia, Phillipines, Australia and New Zealand. The
meeting will have representatives from most of these countries and also from
various regions in India. The organizers include some of the U.S. and India's
leaders in electrical, electronics and communication engineering. They also have
as advisors experts from major U.S. laboratories in industry and academia, as
well as others from Europe and Japan. Scope: Region 10 of the IEEE has a large
potential for high technology in terms of manpower which will greatly benefit
from this conference. The U.S. stands to gain from tapping scientific advances
in the region in areas such as probability and statistics and their applications
to eletronics and communications, including control theory and signal
processing. The U.S. participants will interact with leading research
organizations in India, and learn of specific problems in technology, adaptation
and research efforts in developing countries' settings.