* 8913170
* U.S.-Australian Cooperative Research:  Experiments on ActiveControl of Aircraft Interior Noise
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/1991,11/30/1994
* Christopher Fuller, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Wallace
* 11/30/1994
* USD 13,576.00

This award will support collaborative research between Dr. Christopher Fuller of
Virginia Polytechnic Institute and Dr. Dolin Hansen of Adelaide University for a
two year period. The cooperative work is to explore control of interior noise in
aircraft using vibration inputs applied to the fuselage. In particular, the
study compares using transputer/communi- cations systems and those using digital
signal processing systems for noise control. Areas to be examined include
research on faster input-output control of noise, advanced noise sensors, and
understanding of fuselage scaling effects on noise control. The project
represents excellent collaboration between the U.S. and Australian researchers.
The Australian group is approaching the control problem with the use of
transputer/ communications systems, which are configured to many input output
channels at high speed. The system at Virginia Polytechnic Institute is
implemented on a digital signal processing chip, limited in terms of input and
output channels. The research has the potential to advance an increase in
control channels without sacrifice of control speed, and lead to more rapid
implementation of effective noise control systems in aircraft. Application of
the results to other areas such as underwater acoustics and industrial noise
control are also expected. This action provides funds for Dr. Fullerr's travel
in the first year of the project. Funding for the second year is contingent upon
the Australian Government's approval and continued provision of funds for
Adelaide's part of the cooperative project.