* 8913261
* Inter- and Intra-Annual Variability in an Interactive       Ocean-Atmosphere Climate System
* GEO,AGS
* 01/15/1990,12/31/1993
* Robert Gallimore, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Donna W. Blake
* 12/31/1993
* USD 494,047.00

This is a renewal grant to continue an investigation of climate variability as
simulated by a low resolution atmospheric general circulation model (GCM)
coupled to interactive upper oceans formulations. Both interannual and intra-
annual aspects of the model climate will be examined. The PIs will continue the
analysis of variability within two already completed 100 year seasonal
integrations one performed with the atmospheric model coupled to a 50m deep
upper ocean and the other performed with a prescribed annual cycle of observed
ocean conditions. New experimental initiatives with more sophisticated upper
ocean and sea ice models are also proposed. These involve 100 year seasonal
integrations of the atmospheric model coupled to a prescribed variable depth
upper ocean component, a prognostic mixed layer ocean formulation, a tropical-
dynamical upper ocean model, and a improved sea ice parameterization. The PIs
will focus on characterizing the interannual variability of (1) ocean surface
temperature in tropical and extratropical latitudes of the Pacific and Atlantic
Ocean and (2) sea ice area and thickness in polar latitudes. They will aim to
identify cause/effect relationships between anomalies in different parts of the
atmosphere-ice-ocean system. The studies of intra-annual variability will focus
on bimodality in planetary scale atmospheric circulation features of middle
latitudes and on transition shifts in the seasonal structures of atmospheric
circulation and energetic. Intercomparison of the different experiments will
identify the relative importance of individual ocean-atmospheric processes that
produce climate variability. These processes include ocean-atmosphere energy
exchange,mechanisms involving mixed layer and sea ice development, and internal
ocean dynamics. This research is important because it seeks to improve
understanding of how the ocean-ice-atmosphere system interacts to cause climate
variability.