* 8913365
* U.S.-Australia Cooperative Research:  Ecological Genetics ofHabitat Selection in Drosophila.
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/1990,02/29/1992
* William Starmer, University of Denver
* Standard Grant
* Carole Ganz
* 02/29/1992
* USD 9,416.00

This award will support collaborative research among Dr. James C. Fogleman of
the University of Colorado-Denver, Dr. William T. Starmer of Syracuse
University, and Dr. James Barker of the University of New England, New South
Wales, Australia. The maintenance of genetic variability in natural populations
is considered a prime question of population genetics and evolution. These
parallel research programs in Australia and the United States on the population
biology of Drosophila and microorganisms (bacteria and yeasts) which reside in
cacti provide an excellent model with which to investigate genetic variability
under natural conditions. Specifically, this research involves field tests of
the genetic consequences of habitat selection by Drosophila for yeast resources.
The project represents excellent collaboration between the Australian group,
with its international reputation in both theoretical and empirical population
genetics of Drosophila. Dr. Starmer is recognized as a leading authority on
naturally occurring yeasts, and Dr. Fogleman has extensive experience in the
role of cactus chemistry in this ecological system. The research represents a
coordinated and cost-sharing approach to produce results expected to make an
important contribution to improved understanding of genetic variability in
natural populations.