* 8913559
* Symposium on Ecology and Conservation of Neotropical        Migrant Landbirds; December 7-9, 1990; Woods Hole, MA
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/1990,06/30/1991
* Trevor Lloyd-Evans, Manomet Bird Observatory
* Standard Grant
* Gregory J. McCants
* 06/30/1991
* USD 5,000.00

With the increasing destruction and fragmentation of forests in both the
tropical and temperate regions of the western hemisphere, the need to understand
the impact of these changes on the total ecosystem is urgent. Neotropical
migrant landbirds are particularly susceptible to these alterations because of
their migratory habits. For these species, survival depends on suitable habitat
in both regions. This dependence is manifested in a complex ecology that
incorporates spatially separate and often physiognomically different habitats.
This symposium will bring together an international group of scientists with
diverse expertise in research on migrant landbird ecology, but who have a common
goal of species and habitat conservation. The goal is to understand the ecology
of this diverse group in light of their international migratory habits, so that
avian biodiversity can be maintained and so endangered status can be averted or
forestalled. Essential to the success of this meeting will be participation by
Latin American researchers who study these species in their "wintering"
habitats. Documenting population trends in migrant landbirds, and establishing
causes of such change, are both formidable tasks. However, this knowledge will
be of limited value without participation of Latin American scientists who bear
the direct responsibility of taking conservation action in their countries.
Interaction between North and Latin American scientists at this conference will
provide a perspective that otherwise would not be possible, it is difficult for
North American scientists to appreciate the socioeconomic realities of
conservation action in Latin America. Latin American contingent at this meeting
is essential for understanding of neotropical migrant landbird ecology, and in
helping to establish a realistic international conservation agenda.