* 8913278
* New Polymers with Controlled Architecture
* NONE,NONE
* 01/15/1990,12/31/1992
* Jean M. J. Frechet, Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* None
* 12/31/1992
* USD 311,700.00

Monodispersed dendritic macromolecules having controlled surface functionality
will be prepared by two methods. The first involves a novel "convergent"
approach in which growth of the macromolecule starts at what will become its
external surface and proceeds inwards through repeated coupling of a
polyfunctional monomer to the single reactive group of the growing polymer,
while the second method uses a more classical solid-phase approach. The
"convergent growth" approach provides unparalleled control of both the number
and the spatial location of the functional groups at the outer surface of the
final spheroidal macromolecule. Once prepared, the dendritic molecules will be
used to prepare new macromolecular assemblies with unusual architectures and
properties. This will be done through modification of the surface functional
groups in processes involving grafting, block polymerization, or coupling
reactions. In particular, the growth of linear polymer chains form controlled
locations on the outer surface of dendritic macromolecules will be studied. The
synthesis of these new macromolecular assemblies will lead to new materials with
novel properties resulting from their unusual topology, their uniform small size
(30-100) A), their symmetrical or unsymmetrical surface functionalization, the
existence of strong molecular dispoles, the presence of chirality, etc.
Applications of these new materials are anticipated in areas as varied as
molecular transport, catalysis, and optoelectronics.