* 8913116
* Analysis and Design of Interconnects for Microelectronics   Applications (Minority Research Initiation)
* ENG,ECCS
* 12/15/1989,05/31/1993
* Jose Schutt-Aine, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 05/31/1993
* USD 264,312.00

Progress made in the fabrication of high-speed devices and the increasing demand
for a higher level of integration in digital circuits have led to several
important changes in the design of networks and computers, and in their
interconnections, both on-chip and off. At present, with the faster rise times,
shorter delays and higher frequencies involved simple analysis and
straightforward simulation of the networks are involved and no longer possible
using the old tools. It is essential to develop more complex and more
sophisticated models and analysis tools for simulating the interconnecting
circuits between components of the network. Computer-aided design (CAD) tools
play an essential role in helping this analysis, in both the design and the
simulation of the interconnects. Measurement techniques play an active role in
determining the accuracy of the design methods as well as the feasibility of the
design considered. Laboratory simulations allow a comparison with computer
simulations and verification of the accuracy of the simulation techniques.
Finally, new interconnect schemes must be devised and analyzed to replace older
methodologies. The object of the proposed research is to provide a better
understanding of the behavior and performance of interconnections in
microelectronics packaging and high-speed digital network applications. Three
important aspects can be distinguished in the study: 1) development of accurate
models and analysis of signal propagation in interconnects; 2) experimental
characterization of interconnections; and 3) implementation of an interconnect-
based computer-aided design simulation program.