* 8913669
* Organization of Symposia on Protistan Phylogeny at Congress in Japan, July 1989
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/1989,12/31/1990
* John Corliss, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Penelope L. Firth
* 12/31/1990
* USD 21,145.00

Protists are a diverse and poorly understood aggregation of microbes, often
considered to include fungi, certain algae, protozoans, and other unicellular
groups. Dr. John Corliss has embarked on a long-term effort to coordinate the
nomenclature and taxonomy of these disparate groups, heading eventually to a
clearer understanding of their evolutionary relationships and histories. This
inter-disciplinary effort will make considerable progress at the Eight
International Congress of Protozoology, to be held in Tsukuba, Japan in July,
1989. Dr. Corliss has organized two symposia at the Congress that will bring
together investigators from different quarters of protistology. These symposia
will focus on new technologies that provide evolutionary data, and on the need
for an interdisciplinary approach to the study of protistans. Dr. Corliss'
efforts to create an integrated approach to protistology have broad
implications. Protistans are central to questions regarding the evolution of
multicellular groups, and they are biologically and ecologically important in
their own rights. The international collaboration and cooperation that will
result from this meeting will affect decades of future research on an array of
microbial groups, leading eventually to a clearer view of some of the world's
earliest life forms.