* 8913250
* U.S.-Italy Cooperative Research:  Embedding Statistical     Processes
* O/D,OISE
* 01/15/1990,06/30/1991
* Galen Shorack, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 06/30/1991
* USD 19,990.00

This award will support a long-term visit by Professor Galen R. Shorack of the
University of Washington to the Universita Degli Studi di Roma in Italy, to
collaborate with Professors Gabriella Salinetti and Giorgio Koch of that
institution. The researchers intend to investigate a broad class of statistical
limit theorems that are of fundamental importance in the theory of empirical
processes. There are at least two major approaches based on the so-called
Skorokhod and Hungarian constructions. The PI has fundamentally simplified one
of these approaches by showing that a properly formulated result yields
classical necessary and sufficient condition types of statistical limit
theorems. The proof depends only on standard second moment inequalities as
opposed to the current delicate exponential bound techniques. Moreover, there is
a natural mechanism by which the so-called weighted empirical process can be
embedded. Additionally, newly discovered second moment techniques can be applied
here also, to again yield a best possible rate of embedding result. This greatly
expands the scope of application to statistical procedures. Thus, where
reasonable conditions for limiting results are known, it will now be possible to
determine both necessary and sufficient conditions. The Italian collaborators
are also currently active in the field of empirical processes although they
approach the subject from different but complementary directions. Thus the
proposed interaction should be of mutual benefit and should help to advance the
area of empirical processes. ***//