* 8913660
* Collaborative Research:  Adjusted and Extended Measures of  Government Budgets, The Balance of Payments, Savings,       Investment and Capital
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/1989,01/31/1992
* Paul Pieper, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Lynn A. Pollnow
* 01/31/1992
* USD 38,356.00

One objectives of this research is to continue the development of adjusted and
extended measures of macroeconomic variables and their application to major
issues of economic theory and policy. The measures will relate to budget and
balance of payments surpluses and deficits, public, private and national saving,
foreign and domestic tangible investment, market and nonmarket output and stocks
of capital and wealth. New data sets will be developed and made available for
public use. The other objective of this project is to analyze the determinants
and interrelations of broader measures of saving, investment and output and
their components. Possible equilibrating mechanisms with regard to budget
deficits and balance of payment capital accounts will be explored through
simulations and empirical estimation. Particular attention will be paid to the
social security system and the effects of public investment in human and
nonhuman capital on private investment and output. The analysis will extent to
major developed countries as well as developing countries, making use of
adjusted budget data and market price and replacement cost indices to introduce
current value estimates of capital and wealth. This research is important
because it will provide a better understanding of international indebtedness and
economic growth.