* 8913598
* US-UK Cooperative Research:  Use of High Performance        Computing and Networking for Computer Integrated            Manfacturing
* O/D,OISE
* 12/01/1989,05/31/1992
* H. Kung, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 05/31/1992
* USD 13,834.00

This award will support a two year program to share facilities and researchers
to carry out complementary work on the use of high performance computing and
networking for computer integrated manufacturing. The investigators are Dr. H.
T. Kung, Carnegie- Mellon University and Dr. Peter Dew and Alan DePennington,
Department of Mechanical Engineering, Leeds University, England. Professor Kung
and his group are at the forefront of the most promising areas of high
performance network parallel computer systems. Dr. DePennington and Dew lead an
internationally recognized, cross-disciplinary research program in mechanical
engineering and computer science. This project will focus on the following
specific tasks: 1) Continue the development of application programming by
benchmarking the Meiko Computing Surface against CMU machines, and investigate
the potential use of AL within the analysis phase of the product life cycle 2)
Investigate the issue of portability of software between diverse parallel
machines and develop tools to aid this process and computers. Both research
groups have complementary research programs. Through this project, the Leeds
group will improve their understanding of CIM requirements for exploiting
parallel computation; the CMU group will gain application insight into the
characteristics of high performance networked parallel architectures and
requirements for future software environments.