* 8913496
* Photophysical and Photochemical Behavior of Metal Complexes on Porous Vycor Glass
* MPS,CHE
* 11/01/1989,10/31/1993
* Harry Gafney, CUNY Queens College
* Continuing Grant
* John Gilje
* 10/31/1993
* USD 242,000.00

The focus of this project in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic
Chemistry Program is the photochemistry of metal complexes adsorbed on porous
Vycor glass. The colored compounds of such transition metals as ruthenium absorb
light to form excited state molecules, which then undergo a variety of chemical
reactions, such as electron transfer or bond cleavage. Both the reaction
dynamics and the products which are formed are quite different in the pores of
the glass than in solutions. In some cases the absorption of light causes the
formation of charge-separated states of the sort needed for practical solar
energy conversion. The reasons for the differences between the photochemistry of
transition metal complexes in Vycor glass and in solution will be explored. The
effects of using mixed ligand complexes, of changing the glass environment and
of changing the assembly of reaction sites will be investigated. The nature of
the surface acceptor sites responsible for electron conduction along the glass
surface will be explored, and laser flash photolysis experiments will be
performed to determine the dynamics of the secondary thermal and photochemical
reactions which follow the primary photoprocesses and account for the
differences in behavior in the glass and in solution. A particular emphasis will
be placed on elucidating the sequence of steps leading to catalytic
intermediates, and on the factors which control the aggregation and distribution
of metals and metal oxides on the glass surface.