* 8913472
* US-UK Cooperative Research:  Graphics and Regularization forSpatial Statistics
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/1989,08/31/1990
* Brian Yandell, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 08/31/1990
* USD 4,479.00

This award will support joint research in statistics between Dr. Brian Yandell,
University of Wisconsin, and two British mathe- maticians - Professor D. Michael
Titterington, University of Glasgow and Professor Brian Ripley, University of
Strathclyde, Glasgow. The focus will be on three interrelated collaborative
projects; graphics in spatial statistics, regularization and statistical
graphics. This area of research is one of the fastest developing and most
exciting in the statistical sciences. This award will give Dr. Yandell the
opportunity to work for four months with leading British researchers in this
field. The first project will involve the investigation of the properties of
existing systems for spatial statistics and image reconstruction, with the view
towards developing a new tool kit for graphical statistics. The project on
regularization will investigate the larger theoretical domain of the problem of
model selection under ill-posed constraints. The third project will concentrate
on the graphics interface and the use of graphics as a means to conduct formal
and informal statistical analysis in an interactive environment. This will
involve considerable development of software. Results of this joint research
should make a significant contribution to the development of statistical
computing tools for displaying and analyzing complicated spatial patterns of
data.