* 8913486
* Enhancement of the Computer Engineering Academic and        Research Program at UPRM
* CSE,EIA
* 09/15/1989,08/31/1995
* Rafael Fernandez-Sein, University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
* Continuing Grant
* John Cherniavsky
* 08/31/1995
* USD 1,334,998.00

The Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering of the University of
Puerto Rico at Mayaguez (UPRM) will acquire new computing resources to enhance
the established academic programs and strengthen research efforts. These
computing resources are required to attain the following goals: Develop a
Master's Program in Computer Engineering within three years. Attract minority
students, from the island and the mainland states, to careers and graduate
education in computer engineering. Increase significantly the research output
and the number of technical publications in learned journals. Strengthen the
computing and connective infrastructure so that researchers can join the
knowledge and information intensive environments made possible through
networking within the academic and industrial communities. Build an
infrastructure to promote faculty development and to create an environment for
research. Develop a program of manufacturing-related research and development
that will forge close ties with industry and foster future entrepreneurial
product development for a world market. As the final outcome of this project,
the number of trained minority computer engineers entering the workforce from
the institution at both undergraduate and graduate levels will significantly
increase in quantity and quality. The students and faculty will be able to use
computing equipment comparable to that used in industry in their studies and
their research. Faculty will be able to conduct state of the art research for
both government and industry sponsors.