* 8913221
* US-Switzerland Cooperative Research on the Effects of       Insulin-like Growth Factor I From Dietary Colostrum
* O/D,OISE
* 04/15/1990,09/30/1992
* Craig Baumrucker, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 09/30/1992
* USD 11,490.00

This award provides partial support for a sabbatical research visit to
Switzerland by Professor Craig R. Baumrucker of Pennsylvania State University.
He will work with Professor Juergen Blum of the Institute of Animal Breeding of
the University of Bern and Professors E. R. Froesch and J. Zapf of the
Department of Internal Medicine, University of Zurich. They have mutual interest
and complementary expertise in studies of the effects of bovine colostrum growth
factor (IGF-I) in the neonatal calf. Dr. Blum has extensive experience in
surgical and physiological work with ruminants; Dr. Baumrucker is more
accomplished in the cellular-molecular aspects of the ruminant mammary gland.
The specific objectives of their current research are to determine if dietary
IGF-I in bovine colostrum affects intestinal growth in vivo and to quantify the
survival of bioactive dietary IGF-I in the intestine of the calf. They will also
investigate the occurrence of type I and II IGF receptors in intestinal
membranes. The recent discoveries of numerous growth factors has opened a new
and exciting era for the understanding of animal tissue development and growth,
with implications for agricultural productivity as well as human biology. By
testing the hypothesis that colostrum containing IGF-I has beneficial growth
effects upon the bovine neonatal intestine, this study will contribute
substantially to understanding of what happens to both colostrum and milk in the
gut. Isolation of cell stimulatory factors and understanding of IGF-I are
prerequisites for development of recombinant growth factors. Since human and
bovine colostrum are identical, the results of this study may benefit the human
species.