* 8913723
* Particle Dry Deposition From the Ambient Atmosphere:  The   Role of Particle-Surface Interactions
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/1990,02/28/1993
* Armistead Russell, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Jarvis L. Moyers
* 02/28/1993
* USD 210,300.00

Airborne particles play a vital role in maintaining the earth's energy balance,
sustaining ecosystems and influencing global cycles of chemical species.
Unfortunately, our understanding of the processes affecting these particles,
from emissions to their ultimate fate, is far from complete. A particular
deficiency concerns our limited knowledge of particle removal from the
atmosphere by dry deposition. The overall goal of this project is to determine
the most important factors influencing dry deposition of airborne particles,
focusing on interactions between particles and the surface of vegetation. There
are three specific objectives: 1) to develop improved mathematical formulations
for several mechanisms of particle-surface interaction, 2) to verify these
formulations through wind tunnel tests, and 3) to apply the formulations to
field conditions by developing and verifying an in-canopy deposition model.
Objective 1 will be achieved by improving existing formulations in the areas of
turbulent transport through the viscous sublayer, electrostatic attractions, and
resuspension. Objective 2 will be achieved by conducting deposition and
reentrainment measurements in a wind tunnel using monodisperse uranine particles
that can be measured by fluorescence. Finally, objective 3 will be achieved by
developing a model that relates airborne concentrations within the canopy and
geometry of the vegetation elements are used as model inputs. Measurement of dry
deposition of ambient chemical species with known size distributions will allow
verification of the model. The results of this study will enable a better
understanding of the most important processes influencing particle dry
deposition onto natural surfaces. This, in turn, will yield more accurate
prediction of dry deposition as a component of atmospheric transport models.