* 8913441
* U.S.-West Europe Workshop on Genes and Development:         Molecular and Logical Themes from Phage to Metazoa;         Provence, France; May 7-11, 1990
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1990,01/31/1991
* William Dove, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 01/31/1991
* USD 4,000.00

This award supports the participation of five young U.S. biologists in an
international conference addressing the relatively new role of experimental
genetics in the study of developmental biology. The conference was jointly
organized by several European and American scientists, including William F. Dove
of University of Wisconsin and Francois Jacob of the Institut Pasteur, Paris,
France. The meeting is to be held May 7 - 11, 1990, in Provence, France. The
participants have a common intellectual starting point - an understanding of
phages and an appreciation of genetical experimental systems, i.e., the
discovery of salient developmental mutants to identify key developmenal
elements. However, they work with a wide variety of organisms including
bacteria, nematodes, plants, drosophila, birds and mice. The conference will
review the successes and limitations of this approach, familiarize the 30 or so
participants with the experimental systems being used, and encourage new modes
of thinking about developmental biology for the coming decade. Specific themes
of the meeting include control of transcription versus post-translational
interactions; lineages and polar divisions; cell interaction and signalling; and
the genetics of dispensible versus essential developmental processes. The
framework of the meeting is integrative questions such as: How broadly can one
use the formalisms of regulatory loops to extend our understanding of
development? In what ways does the reductionist tradition work, and in what ways
not? What useful paradigm replaces the nineteenth century dualism of
preformation/epigenesis? Participants include several leading contributors to
this field as well as some promising younger scientists who will shape the
future of developmental biology.