* 8913297
* Dissertation Research:  The Development of the Expression ofTime and Event in Narrative
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1989,08/31/1990
* David McNeill, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Paul G. Chapin
* 08/31/1990
* USD 10,607.00

ABSTRACT By the time children are five years old, they are using many of the
same linguistic and gestural devices that adults do to mark the relationship
between events in a story. This fact has lead many researchers on narrative
skills to presuppose the notion of event. The present study asks whether
appearances may not be deceiving; whether children and adult's similar
linguistic means function in fundamentally different ways. In the first phase of
the study adults and children aged 4-5, 7-8, and 10-11 will watch a short
cartoon and then narrate the story to a same-age listener. Analyses of verbal
and gestural transcripts will focus on the linguistic devices for conveying
temporal structure in narrative, and on the use of non- representational
gestures which adults produce when they are introducing and commenting on
narrative events. In the second phase, the same subjects will be presented with
stills from the stimulus cartoon and asked to "group the pictures that belong
together". Event groupings will be compared with a frame- by-frame analysis of
the stimulus cartoon, and with each subject's choice of temporal conjunctions
and placement of beats and deictic gestures. In this way, this study begins to
find out how children convey the interrelationship of events in narrative with
the linguistic and gestural means at their disposal, and contributes to an
understanding of the interaction between cognitive ability and linguistic skills
in the development of narrative competence.