* 8913405
* Language and Cultural Training for the International        Engineering Experience
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/1990,05/31/1993
* James Eifert, Rose-Hulman Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* William Blanpied
* 05/31/1993
* USD 142,362.00

Rose-Hulman Institute of Technology will design and implement a three-part
program of Japanese language and cultural training aimed at senior-level
engineering students. Students will be drawn primarily from the 11 engineering
colleges which, together with Rose-Hulman, comprise the Engineering Alliance for
Global Education (EAGLE) whose overall objectives are to provide international
work experiences for recent engineering graduates or senior-level students, and
to develop curricular tools to enable participants to profit from such
experiences. Up to 75 students will participate in the first cycle of the Rose-
Hulman program. The first part will consist of a one-week screening and
orientation session at the end the summer prior to the final year of engineering
studies. The second part will be a customized, mentored self-study course in the
Japanese language on the participants' home campuses during their final year of
engineering studies. The third part will take place during the summer following
receipt of the engineering degree and will consist of a ten-week, resident,
intensive language and cultural skills session. Industrial support is being
sought to place those who complete the program successfully in year-long
internship positions with U.S.-owned or affiliated companies in Japan
immediately following that final summer.