* 8913627
* Studies of Magnetohydrodynamic Turbulence and Turbulence    in the Interplanetary Medium
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/1989,01/31/1993
* William Matthaeus, Bartol Research Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Sherry O. Farwell
* 01/31/1993
* USD 432,100.00

This grant focuses on plasma turbulence in the magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) model,
with an emphasis on implications for space plasmas and S/T research. A major
continuing goal is the identification and characterization of basic dynamical
processes in MHD turbulence. Prior results on incompressible turbulent
relaxation processes such as selective decay and dynamic alignment will be
extended to three dimensions and generalized to moderately compressible
magnetofluids. Further study and application of turbulent reconnection and
turbulence driven by large scale velocity shear will be pursued. These
turbulence theory studies involve both analytical studies and extensive direct
numerical simulations. Study and development of numerical algorithms for
compressible turbulence simulations is also undertaken. A second major area of
emphasis is the study of turbulence in the interplanetary medium at MHD scales,
involving a high degree of interplay with the basic theory and extensive
comparisons with observational data. Major undertakings in interplanetary
studies include further development of the consequences of nearly incompressible
MHD theory, completion and numerical implementation of an analytical model for
theory, completion and numerical implementation of an analytical model for the
evolution of interplanetary turbulence, including couplings of the local
turbulence to large scale gradients, and the further study of dissipation
mechanisms acting near ion gyroscales in the solar wind plasma. A third and
closely related area of study involves the effects of MHD turbulence on charged
particle acceleration and scattering, especially due to induced electric fields.
The overall aim is to understand MHD processes and hence interplanetary
'weather'. //