* 8913389
* U.S.-Australia Cooperative Research:  Comparative Analysis  of Mitochondrial DNA of Australian and U.S. Drosophila
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1990,03/31/1992
* Richard Halliburton, Western Connecticut State University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Ganz
* 03/31/1992
* USD 10,000.00

This award will support collaborative research between Dr. Richard Halliburton
of Western Connecticut State University and Professor James S.F. Barker of the
University of New England, New South Wales, Australia. The principle objectives
are to survey Australian populations of Drosophila species for variation and
differentiation of mitochondrial DNA, as detected by enzyme analysis, and to
estimate correla- tions with genetic variability and with environmental
variables. Mitochondrial DNA has become an effective tool for inferring
evolutionary relationships. For one, because it does not undergo recombination,
it alleviates problems associated with more conventional genetic analysis of
evolutionary problems. Project results will advance understanding of the extent
and nature of genetic variation in desert Drosophila, the nature of interactions
between mitochondrial and chromosomal DNA, and enable comparisons between
Drosophila species in the United States and Australia. The project represents
excellent collaboration between the Australian researcher, world-known for his
studies of the evolutionary genetics of Drosophila and Halliburton's expertise
in enzyme studies that suggest that genetic variability is maintained by
balancing natural selection, and not by migration or genetic drift. Validation
of the Halliburton hypothesis would be strongly enhanced by testing over the
wide geographical range offered by the Australian cooperation. Comparisons of
desert Drosophila in the United States and Australia will advance basic
understanding of the nature and causes of genetic variation in desert
Drosophila. In addition, the research has potential to further under- standing
of the evolution of desert organisms in general, with potentially important
ecological implications.