* 8913705
* US-France Cooperative Research:  Late Neogene Paleoceanogra-phy of the Centeral Indian Basin
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1990,09/30/1992
* David Johnson, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 09/30/1992
* USD 7,260.00

This award will support collaborative research between Dr. David Johnson, Woods
Hole Oceanographic Institution and Dr. Jean Pierre Caulet, Museum of Natural
History, Paris, France. The objective of the project is the detailed sampling
and analysis of long piston cores collected in the Central Indian Basin during
the 1989 coring expedition of the French research vessel Marion Dufresne. In the
region where the cores were collected, the Neogene radiolarian assemblages are
well preserved and the paleomagnetic polarity record can be readily identified.
Using the long cores, the investigators will be able to refine and extend
precise calibrations of faunal datum levels with the magnetic polarity time
scale into the Late and Middle Miocene. They will also be able to integrate the
silica records with those of cores taken from previous expeditions on this
vessel. Through this synthesis, the investigators expect to be able to interpret
the regional silica distribution patterns in terms of the tectonic and
paleoceanographic history of the Central Indian Ocean. This study may provide
important constraints on subsequent models by evolutionary biologists. The
qualitative data may point the way toward stratigraphic intervals and geographic
regions where time-transgressive evolutionary patterns can be further
substantiated using other microfaunal and microfloral fossil marine organisms.
The project will benefit from the complementary expertise of the two
investigators in micropaleontology and sedimentology.