* 8913055
* U.S.-Malaysia Cooperative Research on Threshold Region      Elastic Photon Atom Scattering
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/1990,02/28/1993
* Richard Pratt, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 02/28/1993
* USD 20,330.00

This proposal requests funds to permit Dr. James E. Bayfield and Dr. Richard H.
Pratt, Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Pittsburgh, to pursue
with a team of Malaysian scientists led by Dr. Chon Sing Chong, School of
Physics, Universiti Sains Malaysia (USM), Penang, Malaysia, for a period of 24
months, a program of cooperative research on threshold region elastic photon
atom scattering. The collaborators will use theory and experiment to study the
extent to which current models describe elastic photon atom scattering in
moderate to high atomic number media. Cross sections will be measured for a
variety of elements and scattering angles. These experimentally obtained cross
sections will be compared with theoretical predictions. The use of experimental
data to improve theoretical models will be explored. Both small angle circular
target geometry and transmission type geometry will be utilized in the
measurements. This project involves cooperative research of two groups of
investigators who have complementary skills and facilities. The experimental
group at USM has a background of research in radiation metrology with efforts
directed towards obtaining higher precision and more accurate measurement of
total interaction coefficients and differential scattering cross sections of
photons, in addition to applications-based research. The group at Pittsburgh has
considerable involvement in benchmark theoretical calculations. Their interest
has been in developing a firm physical understanding of the various possible
photon interaction processes at the atomic level. The key collaborators are
highly respected scientists who, for a number of years, have cooperated in the
field of the research. Their cooperation has been highly successful and has
resulted in joint publications in refereed journals. This project is relevant to
the objectives of the Science in Developing Countries Program which seeks to
increase the level of cooperation between U.S. scientists and engineers and
their counterparts in developing countries through the exchange of scientific
information, ideas, skills, and techniques and through collaboration on problems
of mutual benefit.