* 8913416
* Fort Monmouth Interaction: Dynamics of Intersubband Carrier Transitions in Quantum Wells and Superlattices
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1989,07/31/1990
* Jia-Ming Liu, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Arthur R. Bergen
* 07/31/1990
* USD 39,245.00

This proposal describes proposed collaborative research project between UCLA and
the U.S. Army Electronics Technology and Devices Laboratory (ETDL) through the
support of the NSF-Fort Monmouth Interaction Program. The objective of this
project is to investigate the ultrafast carrier dynamics of the intersubband
transitions in the doped GaAs/A1GaAs quantum-well and superlattice structures.
Of particular interest are structures which have resonant intersubband
transitions corresponding to optical wavelengths in the 8 to 14 um atmospheric
window spectral range. The quantum well will be grown at ETDL in collaboration
with Dr. Mitro Dutta. Basic preparation and characterization of the samples will
also be carried out at ETDL by a participating graduate student from UCLA. The
dynamic processes involved in the intersubband transitions will be investigated
at UCLA with tunable picosecond time-resolved infrared spectroscopy. The carrier
dynamics as a function of material and structural parameters will also be
studied. The results from this research will lead to better understanding of the
ultrafast carrier dynamics in the intersubband transitions and will enable us to
determine the dominant processes involved. This knowledge is of crucial
importance for the future development of the infrared devices based on the
intersubband transition process in the quantum wells and superlattices.