* 8914921
* LMER Site for the Study of Biogeochemical Reactions in      Estuaries at Tomales Bay, California
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/1989,03/31/1996
* James Hollibaugh, San Francisco State University
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 03/31/1996
* USD 923,771.00

The coastal bays plays a critical role in the transport and transformation of
land runoff to the ocean. Drs. Hollibaugh and Smith will consider the role of
bays and estuaries in the net flux of Carbon, Nitrogen, and Phosphorous between
the land and ocean. The system of interest (Tomales Bay, California) is
hydrographically simple, has a long water residence time, is sufficiently
compact that it can be studied as a single unit, and has low inorganic nutrient
pollution. The system functions metabolically like numerous other coastal marine
ecosystems. External sources of organic matter which support food chains in this
system are simple to characterize and have strong seasonal and interannual
signals. These investigators will address the following questions by means of a
multi-investigator field and laboratory program: 1) What is the relative
importance of coastal upwelling versus terrigenous runoff in delivering
oxidizable organic matter and nutrients to this system? 2) What are the
responses of system metabolism and the metabolism of major system components to
seasonal and interannual variations in these forcing functions? 3) What is the
relationship between net system metabolism and non-conservative fluxes of
nitrogen? 4) Can rates derived from stoichiometric arguments be validated by
"direct" biochemical assays? It is anticipated that the outcome of this research
can be extrapolated to other systems which may be applicable to management of
the nations resources. This effort is being funded as a Land Margins Ecosystem
Research project which is jointly supported by the Directorates of Geosciences
and Biotic Systems and Resources.