* 8914358
* Control and Regulation of Alternate Pathways of Metabolism
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/1990,07/31/1993
* Henry Reeves, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Uffen
* 07/31/1993
* USD 259,000.00

Protein phosphorylation in bacteria has only recently been demonstrated. The
first report was in E. coli, where an NADP- specific isocitrate dehydrogenase
was identified as a substrate for the protein kinase. More recently, the
phosphorylation of isocitrate lyase and enolase in E. coli has been reported.
This project supports research to: 1) further characterize the phosphorylated
forms of isocitrate lyase and enolase; 2) further purify and characterize
protein kinases and phosphatases catlyzing the reversible phosphorylation of
these two enzymes; 3) elucidate the regulation of cellular metabolism as it is
affected by the post-translational modification of these two enzymes; 4)
determine the factors which regulate the synthesis and expression of these
activities; 5) investigate the unique regulation of isocitrate dehydrogenase
activity in Acinetobacter calcoaceticus; and 6) investigate the role of
prokaryotic protein kinases and other endogenous proteins in the regulation of
eukaryotic metabolism. The reversible phosphorylation of regulatory enzymes and
proteins is known to be an important mechanism for the metabolic control of a
wide variety of cellular functions in many higher organisms, and in some
viruses. Only recently has protein phosphorylation been demonstrated to occur in
bacteria. It is now generally accepted that protein phosphorylation represents
an important regulatory mechanism for a variety of physiological processes in
many species of microorganisms. This research will examine the phosphorylation
of bacterial enzymes, providing a better understanding of how bacterial
metabolism is controlled. It will also provide insight into how this
phosphorylation system interacts with that of higher organisms, and whether this
might have any relationship to the process of infection.