* 8914004
* Investigation of Persistent and Coherent Structures in      Geophysical and Turbulent Flow
* GEO,AGS
* 11/01/1989,10/31/1993
* Geoffrey Vallis, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 10/31/1993
* USD 316,000.00

This research includes theoretical, numerical and observational studies of the
free solutions of the equations of fluid motion, with the goal of understanding
persistent and coherent structures in the atmosphere and in fluid turbulence.
Such structures are ubiquitous features of numerical simulations and of large
scale atmospheric flow. Understanding how they evolve and affect the turbulent
flow in which they are embedded is fundamentally important in geophysical fluid
dynamics, as well as being of practical importance in long range predictability.
The PIs have recently discovered potentially powerful methods which enable
steady stable solutions to be constructed from an unsteady initial state, while
preserving the vorticity structure, or signature, of the initial state. They
will utilize such methods in an investigation of observed persistent phenomena
in the atmosphere, and to systematically investigate the construction of steady
solutions of the equations of motion, for three dimensional, two-dimensional and
quasi-geostrophic flow. They will also perform theoretical and numerical
investigations of this and related techniques. The general significance of the
work is that use of the methods will elucidate the nature of persistent
structures in turbulence and in geophysical flow, by relating them to free
solutions of the equations of motion. The methods also provide the means to
construct new, stable, fluid configurations. Weather and climate systems are
manifestations of geophysical turbulence and so this research may lead to
improved understanding of these systems.