* 8914951
* U.S.-Japan Cooperative Research:  Study of Melt-Solid       Segregation in the Upper Mantle as Represented by the       Horoman Peridotite, Hokkaido, Japan
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1990,03/31/1992
* Frederick Frey, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Turczak
* 03/31/1992
* USD 16,470.00

This award will facilitate cooperation in earth science between Professors
Frederick A. Frey and Nobumichi Shimizu, Department of Earth, Atmospheric, and
Planetary Sciences, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, and Professor Masaaki
Obata, Department of Geology, Kumamoto University, Japan, and several Japanese
colleagues. The scientists will collaborate in a study of the Horoman
peridotite, a large, exposed igneous rock formation on the Japanese island of
Hokkaido. It is an unusual formation, derived from the earth's upper mantle, and
characterized by a well developed layer structure, with systematic changes in
mineral composition and well-exposed rocks which are relatively free from
crustal alteration. These properties make it ideal for studying certain
geochemical processes that have occurred in the upper mantle, particularly the
formation, segregation and migration of partial melts. The observed layering has
been interpreted as reflecting "magma waves" in a partially molten, ascending
mantle. The Horoman may thus actually be a piece of upper mantle where the
processes of melt formation and segregation have been frozen in situ. The
cooperating scientists will combine a quantitative field and petrologic study of
the peridotite formation with geochemical analyses for major and trace element
abundances and radiogenic isotope ratios in the rocks. A study of layered upper
mantle rocks is important because it provides information on the partial melting
and melt segregation occurring in the earth's upper mantle. Though poorly
understood, these processes appear to be fundamental to the past, current, and
future evolution of the earth. This investigation of the Horoman peridotite is
aimed at contributing to a better understanding of these processes.