* 8914756
* The Effect of Pressure on Low and Intermediate Temperature  Hydrocarbon Oxidation
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/1990,01/31/1993
* Nicholas Cernansky, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* George P. Peterson
* 01/31/1993
* USD 159,532.00

Support is provided to study the effect of pressure on low and intermediate
temperature oxidation of C4 hydrocarbon fuels. The current project will continue
and completeprevious NSF work and extend it to examine the effects of pressure
in some detail. An important and unique goal of this new program will be to
develop and demonstrate in situ FTIR capability for monitoring stable and
radical species. Three separate and complementary bench scale experiments (a
pressurized flow reactor, an atmospheric pressure flow reactor, and a static
reactor) are available and will be used to examine the oxidation chemistry of
hydrocarbons over a range of temperatures, pressures, and equivalence ratios.
Gas chromatography, GC/MS, and GC/FTIR will be used for chemical analysis of the
stable reaction intermediates and products. In situ measurements of stable and
radical species are planned using FTIR spectroscopy. Specifically, the
objectives are to (1) develop and implement techniques for making in situ
measurements of concentrations of stable and radical species with Fourier
Transform Infrared Spectroscopy; (2) obtain kinetic information in the low and
intermediate temperatures regimes (500-1000 K) over a range of pressures (up to
20 atm) for the oxidation of pure C4 hydrocarbons. This research will focus on
developing and demonstrating FTIR capabilities and on mechanistic studies using
flow reactors with particular emphasis on pressure effects of hydrocarbon
combustion. Successful completion of the program will provide important new data
and results showing the effects of pressure on hydrocarbon oxidation, and
eventually, lead to a comprehensive understanding of fuel factors and physical
effects in hydrocarbon oxidation systems.