* 8914372
* U.S.-Japan Cooperative Research: Theoretical Investigations of Correlation in Few-Body Atomic Collisions
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1990,03/31/1992
* Chii Dong Lin, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Turczak
* 03/31/1992
* USD 17,650.00

This award will facilitate continued collaboration between physicists at Kansas
State University and Argonne National Laboratory in the U.S. and the University
of Electro- Communications, the University of Tsukuba, and Kyoto University in
Japan. The scientists are cooperating in a study of what are known as electron
correlation effects in heavy particle collisions and in collisions of atoms with
antimatter. These effects arise when the processes being observed depend on the
interaction between two or more electrons. Such interaction or interdependency
in general requires a much more complicated and difficult treatment than when
one-electron processes are considered. Examples of two-electron processes are
double capture, transfer excitation, transfer ionization, double ionization, and
double excitation. These phenomena are of current experimental interest, and
they pose new challenges to theorists. The principal investigators in this
project under the U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science Program are Dr. James H.
McGuire, Kansas State University, and Dr. Michio Matsuzawa, The University of
Electro-Communications, Tokyo, Japan. The collaborating researchers in this
current activity will examine the impact excitation of doubly excited states and
double ionization of helium atoms by protons and antiprotons over a wide range
of collision energies. They will also study some aspects of Coulombic three-body
systems by analyzing the wave functions in the body-frame of the system, using
mass- weighted hyperspherical coordinates. The U.S. and Japanese groups have
been investigating similar topics and have collaborated previously. Exchanging
and combining methods and computer codes should prove beneficial to each group
involved, and to the understanding of the physical processes being studied.