* 8914990
* US-France Cooperative Research:  Structural and Chemical    Investigations of Chalcogenide-Type Intercalation Compounds
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1990,09/30/1993
* Michael McKelvy, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 09/30/1993
* USD 14,550.00

This award will support collaborative research in solid state chemistry between
Dr. William Glaunsinger, Arizona State University and Dr. Pierre Colombet,
Institute for Material Physics and Chemistry, Nantes, France. The objective of
the project is the synthesis and characterization of sulfide intercalation
compounds. The primary thrust of modern materials research is to synthesis new
materials and structural arrangements with desirable chemical and physical
properties based on a knowledge of key structure-property relationships. One of
the best examples of this theme has been research on intercalation compounds,
which are formed by the insertion of guest species (intercalants) into a host
matrix. By appropriate choice of guest and hosts, intercalation compounds can be
prepared with controlled chemical, structural, thermal, motional and electronic
properties. In the proposed project, the investigators plan to elucidate the
structures and chemical reactivity of a carefully selected set of prototypical
intercalation compounds using four different classes of chalcogenide hosts.
These materials will provide a unique solid-state framework for detailed study
of a diversity of intriguing structuring, physical and chemical phenomena in
reduced dimensionality. Crystal structures will be determined using neutron and
X-ray diffraction. This project will benefit from the complementary expertise of
the two investigators. Dr. Colombet and his group are internationally recognized
researchers in layered compound chemistry and Dr. Glaunsinger has significant
experience in the area of intercalation compounds.