* 8914637
* US-France Cooperative Research:  Electronic Properties of   Hg-based Heterostructures Grown by Molecular Beam Epitaxy
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1990,09/30/1993
* Jean-Pierre Faurie, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 09/30/1993
* USD 11,650.00

This award will support collaborative research in solid state physics between
Dr. Jean-Pierre Faurie, University of Illinois at Chicago and Dr. Yves Guldner,
Department of Physics, Ecole Normale Superieure, Paris, France. The objective of
the project is the study of the electronic properties of Hg-based
heterostructures grown by molecular beam epitaxy (MBE). The II-VI superlattices
(SL's) fabricated with CdTe and zero-gap Hg-based compounds form a new class of
heterostructures which are of great interest both fundamentally and technically.
The Hg- based semi-conducting heterostructures are considered to be very
important and are currently being intensively studied. These heterostructures
have been termed "Type III heterostructures" because of the unique inverted band
structures of the zero-gap material; in particular the mass reversal for the
light particles occurring at each interface leads to the existence of quasi
interference states. This distinctive feature contributes significantly to
optical and transport properties of these structures. On the other hand, HgTe-
CdTe SL's have been proposed as a new material for far infrared detection and
they are now under consideration for infrared lasers and optical switching due
to the large optical non-linearities observed in these SL's. In this research
project, the investigators propose to grow and study two novel SL systems by
using MBE as the growth technique and magneto-optical and magneto-transport as
the characterization techniques. They also propose to grow by MBE and to study
the resonant tunnelling and magneto-tunnelling through HgTe-CdTe double barrier
structures. The project will benefit from the complementary expertise of the two
investigators. Dr. Faurie is an internationally recognized leader in the area of
modulated semiconductor structures grown by MBE. The French group is well
recognized for its work on the electronic properties of semi- conductor based
heterostructures, such as quantum wells, super- lattices and heterostructures
with modulated doping.