* 8914599
* Dissertation Research: Seed Dispersal and Population GeneticStructure
* BIO,DEB
* 12/15/1989,11/30/1990
* Donald Waller, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Gregory J. McCants
* 11/30/1990
* USD 6,500.00

The effects of seed dispersal on genetic structure are much less well studied
than those of pollen dispersal. Broad taxonomic comparisons have failed to
demonstrate conclusively the relationship between mode of dispersal and
population genetic structure. The proposed research will compare three sympatric
species in the family Umbelliferae, which differ mainly in morphological
adaptations for seed dispersal by attachment to animals, to isolate the effects
of seed dispersal traits on genetic structure. Genetic diversity within and
among 15-18 populations, ranging from <0.5 to > 100 km apart, will be evaluated
from isozyme data. Two populations will be more intensively studied by mapping
and genotyping several hundred individuals, as well as collecting seeds for
outcrossing analyses. These spatial and genetic data, combined with observations
on demography, flowering and fruiting will be used to investigate patterns of
microgeographic genetic differentiation and mating systems. Field and laboratory
studies will be used to estimate seed removal rates and attachment and
detachment probabilities of fruits on dispersers. Correlations of genetic and
spatial distances between reproductive plants and seed crops or seedlings will
be used to evaluate the relative importance of pollen and seed dispersal on gene
flow within the two mapped populations. This study will contribute to
understanding how seed dispersal mechanisms affect population genetic structure,
quantitative and qualitative difference in the apportionment of genetic
variation at different spatial scales, and the relative importance of the
effects of seed versus pollen dispersal on patterns of plant population
differentiation. Because these species occur in "habitat islands" of relatively
undisturbed forest in nature preserves, this study will provide information with
which to examine the effects of habitat size and isolation on gene flow and the
maintenance of genetic diversity.