* 8914419
* US-France Cooperative Research:  Properties of Hot Nuclei
* O/D,OISE
* 02/01/1990,07/31/1993
* Joseph Natowitz, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 07/31/1993
* USD 18,850.00

This award will support contiued collaborative research among the following
researchers: Dr. J.B. Natowitz, Cyclotron Institute, Texas A&amp;M University,
Drs. Albert Demeyer and Daniel Drain, Institute of Nuclear Physics, Lyon and Dr.
Alain Giorni, Institute of Nuclear Sciences, Grenoble, France. The objective of
the research is the study of nuclear properties at high excitation energy. The
experimental program to be pursued will focus on measurements of the properties
of nuclei having hundreds of MeV of excitation energy produced in heavy ion
induced reactions. Among the properties to be determined are the heat
capacities, limiting temperatures and modes of de-excitation or disassembly.
Studies of hot nuclei near the limits of self-bound nuclear systems allows
stringent tests of theoretical models of the nucleus and provide new information
on nuclear dynamics and the nuclear equation of state at elevated temperature.
The AMPHORA detector array at Grenoble and new detection equipment available at
Texas A&amp;M will be the primary research tools employed in this work. The
project will benefit from the significant expertise of Dr. Natowitz on this
topic, as well as the sharing of U.S. and French accelerators and equipment. The
latter will greatly help in obtaining the necessary beam time, and in full
construction of an optimal experimental set up.8914710 Beck This award will
support collaborative research between Dr. Jean Galtier and Dr. Brigitte Meyer-
Berthaud, Universite des Sciences et Techniques du Languedoc, Montpellier,
France, and Dr. Charles Beck, University of Michigan, Ann Arber and Dr. William
Stein, State University of New York-Binghamton, centering the origin and early
evolution of seed plants. These two research groups have access to especially
large and important collections of some of the earliest known seed plants,
members of the extinct Lower Carboniferous seed fern family, Calamopityaceae,
from the New Albany Shale of the United States, and the Lydiennes Formation of
the Montagne Noire of France. In the recent years, it has become increasingly
clear that input from fossil early seed plants is essential for correctly
inferring seed plant phylogeny. However, to be successful more comprehensive
geological and geographic perspectives on calamopityacean and other early seed
plant remains must be developed. This award will provide travel support to allow
the investigators to integrate their research efforts in several areas
including: i) detailed systematic analysis of very similar material described
independently by the two groups, ii) a concerted effort to improve the methods
by which information on these forms is collected, including development of
morphometric analytical techniques for assessing homology in the primary
vascular system, iii) development of plans for a comprehensive database on early
seed plant remains suitable for a wide range of research problems, and iv) a
phylogenetic analysis of seed plant origins concentrating on the fossil evidence
of this group's early members.