* 8914781
* The Study of Quantum Confinement Effects for Optical Beam   Modulation
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/1989,07/31/1991
* Michael Fiddy, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* alexander schwarzkopf
* 07/31/1991
* USD 25,000.00

This award funds a collaboration between Northeastern University and the
University of Lowell and focuses on a Spectra Physics Ring Dye Laser (actively
stabilized model 380D) owned by Northeastern but currently installed in the
research optics laboratory at the University of Lowell. It is pumped by a new
Lexel 5W Argon ion laser provided by the University of Lowell. This tunable
laser source provides a key probe in the study of the quantum confinement
effects for optical beam modulation. The objectives of the research are centered
around the investigations of particle distribution, nonlinear refractive
indices, estimation of response times, and beam amplitude noise. The primary
activity will be the study of a specific type of non- linear optical medium that
can exhibit large optical non- linearities with short response times. A strongly
non-linear material allows relatively weak optical fields to be used for writing
structures that can diffract or modulate optical beams. The optical device
envisioned ultimately will consist of an array of sets or clusters of 'quantum
dots'. In the initial stages of this program, materials such as colloidal
suspensions of (40 Angstrom) gold particles, are readily available and will be
used to study quantum confinement effects. A data base will be developed on the
optical properties of this particle suspension as a function of incident power
and wavelength; response times and the bulk optical nonlinearity of the medium
as a function of particle concentration, and where possible, particle size will
be measured. The principal investigators are qualified to conduct this research
and a grant of $25,000 for one year is recommended.