* 8914520
* Transient Radiation Properties of Strongly Radiating        Turbulent Flames
* ENG,CBET
* 11/15/1989,04/30/1993
* Jay Gore, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* mary chen
* 04/30/1993
* USD 143,470.00

This research proposal attempts to obtain information on the transient radiation
characteristics of strongly radiating flames. The authors have noted that
previous attempts at predicting emission temperatures, absorption coefficients,
and radiative heat fluxes for such flames have been in considerable error, and
they propose that the cause of this may be due to the misinterpretation of data
which includes both spatial variations and temporal variation. Previous analyses
have not attempted to separate these effects. However, the authors presented
ample evidence to indicate that, because of the high level of turbulence in the
flames of interest, temporal fluctuations are indeed present. The approach is a
coordinated experimental/analytical study. The experimental program is
innovative and ambitious. It will attempt to obtain simultaneous time resolved
measurements of temperature, soot absorption coefficient, and Carbon Dioxide
concentration at various positions in an acetylene/air diffusion flame. The
analytical approach is novel in that it will attempt to follow the history of a
parcel of fuel through its trajectory within the turbulent flame. Both studies
will be closely connected for correlation. The study proposed is a very
important problem in a variety of power generation, environmental, and
industrial applications, and the fundamental knowledge as proposed is very much
in need.