* 8914587
* Research in Parallel Program Design and Architecture        Synthesis
* CSE,EIA
* 01/01/1990,09/30/1995
* S. Iyer, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* John Cherniavsky
* 09/30/1995
* USD 1,179,700.00

This award provides support to develop computing infrastructure for research in
four primary areas: parallel program design tools, development of a CAD design
system, distributed database design, and visual texture perception. The new
infrastructure includes the development of a more powerful UNIX environment, the
upgrading of parallel processing capability, the acquisition of a number of
workstations, and the provision of hardware and software technicians. The
parallel program design tools research focuses on the design of various tools to
assist in the development of parallel programs. One aspect is the design of
kernel-level mechanisms for distributed real- time programs. Another is the
design of operating system mechanisms to support different kinds of parallel
programming paradigms. A third aspect is the development of techniques for the
static analysis of parallel programs, including deadlock detection. The CAD
design system research focuses on the development of a constraint driven, multi-
level CAD design system. This system includes CAD tools to support high-level
architectural design, behavioral synthesis, logic synthesis, and layout
generation. Synthesis for performance is an emphasis. Distributed database
design research is concerned with two issues in the design of distributed
databases. The first is the design and analysis of highly available databases.
Replication methods to tolerate site and communication failures are being
explored. Database design using robust data structures to tolerate an
intermediate level of faults, including software faults and partial media
failures is also being investigated. The second issue is the development of a
distributed database system using an object mode. Visual texture perception
research is concerned with visual texture perception in humans and machines. The
trade-offs of using different types of filters as the front-end for the texture
discrimination module in a machine vision system are being explored. VLSI-
appropriate architectures for various problems in machine vision are also being
studied. Some of these architectures will be prototyped using the CAD tools
developed above.