* 8914934
* US-Hungary Research on Charcoal Formation from Biomass
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1990,03/31/1994
* Michael Antal, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 03/31/1994
* USD 29,799.00

Research described in this proposal explores new approaches to increasing the
yields of charcoal from biomass. Thermogravimetric studies of water washed, acid
washed (low temperature), and acid hydrolyzed bagasse will be undertaken to
determine the influence of the various components of bagasse on charcoal
formation. Considerable experimental evidence has accumulated which suggests
that elevated pressures and a stagnant gas environment can double the usual
yield of charcoal from biomass. This phenomena will be detailed by studying
biomass pyrolysis in closed, sealed crucibles using a differential scanning
calorimeter to monitor heat demand. Both studies of peak pressure and substrate
composition will be undertaken to gain insight into how charcoal yields from
biomass can be improved. Kinetic analysis of the data will also be completed.
These studies rely on complementary expertise and instrumentation available in
the Renewable Resources Research Laboratory of the University of Hawaii, and the
Hungarian Academy of Sciences Laboratory for Inorganic Chemistry. The research
will be accomplished during exchange visits of scientists between the two
laboratories. Results of this work will be particularly important to Pacific rim
countries (Thailand, the Philippines, India, and China) which use substantial
amounts of charcoal for cooking, and other developing countries (such as Brazil)
which rely on charcoal to smelt iron ore.