* 8914788
* U.S.-Ghana Cooperative Research:  A Rational Approximation  in Strictly Pseudoconvex Domains
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/1990,01/31/1993
* Clement Lutterodt, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 01/31/1993
* USD 13,660.00

This proposal requests funds to permit Dr. Clement H. Lutterodt, Department of
Mathematics, Howard University, and Dr. Patrick W. Darko, Department of
Mathematics, University of Ghana, to pursue, for a period of 24 months,
cooperative research on a rational approximation in strictly pseudoconvex
domains. They will study and attempt to resolve problems which have grown out of
attempts to extend the generalization of the Montessus de Ballore theorem in a
ball to other strictly pseudoconvex domains. The field of several complex
variables is a central one in modern mathematics with ties to differential
geometry, physics, geometric measure theory, algebraic geometry, and others. The
two collaborators are well suited by training and previous research to engage in
this research. In addition to the immediate scientific benefits expected from
this work, this project may help strengthen the research efforts in complex
analysis at both of the cooperating institutions. The U.S. PI will give seminars
at the University of Ghana on his recent results in meromorphic approximations.
The research and these seminars have the potential for strengthening the S&amp;T
infrastructure in Ghana by stimulating in Ghanaian students an interest in
mathematics research. This project is relevant to the objectives of the Science
in Developing Countries (SDC) Program which seeks to strengthen SDC scientific
infrastructure and increase the level of cooperation between U.S. scientists and
engineers and their counterparts in developing countries through the exchange of
scientific information, ideas, skills, and techniques and through collaboration
on problems of mutual benefit.