* 8914578
* US-France Cooperative Research:  Generation, Structural     Characterization, and Chemistry of New Free Phosphinidenes  and Phosphinidene-Metal Complexes
* O/D,OISE
* 03/15/1990,12/31/1993
* Peter Gaspar, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 12/31/1993
* USD 7,750.00

This award will support collaborative research between Dr. Peter P. Gaspar,
Washington University and Dr. Francois Mathey, Laboratoire de Chimie du
Phosphere et des Metaux de Transition, Palaiseau, France. The objective of the
project is the preparation and study of an unusual, short-lived chemical
species, a phosphorus-containing molecule called phosphinidene. It is believed
that these molecules will have extremely unusual properties and that the study
of phosphini- denes will further the understanding of fundamental principles of
chemical reactivity, as well as lead to the synthesis of new kinds of molecules,
including some biochemical interest. As a benchmark for the applications of ab
initio calculations in organometallic chemistry, there is a need to compare the
actual structures and detailed reaction paths of phosphinidenes and their metal
complexes with theoretically predicted structures and mechanisms. The
investigators plan to carry out a series of experiments to include the synthesis
of a sterically hindered phophirane-metal complex, whose thermal or
photochemical decomposition should form a phosphinidene- metal complex
sufficiently long-lived for direct spectroscopic observation. This project will
benefit from the complementary experimental expertise of the two investigators.
Dr. Mathey and his colleagues have considerable experience in the synthesis of
metal-phosphine complexes, including phophiranes and their demetallation. Dr.
Gaspar's laboratory has perfected the adamantylation of main group hydrides and
the photochemical as well as thermal decomposition of related three-membered
rings such as siliranes. This project should provide the opportunity to develop
new routes to interesting and useful reactive intermediates that have thus far
eluded detailed study. Phosphinidenes hold great promise both for the synthesis
of organophosphorus compounds and for the mechanistic studies aimed at
increasing control of reaction pathways by subtle changes in electronic
structures. Results of this research may clarify how the ideas of organic
chemistry must be modified to deal with bond-making and bond-breaking phenomena
below the first row of the periodic table.