* 8914549
* Plasma Desorption Mass Spectrometry at the MAMS Facility
* NONE,NONE
* 11/15/1989,04/30/1994
* Robert Cotter, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 04/30/1994
* USD 592,504.00

This award renews funding for Plasma Desorption Mass Spectrometry (PDMS)
activities at the Mid Atlantic Mass Spectrometry (MAMS) Laboratory at The Johns
Hopkins University School of Medicine. PDMS, one of several approaches to mass
spectrometry, provides low resolution measurements of compounds with high
molecular weights (10,000 Daltons or greater). Analysis of ionized compounds in
this size range is of particular importance in the analysis of proteins and
other biopolymers. Efforts sponsored by this award will focus on improving
techniques for analysis of polyionic polymers such as oligonucleotides and
phosphorylated proteins. Expected improvements should increase the sensitivity
and mass range of PDMS analyses. A variety of collaborative research projects
will be initiated or continued. Mass spectrometry plays an increasingly
important role in the structural analysis of biomolecules. Information about
naturally occurring modifications of proteins, and about the structures of
polysaccharides and other branched chain polymers can only be obtained with
great difficulty by other techniques. The MAMS facility was established as a
shared instrument resource for collaborative and service projects. The facility
provides the research community at Johns Hopkins and at numerous other
institutions with access to the kind of skilled mass spectrometry needed in many
areas of modern biological research.