* 8914634
* Dissertation Research: Sex Ratio in an Autoparasitoid Wasp
* NONE,NONE
* 02/15/1990,01/31/1992
* David Pimentel, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Gregory J. McCants
* 01/31/1992
* USD 4,505.00

The proportion of females in an animal species directly influences the rate of
population growth, and thus is important for understanding population dynamics.
Although equal numbers of each sex are produced in many animals, members of some
groups, such as the parasitic wasps, often exhibit highly variable sex ratios.
Understanding the mechanisms that produce these variable sex ratios is necessary
to predict population fluctuations. In addition, variable sex ratios offer a
good opportunity to study the process of adaptation, since optimal sex ratios
can be predicted using evolutionary models, and the fit to theory can be easily
measured experimentally. In a group of minute parasitic wasps in the family
Aphelinidae females lay male and female eggs in different hosts. Female eggs are
laid inside nymphs of Homoptera, such as whitefly and scale insects, while male
eggs are laid inside the body of immature female wasps while they are still
developing within the homopteran host. Males are parasitic on female wasps,
often of their own species. This study involves investigating the sex allocation
behavior of females of an autoparasitoid, Encarsia pergandiella, which
parasitizes whiteflies. In particular, the investigator is investigating how
females allocate eggs to be sons and daughters given the constraint on sex ratio
imposed by the availability of the appropriate hosts. The pattern of egg laying
in the two host will be examined over the season when the availability of the
two hosts, and the density varies. In the laboratory, factors which may alter
the sex allocation behavior such as host density, previous experience and female
age will be examined. The results will be interpreted in the context of
evolutionary theory. This system offers a unique opportunity to test sex ratio
theory. Fisher predicted that natural selection should equalize the investment
of resources in each sex. Generally this leads to a 1:1 sex ratio, but in
autoparasitoids the predicted sex ratio varies with the limited resource. When
eggs are limiting, sons and daughters should be produced in equal numbers, but
when hosts are limiting, the sex ratio should reflect the relative availability
of the two hosts. In addition, autoparasitoids have been used in many instances
to biologically control scale and whitefly pests, often with tremendous economic
and environmental benefits due to reduced numbers of pesticide applications. Sex
ratio is central to the population biology of these wasps, and, therefore, an
understanding of the mechanisms that control sex ratio will improve our ability
to evaluate wasp species for their potential to control pest species.