* 8914167
* Influence of Molecular Structure on the Thermodynamic and   Mechanical Properties of Crystalline Polymers
* MPS,DMR
* 02/15/1990,07/31/1995
* Leo Mandelkern, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* David Nelson
* 07/31/1995
* USD 406,500.00

The main objective of this research is to determine the influence of molecular
constitution and crystallization conditions on the independent structural
variables that describe the crystalline state of long-chain molecules. These
variables govern the thermodynamic, mechanical, and other macroscopic properties
of such systems. It is planed to build upon the established base with respect to
control of properties by molecular weight and the requirements for co-
crystallization of linear polyethylene fractions and its copolymers to study the
properties of well-defined binary and ternary mixtures of these species. In
addition to thermodynamic and tensile properties, the crystallization kinetics
and morphological changes of these mixtures will also be studied. Another
portion of this proposal deals with measuring and analyzing tensile properties
of molecular weight and compositional fractions of homopolymers and random
copolymers. Emphasis will be given to defining the boundary between ductile
deformation and brittle failure in terms of molecular and structural factors. In
these studies advantage will be taken of a new apparatus that has been built and
which only requires very small amounts of sample. Detailed studies of the fusion
process, crystallization kinetics from the melt and crystallite structure will
be made with high-molecular-weight n- alkanes that are in the range
C144H290toC408H818.