* 8914626
* US-France Cooperative Research:  Quantum Chromodynamics and Hard Interactions in a Nuclear Environment
* O/D,OISE
* 01/15/1990,06/30/1992
* John Ralston, University of Kansas Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 06/30/1992
* USD 10,830.00

This award will support collaborative research in high energy theoretical
physics between Dr. John Ralston, University of Kansas, and Dr. Bernard Pire,
Center for Theoretical Physics, Ecole Polytechnique, Palaiseau, France. The
investigators, who have a long history of fruitful collabora- tion, propose a
new area for applying the fundamental theory of strong interaction physics,
Quantum Chromodynamics, to high energy collisions with nuclei. The goal of such
research is to learn from the comparison of theory with experiment, as well as
to make theoretical predictions and suggestions for future experiments. Their
method will extend their work on the phenomenon called color transparency, where
they showed that Quantum Chromodynamics may in some cases be more cleanly tested
and applied in a nuclear medium than with isolated particles. A parallel project
involves the possible phases of nuclear matter in QCD. The investigators will
propose a percolation-theoretic viewpoint, arguing that a color- conducting, but
chirally-broken phase may have been observed in recent relativistic heavy-ion
experiments. These studies in theoretical physics will benefit from the
complementary expertise of the two investigators and should make a continuing
contribution to this important field of research.