* 8914670
*  REU SUPPLEMENT:  Parallel Processing Projects in Artificial Intelligence
* CSE,EIA
* 02/15/1990,10/31/1996
* Joseph Denk, New Mexico State University
* Continuing Grant
* John Cherniavsky
* 10/31/1996
* USD 1,277,285.00

This award provides support to develop computing infrastructure for a wide
variety of research with the primary areas being: plausible ascription of
beliefs by an AI system; complex symbolic information processing in
connectionist systems; associative network databases for computer vision; the
Model Generative Reasoning system; and parallel algorithms for scene model
generation. The new infrastructure includes the upgrading of a parallel
processor from a 4 processor system to a 22 processor system, the acquisition of
a number of workstations, and the provision of hardware and software
technicians. In the Beliefs/Metaphor project on natural language discourse
understanding, two complementary approaches to integrating the processing of
metaphors and the processing of information about participants'belief are being
explored. In one approach, metaphors are processed by a simple extension of the
belief-reasoning machinery in an existing program, whereas the other approach
bases the representation of belief states on common-sense metaphorical models of
mind that are often exploited in discourse. In the Connectionism project,
connectionist information-processing techniques are being developed that are
useful in high-level cognitive tasks, such as natural language understanding and
common-sense reasoning, as opposed to the perceptual and adaptation tasks to
which most connectionist work has been directed. Part of the work is exploiting
signal timing effects that occur in networks inspired by real biological neural
networks. The purpose of the vision database project is to design, implement,
and test a database (appropriate for robotics applications) which supports
associative organization and retrieval, clustering by physical properties,
higher levels of abstraction, and efficient search for matching entities. The
paradigm used is an extension of Pathfinder networks (originally intended to
model human semantic memory) called monotonic search networks, which is a type
of proximity graph. Model Generative Reasoning is a general automated problem
solving system developed by Coombs and Hartley. It makes expert problem solvers
robust in the light of conflicting evidence through the maintenance of
alternative hypotheses in a proper abduction/deduction cycle. In the Parallel
Algorithms for Scene Model Generation project, time- varying imagery based on
natural scenes is being analyzed with the goal of developing dynamic three-
dimensional models of the scenes. Important features of the work include a
hypothesis-and-test paradigm for construction of the models, merging of multiple
cues through the use of local consistency constraints, and maintenance of model
consistency in a parallel environment through data locking protocols developed
automatically from graph grammar productions.