* 8914900
* Dissertation Research:  Evolutionary Effects of             Interspecific Competition on Townsend's Solitaires
* NONE,NONE
* 02/01/1990,06/30/1992
* William Hamilton, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* James R. Gosz
* 06/30/1992
* USD 8,280.00

Two current approaches to studying interspecific competition in the field
provide inconclusive results. These are behavioral observations of individuals
in the presence and absence of their putative competitors, and population
removal experiments. Behavioral studies rarely measure the effects of
competition on individual fitness, and population studies seldom elucidate the
underlying causal mechanisms of competition. A synthetic approach is needed
which simultaneously measures resource availability, effects of competitors upon
their shared limiting resources and on one another, and effects of competition
on individual fitness. This study will apply this synthetic approach to foraging
competition between Townsend's solitaires and other species which feed upon
juniper berries during the nonbreeeding season. It will quantify both
interference and exploitive effects of competitors on individual solitaires
defending winter feeding territories. It will also measure the fitness of 50-60
solitaires over two years by monitoring overwinter survival and fledgling
success. Quantifying the relationship between the intensity of competition
experienced by individual solitaires and their fitness will provide an empirical
test of the evolutionary significance of interspecific competition to this
species.