* 8914940
* Documenting Cold Fusion:  An Urgent Project to Preserve     Historical and Sociological Materials from Fast-Moving      Controversial Science
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1989,01/31/1991
* Thomas Gieryn, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Shelton White
* 01/31/1991
* USD 11,092.00

This project will collect, store and catalog a wide range of materials
pertaining to the announcement of "cold fusion" at the University of Utah on
March 23, 1989. These documents -- collected in the midst of on-going and heated
debates among chemists and physicists -- will enable scholars to better
understand science "as it happens". Whether or not recent experimental claims
are defined as valid, the episode is a strategic research site for historians,
sociologists, policy analysts, communication scholars and others interested in
how science works. Several features of the cold fusion case make it of special
interest. Communication patterns among scientists have been altered dramatically
by recent electronic and computer innovations (FAX machines, computer mail
networks, electronic bulletin boards), which have allowed virtually
instantaneous communication of both fact and rumor, raising troubling questions
about the viability of "peer review" systems associated with traditional forms
of print communication in scientific journals. The simultaneous promise of an
enlarged understanding of nature and a lucrative technology based on cold fusion
have blurred the boundary between "pure" and "applied" science. At the same
time, the mass media have played a fundamental role in bringing the cold fusion
controversy to national attention and scientists themselves have used the mass
media for communicating among their professional peers. In order for scholars to
be able to investigate these and other topics, primary source materials must be
collected today. With so much communication moving by electronic means --
relatively ephemeral compared to print -- it is imperative to act quickly before
valuable materials are "purged", and thus irretrievably lost. It is especially
important to collect these data before consensus has formed and the facts have
been settled. Later accounts, experience tells us, will "reconstruct" the events
in often creative ways.