* 8914299
* Continuation of Vapor-Liquid Equilibrium for Chemical       Engineering and Applied Thermodynamics: A Research Project  with International Collaboration and Industrial Cooperation
* ENG,CBET
* 10/15/1989,03/31/1992
* Stanley Sandler, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 03/31/1992
* USD 155,631.00

This project deals with a research program on separations processes, including
experimental and theoretical work on low pressure vapor-liquid equilibrium. It
is related to group contribution activity coefficient prediction methods, and
high pressure phase equilibrium for the development of better equations of state
and their mixing rules. The project covers the range of conditions in gas and
oil processing, supercritical extraction, enhanced oil recovery by gas
injection, and other elevated pressure processes. There are several unique
features of the proposed work. First, the experimental work will be on systems
specially chosen to critically test current equation of state and activity
coefficient models, not merely to fill voids in data banks. Second, by the
choice of systems and conditions, these data will also be of direct industrial
interest for process design and development. Third, the project will explore the
use of molecular mechanics and ab initio quantum mechanical calculations to
identify nearest neighbor interference effects, in order to improve shortcomings
of current group contribution methods. This work will represent the first use of
quantum chemistry in molecular thermodynamics and has the potential for greatly
improving process design predictions in the absence of experimental data.
Finally, cooperative research with the Technical University of Berlin and
Denmark, and the University of Paris will continue. In the past, this
cooperation has resulted in visits and the exchange of students, faculty and
equipment between the various laboratories.