* 8914195
* U.S.-Japan Cooperative Research:  Extension of the          Bond-Forming Initiation Theory to Electrophilic             p-Quinodimethane Polymerization
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1990,03/31/1992
* Henry Hall, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Turczak
* 03/31/1992
* USD 14,750.00

This award will support a cooperative research project in polymer chemistry
between Professor Henry K. Hall, Jr., Department of Chemistry, University of
Arizona, and Professors Shouji Iwatsuki and Takahito Itoh, Faculty of
Engineering, Mie University, Nagoya, Japan. The scientists will study reactions
of electron-rich, donor olefins with electrophilic quinodimethanes. Previous
studies by Professor Hall on reactions of electron-rich olefins with electron-
poor, acceptor olefins led to development of his Bond-Forming Initiation Theory,
which proposes that tetramethylene intermediates, either ionic or free-radical,
are the initiators of the spontaneous polymerizations that frequently occur in
these systems. This theory has been successful in explaining results obtained in
the olefin-olefin systems, and the investigators in this project wish to examine
its extension to reactions of olefins with quinodimethanes Dr. Hall, an organic
polymer chemist, has considerable experience in synthesizing new monomers and
polymers and in investigating the basic mechanisms of polymerization. Dr. Itoh
has synthesized a variety of novel quinodimethanes and has studied their
polymerization reactions. He recently spent a year in Dr. Hall's laboratory in
Arizona pursuing this research. The U.S. and Japanese scientists will cooperate
in synthesizing monomers especially suited for these studies, in attempting to
trap reaction intermediates, and in carrying out detailed kinetic studies of the
reactions. Some of the polymers to be investigated here have potential
applications in such high-technology areas as non-linear optical materials and
piezoelectric materials.