* 8914717
* Dissertation Research: Comparative Ecological Studies Between a Native (Lonicera sempervirens) and an Introduced Congener (L. japonica)
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/1990,10/31/1992
* Kristina Schierenbeck, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* James R. Gosz
* 10/31/1992
* USD 12,818.00

The study of invasive plant species has often emphasized attempts to make
generalizations about the life history characteristics of invaders and
descriptions of their genetic variability. In these attempts, species native to
widely divergent climates and habitats are often compared. The results are often
a comparison of species that only have their invasive ability in common.
Comparative study of a native species growing with an invasive congener has been
repeatedly suggested as a means of gaining a clearer understanding of the
attributes that actually do enable a species to become invasive. This type of
comparative study could also contribute to an understanding of the changes plant
invaders may affect in the communities in which they occur. This study will
perform such a comparison. The focus of the study will be Lonicero japonica
native to Asia, and Lonicera sempervirens native to the southeastern United
States. This investigation will be conducted in the southeastern United States
where L . japonica has been an invasive species since the early 19th century.
This study will include a comparative examination of seed emergence, seedling
survival, growth rates, temporal variation in light utilization, and any effects
preferential herbivory may have on growth and establishment between the two
species. The potential effects of pollinator competition on population biology
will be examined through observations of pollination within and among
populations of these two congeners. Changes in plant community structure will be
measured by sampling community composition in a series of successive old fields.
The proposed project will contribute to an improved understanding of the
possible advantages invading species have as compared to native species, the
effects their presence may have on succession and plant community structure.