* 8914417
* Biosynthesis of Linoleic Acid in Insects
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/1990,07/31/1992
* Charlotte Borgeson, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Robert Uffen
* 07/31/1992
* USD 134,419.00

Vertebrates cannot synthesize and thus require a dietary source of linoleic
acid, 18:2(n-6), which is used both as a structural component of membranes and
as precursor for physiologically important eicosanoids. Until recently, it had
been thought that insects, as is the case for vertebrates, were unable to
synthesize linoleic acid. Studies have demonstrated that some, but not all,
insect species possess a delta-12 desaturase and are thus able to produce
linoleic acid. This proposal is designed to examine this synthesis of linoleic
acid in the cockroach, Periplaneta americana, the aphid, Acyrthosiphon pisum,
and the cricket, Acheta domesticus. Emphasis will be on studies designed to
unambiguously rule out the contribution of microorganisms, both symbiotic and
exterior, to linoleate synthesis, ie. that it is the insect tissue that is
responsible for the desaturation of oleate to linoleate. In addition, the form
of the substrate for the delta-12 desaturase and the further elongation and
desaturation of linoleic acid will be examined. These studies will characterize
the unique process by which certain insect species have gained a nutritional
independence from dietary requirements for polyunsaturated fatty acids.
Significant fundamental knowledge of comparative lipid metabolism will be
obtained from this work. Linoleic acid is an essential fatty acid for
vertebrates. It is an important membrane component and serves as a precursor for
hormone-like substances that regulate many cell functions. Vertebrates lack the
ability to synthesize linoleic acid and fulfill their dietary requirement by the
consumption of plants, which, in addition to protozoa and fungi readily
synthesize the fatty acid. Until recently, it was thought that insects, like
other animals, were unable to synthesize linoleic acid. Recent evidence now
suggests that insects do have this capability. This research will examine this
phenomenon. It will provide a basic understanding of linoleic acid biosynthesis
in insects and may have future implications for the exploitation of the insect-
specific pathways of hormone regulation as a means of pest control.