* 8914405
* The Recent Geological Evolution and Current Activity of     Galeras Volcano, Narino Colombia (South America)
* O/D,OISE
* 12/15/1989,05/30/1991
* Stanley Williams, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 05/30/1991
* USD 8,900.00

This Science and Developing Countries award will support Professor Stanley
Williams of Louisiana State University (LSU) at Baton Rouge in a research
collaboration with Ms. Marta Lucia Calvache and other scientists at the
Colombian Geological Survey (IN- GEOMINAS). The researchers propose to study the
geology and volcanology of the most recent cone of the Galeras volcano, in
northwestern Colombia. In addition, they will compile the historic data
concerning activity of this very dynamic volcano, and they will continue
monitoring of the geochemical evolution of the summit fumaroles during the
present cycle of increased activity. This monitoring paid off when, in February
1989, anomalous degassing and seismic activity clearly increased and small
lithic ash-bearing explosions began. At the present time, a growing sense of
alarm surrounds the continuing activity of Galeras. Samples of the most recent
cone developed at Galera will be examined at LSU for mineralogical and
geochemical variations. Pyroclastic rocks will be analyzed for grain size
variations. With data from present-day monitoring of fumarolic gases and
compilation of the historic records of activity, the investigators intend to
assemble a model of the activity of the Galeras volcano that could serve as a
basis for an assessment of potential hazards associated with future eruptions.
Because of the continued involvement and contribution of Colombian scientists
and the possibility for the work under this award to have a high social impact,
this project fully advances the objectives of the Science in Developing
Countries Program.