* 8914865
* Research Initiation Award: A Critical Evaluation of         Intelligent Structures
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/1989,12/31/1991
* James Sirkis, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 12/31/1991
* USD 79,166.00

"Intelligent structures" are designed to self monitor their ability to perform
designed tasks. To provide this "intelligence" a nerve system must be embedded
in the structure. Optical fiber strain sensors have repeatedly been touted as
prime candidates for this nervous system, particularly when the structure is
produced from fiber reinforced composite materials. Recent results indicate that
the nervous system is not an uncoupled observer and that it may cause severe
degradation of the structural component which they monitor. The amount of fiber-
host material interaction is a critical, but overlooked, aspect of the fast
emerging smart structures technology. The fiber-host material interaction is to
be studied on three fronts. A high frequency moire' interferometry technique is
proposed to study the surface strains in the fiber-host material interaction
zone. Calculations indicate that this image processing based technique can
increase the resolution of moire' interferometry as much as 800 fold. Optical
fiber sensor technology will be advanced so that meaningful internal strain
information can be obtained from embedded single mode optical fibers. Three
dimensional finite element analysis will be used to design experiments and to
supplement experimental results. The above information will be used both to
quantify fiber-host material interaction mechanisms and to predict the effect
these mechanisms have on the life cycle of a structural component containing an
embedded optical fiber nervous system. The optical fiber-host material
interaction mechanisms must be resolved before an overwhelming commitment to a
structurally embedded optical fiber nervous system can be made.