* 8914313
* US-France Cooperative Research:  Electrohydrodynamic        Convection in Liquid Crystals
* O/D,OISE
* 02/01/1990,07/31/1992
* Alan Newell, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 07/31/1992
* USD 9,820.00

This award will support collaborative research between Dr. Alan Newell,
University of Arizona and Professor R. Ribotta, Laboratoire de Physique des
Solides, University of Paris-Sud, France. The objective of the proposed work is
an interdisciplinary investigation of electrohydrodynamic instability in nematic
liquid crystals. Electrohydrodynamic convection (EHC) in nematic liquid crystal
layers is now beginning to attract much attention. Liquid crystals themselves
are of theoretical and practical interest, but very little is known about how
they interact with electric fields at the microscopic level. The onset of
convection can be modelled by the Ginsburg-Landau equations, which are derived
from fluid equations, and the case of liquid crystals makes the analysis very
tractable. A full understanding of the phenomena involved requires both
theoretical and experimental expertise; specific wave solutions must be used to
represent the behavior and the parameter values, determined experimentally, must
be inserted in the equation. The investigators propose to use a combination of
theory and experiment to determine the coefficients of the complex Ginsburg-
Landau equation for the order parameter which obtains in a range of parameter
values close to onset. The knowledge of these coefficients will provide
information on the nature of the dispersion relation for small amplitude waves,
as well as nonlinear saturation characteristics. The results of this project
could lead to important advances in our understanding of convection. Dr. Newell
is a leading applied mathematician, who has worked extensively on the topic of
Ginsburg-Landau equations. Professor Ribotta will provide the necessary
experimental expertise in advanced liquid crystal research.