* 8914292
* Research in Intermediate Energy Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/1989,12/31/1992
* Dinko Pocanic, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* John W. Lightbody, Jr.
* 12/31/1992
* USD 285,180.00

New problems of basic interest in nuclear and particle physics at intermediate
energies will be studied. The initial emphasis in the program will be on a
precise measurement, with ~0.5 percent accuracy, of the rate of decay of charged
pions. This process provides the theoretically most unambiguous means to study
weak u-d quark mixing which directly tests quark- lepton universality and can
thus constrain certain aspects of physics beyond the present Standard Model. The
proposed experiment represents a first step in a staged effort at improving the
present 4 percent accuracy of the pion beta decay rate, to approach and
eventually surpass that of pure Fermi nuclear beta decays (now ~0.2 percent). At
the level of accuracy proposed for the first step, our measurement will provide
the most sensitive test of the CVC hypothesis in a meson. A large-solid-angle
detector will detect decays at rest and will also be sensitive to other rare
pion decays. Initial runs have been approved for 1989 at PSI, and detector
development work is presently under way at University of Virginia. Other
experimental commitments include a precise measurement of the muon momentum in
pion decay at rest at PSI, a measurement of the spin-dependent structure
functions of the neutron and proton in the scaling region at CERN, and work
related to future experiments at CEBAF.