* 8914359
* Genetically Controlled Syntheses of New Polymeric Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 03/15/1990,08/31/1995
* Maurille Fournier, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing grant
* David Nelson
* 08/31/1995
* USD 1,085,900.00

A broadly based research program aimed at the introduction of the tools of
molecular biology into polymer materials science will be carried out.
Conventional chemical methods of polymer synthesis are inherently limited by the
statistical nature of polymerization processes, and as a result conventional
polymeric materials comprise statistical mixtures of chains. The preparation of
pure polymeric materials, and the use of polymers in applications that require
precise control of molecular and supramolecular structure, can be realized only
through the introduction of new synthetic methods. The exploitation of the high
fidelity of protein biosynthesis, coupled with recent advances in the synthesis,
cloning and expression of genes, will be used to create new polymeric materials
of precisely defined structure. The focus will be on two classes of polymers -
homopolypeptides and repetitive copolypeptides - that are believed to be of
special interest in materials science. The following will be carried out: i) the
synthesis of artificial genes that encode such polymers,ii) expression in
bacterial hosts of the polymers of interest, and iii) detailed analysis of the
molecular and supramolecular structures of the products. Both materials issues
(e.g., solid state structure and chain conformation in solid polypeptides) and
biological questions (e.g., genetic stability and expression levels) will
address in the course of the work. Biological syntheses will be complemented by
chemical preparations of analogous polypeptides in order to compare and contrast
the two approaches, and to facilitate isolation and structural characterization
of the biologically-derived products.