* 8914508
* U.S.-Mexico Collaborative Studies on Determinants of        Distribution in Piper Species from a Tropical Rain Forest
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/1990,08/31/1994
* Christopher Field, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 08/31/1994
* USD 19,501.00

This award will support Professor Christopher B. Field of Carnegie Institute of
Washington and Professor Robert W. Pearcy of the University of California at
Davis in a research collaboration with Professor Carlos Vasquez-Yanes of the
Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico (UNAM). The researchers intend to carry
out experiments on 2 important but poorly understood aspects of the ecology of
rainforest plants in the plant genus Piper, growing in the "Los Tuxtlas"
biological preserve, in Veracruz, Mexico. The experiments are multi-species
comparisons utilizing Piper species native to habitats of contrasting light
availability. One group of experiments focuses on the physiological ecology of
plants at the young seedling stage, a stage characterized by high mortality, but
about which little is known. On plants less than a few months old and less than
10 cm tall, they intend to study the functional determinants of growth rate,
including biomass allocation, mineral nutrition, photosynthesis, and tissue
construction costs. The other group of experiments explores photosynthesis and
transpiration in fluctuating light. Variation in the efficiency of utilizing
fluctuating light is known to have important consequences for carbon balance for
several species. The utilization of fluctuating light has not been studied in a
system where other functional determinants of growth are as well understood as
in the genus Piper. The proposed research will continue to develop the genus
Piper as a model system for understanding the mechanisms controlling the
distributions of tropical rainforest plants. Much of the infrastructure for the
collaboration is already established, as a result of long-standing formal and
informal interactions among the principal investigators in both countries. The
emphasis on a widely studied model system should yield high returns because many
questions in ecology can be answered only through the integration of information
concerning multiple aspects of an organism's biology.