* 8914161
* Strategic Manufacturing Initiative:  Computer-Integrated    Analysis of Deformation Processing
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1990,02/29/1996
* David Parks, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* Jay Lee
* 02/29/1996
* USD 945,910.00

The overall goal of the research is to improve the scientific basis for
computer-integrated analysis of the deformation processing of materials. The
research consists of four major thrusts: (1) physical and computational large
deformation experiments will be conducted on polycrystalline metals in order to
formulate phenomenological constitutive equations which capture the evolution,
with increasing deformation, of mechanical anisotropy due to crystallographic
texturing; (2) physical experiments will be conducted in order to formulate and
evaluate improved state-variable type continuum representation of frictional and
heat transfer characteristics at the tool/workpiece interface; (3) coupled
thermo-mechanical finite element computational procedures will be developed
which incorporate the enhanced workpiece and interface constitute equations; and
(4) laboratory- scale deformation processing operations will be conducted,
instrumented, and critically compared with numerical simulations in order to
assess the predictive capabilities of the constitutive equations and
computational procedures. The research represents a collaboration of
investigators from academia, a materials company committed to computer-
integrated simulation of deformation processing, and a developer of advanced
solid mechanics software applications.