* 8914239
* Residual Strength of Delaminated Composite Panels Under     Compressive Loads, Award in Indian Currency
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1989,02/28/1993
* Krishna Murty, Indian Institute of Science
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 02/28/1993
* USD 76,114.00

Description: Under this project scientists from the U. S. and India plan to
develop reliable methods of predicting compressive strength of laminated
structures when known faults of delaminations exist. Specifically the
scientists, Dr. J. N. Reddy of Virginia Tech in Blacksburg, VA, and Dr. A. V.
krishna Murty of Indian Institute of Science (IISc) in Bangalore, plan to
develop methods of predicting sublaminate instability, delamination growth and
residual strength of laminated composite panels subjected to compressive loads.
The interaction between the two scientists and their associates is aimed at
development of methods for the design of fibre reinforced composite laminates
subjected to compressive loads. The work will be primarily theoretical but will
build on results of experimental data already generated at the IISc. Scope:
Composite materials are increasingly used in a variety of structures in areas as
diverse as medical prosthetic devices, electronic appliances, sports equipment,
automative parts and high performance space and underwater structures. A
limiting factor on their load capacities is the presence of small delaminations
and their progress under certain loads. The research is timely, important and of
both scientific and practical benefit. The two collaborating teams possess
outstanding complementary capabilities to study the problem and the behavior of
such materials. The research is likely to benefit both India and the U. S.