* 8914300
* Development of a 3-D Bioacoustic Imaging System
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/1990,02/28/1995
* Jules Jaffe, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* H. Lawrence Clark
* 02/28/1995
* USD 917,585.00

The Marine Physical Laboratory at Scripps Institution of Oceanography will
develop a sea-going, three-dimensional bioacoustic imaging system. The system
addresses a long- standing requirement within biological oceanography to
describe the distribution and interactions of small plank- tonic organisms in
the open ocean. The use of nets and other acoustic devices are often inadequate
in describing the distribution of organisms in certain scientifically important
spatial and temporal scales. The imaging system is based on the principle of
Spatially Variant Insonification, whereby spatial resolution in the water column
relies on simultaneous transmission of discrete coded pulses along narrow
acoustic beams. The reflection of these acoustic pulses, that are received at a
single transducer, can then be deciphered from each other and an image is
produced by complex mathematical processing. The system will operate at 500 kHz
and will be designed to have a useful range of 50 meters within a 30- degree
solid angle. At this frequency, the instrument will be sensitive to zooplankton
and will be used to map and follow the distribution of these small organisms. A
3-D bioacoustic imaging capability will be useful to a number of envisioned
research projects over the next decade. The new capability will provide
information on the interactions and movements of the organisms within a volume
of water.