* 8914636
* Dissertation Research: Molecular-Genetic Approaches to the  Analysis of Gene Flow in the Cladonia Chlorophaea Complex   (Lichen-Forming Ascomycotina)
* BIO,DEB
* 11/15/1989,04/30/1992
* Paula DePriest, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 04/30/1992
* USD 4,807.00

Under the guidance of faculty adviser Dr. William Culberson, graduate student
Paula DePriest will study genetic variation and species boundaries in lichens
using new molecular-biological methods. Lichens, fungal and algal partners
forming long-lived and durable associations, are the best-known examples of
symbiosis. As one feature of this symbiosis, the fungal partner makes unique
chemical substances, lichen secondary products, which may protect the lichen
against herbivory. These secondary compounds have been used for over a hundred
years as characters to identify lichen species, and when correlated with
geographic distribution or ecology, they have also been used to define a lichen
species. In this study the student will examine the relationship between four
chemotypes that cannot be recognized from their morphology alone--they have
different secondary products but all look alike. These chemotypes occur in mixed
populations in the southern Appalachians. Do they represent separate,
reproductively isolated species or are they variable parts of one species? The
immediately obvious experimental approaches will not work; for example, crossing
individuals of different chemotypes in the field is technically impossible and
lichen cultures in the laboratory do not reproduce sexually. In this study,
newly developed DNA technologies for analyzing variants of ribosomal gene
sequences will be employed to measure genetic relatedness among the chemotypes
and their sporelings in the laboratory. Genetic similarity between different
chemotypes, based on the sharing of molecular-genetic markers, will indicate
that they are members of a single species. Differences in molecular-genetic
markers will indicate reproductive isolation and separate species status. These
new techniques will allow routine genetic evaluation of lichen relatedness and
provide new tools for the taxonomic investigation of lichens.