* 8914657
* US-France Cooperative Research:  Molecular Cytogenetics of  Brassica
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1990,03/31/1993
* Carlos Quiros, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 03/31/1993
* USD 14,050.00

This award will support collaborative research between Dr. Carlos F. Quiros,
University of California at Davis, and two French groups: Dr. Michael Delseny,
Lab de Physiologie Vegetale, University of Perpignan, and Dr. Anne Marie Chevre,
National Institute for Agronomic Research (INRA), Rennes. The objective of the
project is to develop a series of cytogenetic stocks and molecular probes as
chromosome markers, and to use them to study the evolution of the Brassica
genomes. Specifically, the project involves mapping the chromosomes of the
diploid species Brassica nigra and B. oleracea. This will be done by using a
series of chromosome addition lines for these species already developed at Davis
and at INRA, Rennes, and a series of molecular probes developed at Perpignan and
Davis. The Perpignan group will develop additional informative DNA clones from
B. nigra, and sequencing analysis, as well as provide expertise in other finer
molecular genetics techniques. The creation of additional lines will be the
responsibility of INRA, Rennes, and UCD. At Rennes most of the addition lines in
tetraploid background will continue to be developed, while at Davis these lines
will continue to be developed in diploid backgrounds. UCD will do most of the
mapping activity on the basis of RFLP and isozyme markers and the intergenomic
recombination study. This project brings together three of the world's top
laboratories in Brassica research on a topic which is at the forefront of plant
gene mapping research. The results of this project will serve as the basis for
applied studies, such as the improvement of rapeseed and cole crops, development
of resistant varieties to Phoma, improved oil quality and horticultural traits.