* 8914918
* US-Japan Cooperative Research:  Vortex Dynamics and         Organized Structures in Turbulent Shear Flows
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/1990,04/30/1992
* Fazle Hussain, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Turczak
* 04/30/1992
* USD 27,290.00

This award will support a joint cooperative research project entitled "Vortex
Dynamics and Organized Structures in Turbulent Shear Flows" between Professor
Fazle Hussain and colleagues at the University of Houston and Professor Masaru
Kiya of Hokkaido University in Japan and other Japanese investigators. The
researchers note that fluid turbulence is one of the most intriguing yet
difficult-to-understand physical phenomena facing scientists and engineers. The
inherent nonlinearity of the governing equations of fluid motion and the
resulting (apparently) random turbulence are largely responsible for this
difficulty. Turbulent shear flows are characterized by coherent structures, but
knowledge about the detailed topological characteristics of these structures and
their dynamical behavior is scarce. To provide insight into this area the
researchers will study several shear flows such as jets, wakes, mixing layers,
and Taylor-Couette flows. Coherent structure topology and dynamics will be
studied experimentaly in these flows using two computerized measuring
techniques. Models will then be developed and analyzed to predict chaotic
evolutions of coherent structures in turbulent shear flows. This research could
lead to a further understanding of turbulence management (manipulation of
technologically important phenomena such as transports of heat, mass, and
momentum; entrainment; mixing and chemical reaction, including combustion; and
generation of drag and aerodynamic noise). Both the U.S. and Japanese principal
investigators are highly respected engineers. Each has established a record of
significant contributions in his respective area. This award will expand and
sustain their productive cooperation, which should prove beneficial to the
entire turbulent flow community.