* 8914328
* Mathematical Sciences: Research in Sequential Design,       Optimal Stopping and Survival Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 10/15/1989,09/30/1993
* Janis Hardwick, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Alan Izenman
* 09/30/1993
* USD 67,050.00

This research contains three parts. The first part concerns the design of
sequential experiments in which optimal, asymptotically optimal or approximately
optimal rules for allocating subjects to treatments are sought. Included are
practical designs, in which external and possibly, opposing constraints affect
the class of rules available. Topics include multi-stage rules, biased coin
designs, repeated significance tests, bandit problems, and Bayesian designs
which utilize historical controls. The second part involves problems of optimal
stopping with the main emphasis on derivations of simple-to-use procedures that
are nearly optimal. Optimal solutions to some generalized secretary problems are
also considered. The third part concerns methods of adjusting estimators of
survival rates to account for effects of random censoring. In locating
acceptable correction terms, techniques of transforming parameters to have well-
behaved likelihood functions are combined with those of deriving integrable
asymptotic expansions for posterior distributions. The work involves the study
of the optimal assignment of subjects to treatment groups in a sequence of
experiments to maximize the amount of information obtained. It includes the
analysis of the question of when to stop the experiment by deciding that enough
information has been obtained to reach a decision. The work also involves the
estimation of survival rates of subjects while accounting for the fact that
observations on some of the subjects are randomly censored.