* 8914432
* Dissertation Research:  Banner-Tailed Kangaroo Rats and     Cache Molds:  A Possible Vertebrate-Fungus Mutualism
* NONE,NONE
* 11/15/1989,10/31/1991
* Lauraine Hawkins, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* James R. Gosz
* 10/31/1991
* USD 8,000.00

While many arthropod.fungus mutualisms are known, no comparable
vertebrate.fungus systems have been documented. Based on similarities to
arthropod.fungal mutualists, banner.tailed kangaroo rats, >Dipodomys>
>spectabilis>, are good candidates to be fungal mutualists. In laboratory trials
>D>. >spectabilis> consumes moldy seeds and manipulates seeds to influence seed
water content and moldiness. Under natural conditions, up to 30 species of
fungi, including many important toxigenic genera, were recovered from cached
seeds in >D>. >spectabilis> mounds and cheekpouches sampled near Portal, Cochise
Co., Arizona. Many of these molds are economically important causes of seed
deterioration in human grain storage systems, yet relatively little is known
about their ecology in non.human systems. At least some molds associated with
>D>. >spectabilis> are unique; five new varieties of >Penicillium> which produce
antibiotics, but not mycotoxins, are known only from these caches and
cheekpouches. This research will investigate the identity and variability of
molds associated with >D>. >spectabilis> compared to molds associated with soil
and with seeds of food plants. The impact of molds on the nutritional
composition of seeds will be assayed. Field choice trials will be conducted to
determine the relative attractiveness of non.moldy and moldy seeds to foraging
>D>. >spectabilis.>