* 8914018
* Support for Publication for "A Revision of Anthurium SectionPachyneurium (Araceae)"
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1990,02/29/1992
* Thomas Croat, Missouri Botanical Garden
* Standard Grant
* James L. Edwards
* 02/29/1992
* USD 15,641.00

Dr. Thomas Croat has completed a taxonomic monograph describing the section
Pachyneurium of the genus Anthurium, the most diverse genus of the Araceae.
Aroids vary from small plants to woody shrubs, and they can be very difficult to
distinguish at the level of speceis. Section Pachyneurium extends throughout
Mexico, Central and South America, and the Caribbean, but its greatest diversity
is exhibited from Costa Rica to Peru. Dr. Croat has studied the group over a
twenty year period with research support from the Systematic Biology Program of
the National Science Foundation. He now proposes publication in the Annals of
the Missouri Botanical Garden of a descriptive treatment of the group. This
publication series has been one of the world's most influential sources of
information on the taxonomy and distribution of tropical plant species. The
proposed monograph publication will find a wide audience among systematic
botanists, tropical ecologists, biogeographers, and evolutionary biologists.
Tropical species far outnumber their temperate counterparts, and monographs such
as Dr. Croat's are critical for identifying species and pursuing any further
research on them. Descriptive taxonomic research such as this is the first step
toward unravelling the factors contributing to the extraordinary diversity of
tropical species.