* 8914863
* Heuristics for Stochastic Scheduling and the Control of     Queueing Networks
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/1990,08/31/1993
* Gideon Weiss, Georgia Tech Research Corporation - GA Tech Research Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Senior Program Assistant
* 08/31/1993
* USD 277,630.00

The use of stochastic models for scheduling problems far from making the
problems harder, tends to make them more tractable. This is illustrated by
previous results on the scheduling of jobs on parallel machines with the
weighted flowtime as objective criterion: While the deterministic problem is NP-
hard, it has been proved that a simple, easily applied heuristic (Smith's Rule)
is very close to optimal in the general stochastic setting. Continuing focus on
heuristics will be used to tackle three further stochastic scheduling problems
of practical importance: Scheduling of parallel machines subject to due dates,
preemptive scheduling of parallel machines, and scheduling of machines in series
(flowshops). The least restrictive assumptions on processing time distributions
will be used. A deeper level of understanding for the dynamic optimal
simultaneous operation of several machines is suggested in the new "Restless
Bandits" model of Peter Whittle. Whittle suggests a Lagrangian relaxation and a
priority rule which generalizes the Gittins' index of bandit problems as upper
and lower bounds for an optimal policy. Other important recent results on
control of queueing networks are those obtained by J.M. Harrison and L.M. Wein,
using Brownian control problems as approximations. Another objective of this
research is to prove Whittle's conjecture that his bounds are asymptotically
optimal, and to discover a strong connection between Whittle's approach and that
of Harrison and Wein. Based on these results it should be possible to derive
some new heuristics and to prove their asymptotic optimality.