* 8914510
* Dissertation Research:  Regulation of Sphagnum Decay in     Raised Peatlands
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/1990,09/30/1991
* Antoni Damman, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* James R. Gosz
* 09/30/1991
* USD 2,050.00

Peatlands are large accumulations of the partially decomposed litter of the bog
moss Sphagnum. These wetlands ecosystems cover about 400 million ha and
represent a significant carbon reserve. Previously waterlogging has been
implicated as the primary cause for the slow decay. However, most decay takes
place while the peat is still aerated and therefore waterlogging is no longer a
valid explanation for the slow decay in these ecosystems. Intrinsic properties
of the Sphagnum litter have been virtually overlooked but could be a critical
factor in the regulation of decay. This study will address the issue of decay
limitation by intrinsic qualities of Sphagnum litter versus environmental
constraints of the raised bog habitat? This research will attempt to decouple
these factors by employing reciprocal litterbag transplants of Sphagnum mosses
complemented with laboratory respirometer studies. By identifying the
ratelimiting factor, these results could have predictive value for determining
the effects of widespread environmental changes, e.g., increased nutrients,
global warming, on decomposition in peat bogs. Furthermore, the results will
have relevance for many raised bogs because the moss species used in this study
occur throughout the northern hemisphere.