* 8914810
* U.S.-Japan Joint Seminar: Advanced Materials for Severe     Service Applications/December 1990/Honolulu, HI
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1990,12/31/1991
* Arthur McEvily, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Turczak
* 12/31/1991
* USD 12,142.00

This award will support the participation of seven U.S. researchers in a joint
U.S.-Japan seminar on "Advanced Materials for Severe Service Applications," to
be held in Honolulu, Hawaii, December 2- 7, 1990. The principal topic areas for
discussion are (a) composite materials, (b) fracture toughness, (c) alloys for
cryogenic and high temperature application, and (d) materials behavior. The
principal co-organizers of the seminar are Professor Arthur J. McEvily,
Department of Metallurgy, University of Connecticut; and Professor Hiroyuki
Okamura, Department of Mechanical Engineering, The University of Tokyo, Japan. A
previous seminar on this general topic was held in 1986, also under the auspices
of the U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science Program. At that time recommendations were
made for further research on materials in areas considered critical for future
technology. At this present seminar progress in this research will be reviewed,
and areas will again be identified where further research and development are
needed in order to improve design capabilities in terms of performance and
reliability. Participants and observers will represent various academic,
industrial, and governmental research organizations in the two countries.
Advances in structural design are dependent on the availability of materials
capable of withstanding the demands imposed upon them. These demands include the
nature of the imposed stresses as well as the environment in which the materials
are used. As operating temperatures increase, the use of non-traditional
structural materials, such as ceramics and composites, may be needed. Other
approaches may involve the use of protective coatings to serve as thermal
barriers or to guard against oxidation or corrosion. Some structures must
operate at cryogenic temperatures, and this places other demands on the
materials employed. In all cases consideration must be given to the behavior of
cracks, including dynamic characteristics, detection, fatigue, and stress
corrosion cracking. The seminar is expected to promote not only international
communication regarding current research on these topics, but also communication
between specialists in the mechanics community and in the materials community in
areas of common interest. The participants will benefit from sharing new
results, evaluating the progress of current projects, and charting possible
future directions for individual and cooperative research. Publication of the
proceedings of the seminar is planned.