* 8914545
* International Conference on Structure and Functions of      Biomembranes, November 1989, Calcutta, India, Award in      Indian Currency
* O/D,OISE
* 11/01/1989,10/31/1990
* Marsha Rosner, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 10/31/1990
* USD 27,200.00

ABSTRACT NARRATIVE Description: This proposal requests funds for the travel of
nine U.S. scientists to an International Conference on the Structure and
Function of Biomembranes to be held at the Bose Institute, Calcutta, India,
November 30-December 2, 1989. The U.S. principal investigator, Dr. Marsha Rosner
of the University of Chicago is cooperating with the Indian converner of the
conference, Dr. P. Chakrabarti of the Bose Institute. The conference is decribed
as a one-of-a-kind international conference to address fundamental issues of
membrane structure and function. The organizing committee consists of a noted
scientist from the following countries: United States, United Kingdom, West
Germany, Belgium and India. Scope: The proposed conference will provide a unique
opportunity for American scientists working in membrane-related areas to
establish collaborations and relationships with researchers from all
participating countries. Membrane research in the beginning covered a broad
range of subjects, but soon began to specialize in narrowly focused fields of
research. This specialization is now seen as a disadvantage in loss of
perspective and knowledge that other disciplines may provide membrane research.
This cross-disciplinary conference is a means to open-up and advance new ideas
and information in the field. This proposal fulfills the criteria of the U.S. -
India Cooperative Science Program regarding the support of international
conferences and workshops dedicated to the exchange of information and to expand
scientific cooperation.