* 8914975
* Association of Computer Science and Engineering Departments at Minority Institutions, Organizational and Curriculum     Workshop to be held in NY, August 14-17, 1989
* CSE,EIA
* 07/01/1989,06/30/1990
* Gerald Engel, Institute of Electrical & Electronics Engineers, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Gerald L. Engel
* 06/30/1990
* USD 12,334.00

As a follow up to the Proposal Development Workshop for Chairpersons of
Computer Science Engineering Departments at Minority Institutions held in
November, 1988 in Atlanta, the CISE Directorate, will conduct an Organizational
and Computer Science and Engineering Curriculum Workshop. The workshop will be
coordinated by the IEEE Computer Society. The department chairpersons will be
formally organized into the Association of Computer Science/Engineering
Departments at Minority Institutions (ADMIS) which will prioritize its CISE
program recommendations and assess institutional strengths and weaknesses in the
education and research areas supported by CISE. The ADMIs will provide an
effective means for assessing the impact of CISE programs and developing plans
to strengthen these institutions. Representatives from the Computing Science
Accreditation Board (CSAB) and the Accreditation Board for Engineering and
Technology (ABET) will make presentations regarding curriculum activities.
Invited participants will also include representatives from the Association of
Computer Machinery (ACM) and other government agencies with support programs for
minority institutions such as NASA, DOD and NIH. An attempt will be made to form
a collaborative effort between Federal Agencies to strengthen academic and
research programs of minority institutions. Over 60 minority Colleges and
Universities are expected to be represented.