* 8914764
* Indo-U.S. Workshop on Advances in Construction Materials,   Techniques, and Standards, Madras, India, June 1990         Award in Indian Currency
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/1990,08/30/1991
* Shan Somayaji, California Polytechnic State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 08/30/1991
* USD 26,118.00

Description: This project supports participation of 8 U.S. scientists and
engineers in a binational workshop on "Advances in Construction Materials,
Techniques, and Standards" to be held in Madras, India in June 1990. The
workshop is aimed at affecting professional interaction between engineers,
scientists and industry leaders in India and the U.S. to advance the research
and application of construction materials. Specifically it is proposed to:
describe the systematic methods of construction, techniques used, and
characteristic materials behavior in the U.S. practice; discuss potential
applications of U.S. methods to India and other developing countries; project
the future trends to determine research objectives and requirements for the next
decade, and to focus Indian interest in potential cooperative research as
related to construction material on a global basis. Scope: The importance of
low-cost, efficient and reliable housing is recognized by all countries and
especially by Less Developed Countries (LDC's). The objectives of this project,
to provide a scientific basis for documentation of the state-of-the-art, and for
research needs in this field, are relevant to both India and the U.S. The U.S.
P.I. has well-documented experience in research and teaching in the construction
engineering field. The Indian counterpart Dr. C.S. Krishnamoorthy is Head of the
Structural Engineering Laboratory, of the Indian Institute of Technology,
Madras. That Laboratory is active in this area of research with one cooperative
research grant from NSF. Additional support in India will come form the
Structural Engineering Research Laboratory (SERC) of the council of Scientific
and Industrial Research (CSIR). The SERC in Madras is the best known Indian
Laboratory in that field.