* 8914812
* Optimal Estimation and Control in Aquifer Remediation with  Incomplete Information
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/1990,02/29/1992
* Peter Kitanidis, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Edward H. Bryan
* 02/29/1992
* USD 110,471.00

The objective of this project is to devise a newly method for prediction of the
effects that pumping procedures used to decontaminate aquifers will have on the
quality of water in the aquifer. The method being developed in this project
combines simulation models of solute transport and fate, descriptions of spatial
variability, probabilistic analysis of uncertainty, and optimization. The
proposed algorithm is expected to be used to simultaneously estimate the aquifer
parameters in making decisions on the location of wells and rate of pumping.
Subject to constraints on decision variables and on reliability of meeting water
quality standards, this method gives promise for optimizing the objective
function while balancing the effects of model and parameter uncertainties. A
newly developed estimation method will be incorporated in the optimization
algorithm to improve the performance of estimation. Results of this project are
expected to provide an approach for determination of the effects that aquifer
remediation procedures will have on quality of water in the aquifer. This will
include the identification of additional information that is needed before
engineering design of the remediation procedure which may involve both injection
and recharge systems supplemented by above- ground or in situ chemical or
biological treatment procedures.