* 8914305
* Synthesis, Characterization, and Reaction Studies of        Metal-Pentadienyl Compounds
* MPS,CHE
* 11/15/1989,04/30/1993
* Richard Ernst, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* John Gilje
* 04/30/1993
* USD 273,860.00

This project in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry Program
is in the area of transition metal organometallic chemistry. The focus of the
project is compounds in which the organic molecule pentadiene is coupled with
the so-called transition metals, such as titanium, vanadium and chromium. Such
compounds are similar to the the compounds of cyclopentadiene which are used
extensively as industrial catalysts, and the substitution of pentadiene for
cyclopentadiene brings about substantial enhancements of thermal stability and
chemical reactivity. Potential applications of the pentadienyl compounds include
the deposition of metal films and the catalysis of polymerization reactions. The
preparation of new open metallocenes, i.e., bis(pentadienyl)metal compounds,
will be attempted for manganese and for second and third row transition metals,
following up on the preparation of such a compound of zirconium, for which no
bis(cyclopentadienyl) compound is known. The structures of the new compounds
will be determined, and their reaction chemistry will be explored. The
utilization of highly-substituted pentadienyl ligands will be explored,
especially ligands with silyl and siloxy substituents. Bimetallic compounds
containing "open fulvalene" ligands will be prepared so that metal-metal
communciation via the linked pentadienyl ligands may be explored. Potential
applications of pentadienyl coupling reactions will be explored, involving such
reagents as nitriles, isonitriles, alkynes, imines, and acyl groups. Some of the
latter reactions are expected to involve useful ring-forming reactions, leading
in some cases to bicyclic organic molecules.