* 8914555
* US-France Cooperative Research:  Local Structure and StagingTransitions in Doped Polymers
* O/D,OISE
* 01/15/1990,12/31/1994
* John Fischer, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 12/31/1994
* USD 14,990.00

This award will support collaborative research between Dr. John Fischer,
University of Pennsylvania and Dr. Patrick Bernier, Groupe de Dynamique des
Phases Condensees, University of Science and Technology of Languedoc,
Montpellier, France. The objective of the project is to carry out NMR, X-ray and
neutron scattering studies of the local structure and staging transitions in
doped polymers. The investigators propose a coordinated program to elucidate the
evolution of novel short and long range atomic correlations, as alkali metals
are introduced into polyacetylene. In particular, Drs. Fischer and Bernier will
examine: 1) the possibility of metallic rather than purely ionic character of
the inserted alkali; 2) novel and complex phase equilibria vs. doping
concentration, analagous to "staging" in layer intercalates and 3) a first
measurement of the Q-integrated partial phonon density of states using
incoherent inelastic neutron scattering. The contributions of the two
investigators are complementary in three important categories: materials
synthesis, measurement capabilities and theoretical expertise. Dr. Bernier and
his group have extensive experience with electrochemical doping by alkali
metals, the preferred method for studying in situ the evolution of properties
with doping. Dr. Fischer's strength is in the vapor and liquid- phase alkali
metal doping of carbon-based synthetic metals. The results of this research may
provide valuable new information on the structure and electronic properties of
doped polymers, with important implications for future materials research.