* 8914674
* US-France Cooperative Research:  Genetic and Environmental  Control of Myogenesis
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/1990,08/31/1994
* Marcia Ontell, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 08/31/1994
* USD 14,880.00

This award will support collaborative research in developmental biology between
Dr. Marcia Ontell, University of Pittsburgh and Dr. Margaret Buckingham, Pasteur
Institute, Paris, France. The objective of the project is to investigate the
influence of innervation on the pattern of expression of contractile protein in
developing skeletal muscles of mice. Fetal muscle organogenesis is characterized
by successive waves of myogenesis, resulting in a heterogenous population of
myotubes. Effective analysis of muscle differentiation, including the sequential
expression of genes coding for the mRNAs for sarcomeric proteins, must be
carried out with the collaborative efforts of laboratories skilled in molecular
biology and in morphological analysis. In this project Dr. Buckingham will
prepare nuclear extracts to study nuclear protein binding to muscle gene
regulatory sequences and will study in vitro transcription of mRNAs coding for
actin and myosin in normal murine muscle and in fetally denervated muscle,
obtained from Dr. Ontell, as well as in muscle from transgenic mice. Dr. Ontell
has developed new techniques, permitting transient or permanent denervation of
developing mouse muscle. She will evaluate these muscles and when appropriate,
the muscles of transgenic mice provided by Dr. Buckingham, with electron
microscopy and quantitative morphometery. She will also investigate, with in
situ hybridization, the actin and myosin mRNAs (at the single myotube level,
with light and electron microscopic correlation) in normal developing murine
muscles, in fetally deneverated muscles, and in transgenic mouse muscles using
cRNA probes developed immunocyto- chemical and gel electrophoretic techniques.
This project may lead to new information, regarding the genetic control of
muscle development and maturation and the effect that innervation may have on
the developmental program.