* 8914989
* US-France Cooperative Research:  Molecular Dynamics         Simulation of Proton Transfer Reactions in Solution
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1990,09/30/1992
* James Hynes, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 09/30/1992
* USD 7,850.00

This award will support collaborative research between Dr. James Hynes,
University of Colorado, and Dr. Daniel Borgis, Laboratoire de Physique
Theoretique des Liquides, University of Pierre and Marie Curie, Paris, France.
The objective of the project is to develop an improved theory for treating
simple proton transfer reactions in solution. Protein transfer reactions in
solution play a central role in chemistry, in particular in acid-base chemistry
and enzyme catalysis. However, no comprehensive molecular level description of
such reactions and their rates yet exist. In part, this is due to their special
character, which includes quantum proton tunnelling through a barrier rather
than classical thermal activation over it, and an essential involvement of the
surrounding polar solvent molecules strongly coupled to the proton. Aided by
recent advances in theoretical and computer simulation techniques, the
investigators propose to perform molecular dynamics computer simulation of model
proton transfer reactions in polar solvents. Reaction rates will be calculated
and the role of solvent polarity and dynamics, and of certain molecular
vibrations, will be determined. Simple yet realistic models will be initially
employed to clarify the essential reaction features and to establish the
simulation techniques. The systems studied will then progress to even more
realistic systems directly susceptible to experimental investigation. Emphasis
will be placed on calculating quantities (e.g. solvent dependence, isotope
effects) which can guide the interpretation of experiments. A detailed
microscopic description of proton transfer reactions is expected to result from
the project. The proposed study should provide theoretical insight into
understanding this important reaction class and also should provide an impetus
for new experiments to probe the influence on these rates of solvent polarity
and dynamics. The project will benefit for the complementary expertise of the
two investigators in this rapidly developing area of physical chemistry.