* 8914897
* Multi-User Biomolecular Processing, Purification and        Analysis Instrumentation
* BIO,DBI
* 12/01/1989,05/31/1992
* John Law, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Joann P. Roskoski
* 05/31/1992
* USD 97,646.00

This proposal requests funds to purchase multi-user instrumentation for
biomolecular processing, purification and analysis. An Automated Laboratory
Workstation would assist processing DNA sequencing reactions. A High Performance
Gel Electrophoresis Unit, a Synthetic Peptide Preparative Purification System,
and a Biomolecule Preparative Purification System would accomplish a wide range
of macromolecule purifications. A Solution Analytical Capillary Electrophoresis
Unit would permit advanced detection of biomolecules for a wide range of
research needs. The main users would be researchers in the Colleges of
Agriculture, Arts and Sciences, and Medicine, and the Arizona Research
Laboratories at the University of Arizona. The instruments will be housed in the
Macromolecular Structure Facility established by the Division of Biotechnology.
Skilled prsonnel will operate, maintain and train other users. The specific
research that would be enhanced by these instruments includes: the molecular
biological basis for cell differentiation and morphology; plant gene expression;
plant responses to environmental stresses (salt, low water,,heat); RNA
processing, protein transport and gene expression in chlorplasts; cyanelle
molecular biology; expression of insect proteases inhibitors; insect
endocrinology; structure/function studies of insect proteins; insect protein and
lipid biochemistry; total immune system evolution; peptide/protein
conformational constraints and receptor recognition; biopolymer/Ligand
interactions; and chromatography support design.