* 8914482
* Dissertation Research: Inflorescence Size in Natural and    Experimental Populations of Milkweeds
* BIO,DEB
* 12/15/1989,11/30/1992
* Robert Wyatt, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Gregory J. McCants
* 11/30/1992
* USD 7,500.00

A major controversy exists regarding the adaptive significance of large floral
displays in plants with consistently low fruit-set: why produce so many the
extra flowers are there to produce pollen which will successfully convey male
genes to other flowers. This "pollen donation hypothesis" has been a difficult
issue to address. While it is reasonably easy to measure fruit or seed
production, it is technically much more difficult to quantify pollen success.
Recently, plant population biologists have turned to paternity exclusion
analysis as a possible solution to the problem. In principle, the technique is
identical to the process of using blood types to determine human paternity. The
proposed research will test the pollen donation hypothesis in milkweeds
(Asclepias). Genetic markers from protein electrophoresis will be used to
perform a paternity exclusion analysis. This will identify seeds sired by
individual plants in the population. Inflorescence size will be manipulated by
removing flowers in experimental populations to determine the relationship
between inflorescence size and numbers of seeds sired and numbers of seeds
produced. This study will yield important basic information about the forces
that shape the evolution of inflorescence size in plants. It will also provide
data regarding levels of gene flow within and between populations. Finally the
development of paternity analysis in plants will provide a basis for
investigating breeding systems of both native and crop plants. Furthermore,
should the need arise again (as in World War II) for milkweeds to be used as
substitute sources of kapok and rubber, we will understand better the forces
that limit fruit-set and will have new insights into how to design effective
breeding programs.