* 8914473
* US-France Cooperative Research:  Conservation Laws in       Continuum Mechanics
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/1990,06/30/1993
* Marshall Slemrod, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 06/30/1993
* USD 9,850.00

This award will support collaborative research between Dr. Marshall Slemrod,
University of Wisconsin and two French applied mathe- maticians: Professor
Michel Rascle, University of Nice and Professor Denis Serre, Ecole Normale
Superieure de Lyon. The objective of the project is to study the existance of
solutions to systems of conservation laws arising in continuum mechanics. In
particular, the investigators will study the decay, propagation and creation of
oscillations using the tools of compensated compactness and the Young measure.
One of the most important branches of partial differential equations is the area
of conservation laws. In fact most mechanical systems are described by such
equations, e.g. motion of elastic bodies, gases fluids, plasmas, etc. Hence
their study both analytically and numerically is exceptionally important. In the
proposed project, the investigators will focus on the following: 1) dynamics of
the Young measure associated with a sequence of approximate solutions 2) systems
of conservation laws describing phase transitions. Dr. Slemrod and his French
colleagues are leading researchers in a small group of mathematicians working on
the analysis of physically reasonable problems in conservation laws. Solution of
the proposed problems would be a significant step toward the understanding of
one of the central problems of modern applied mathematics: the dynamics of
discontinuous, oscillatory, measure-valued physical systems.