* 8914421
* US-France Cooperative Research:  Properties of Semi-        conductors, Superlattices and Superconductors under High    Pressure
* O/D,OISE
* 04/15/1990,09/30/1992
* Peter Yu, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 09/30/1992
* USD 7,882.00

This award will support collaborative research between Dr. Peter Yu, University
of California at Berkeley, and Dr. Gerald Martinez, Service National des Champs
Intenses, Grenoble, France. The objective of the project is to study the
properties of semi- conductors and superconductors under high pressure. Pressure
is a fundamental property of materials and can be utilized to alter the crystal
structure of solids. In this project, the investigators will extend earlier work
in using pressure to understand the properties of the DX center, which is a
technological and scientifically interesting deep center in GaAs and GaA1As
alloys. Pressure will be used to fabricate new semiconductor/metal and
superconductor/superconductor superlattices. New techniques will be developed to
measure magnetic susceptibility of samples under high pressure inside the
diamond anvil cell. This collaboration will take advantage of the expertise at
Berkeley in the areas of ab initio pseudopotential band structure calculations
and in high pressure electrical and optical measure- ments. Complementing the
Berkeley group are the unique high field magnet facilities in Grenoble. In
addition, Dr. Martinez has access to novel SSL structures, such as short period
GaAs/A1As superlattices grown in France.