* 8914439
* Acquistion of a Stable Isotope Ratio Mass Spectrometer for  Determining Nitrogen Transformations and Metabolism in Soil,Plant, and Animal Systems
* BIO,DBI
* 12/01/1989,05/31/1992
* J Boling, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Joann P. Roskoski
* 05/31/1992
* USD 74,300.00

Funding is requested for the acquisition of a stable isotope ratio mass
spectrometer. A common theme to all of the research programs is the regulation
of N use efficiency. An overview of the objectives of each program are 1) to
quantify and better understand N transformations in soil, particularly N losses,
2) to understand the fundamental processes of inorganic N transport, N
metabolism, and N fluxes controlling plant N use efficiency, and 3) to develop
the underlying basic principles regulating N cycling and metabolism in the
efficient conversion of dietary protein of ruminants. Specific research areas
includes; regulation of denitrification and N immobilization as related to soil
environment and soil management, ecology of soil bacterial involved in N
transformations, fate of organic and inorganic N sources in agricultural soils,
factors controlling adjustments in N uptake and altered partitioning of reduced
N in N limited plants, roles of plant sink and source strength on allocation of
N, and effects of endogenous proteins and blood urea-N inputs to the rumen N
pool on dietary protein use. A MS designed for stable isotope ratio analysis,
the preferred method of 15N analysis, would directly benefit and further enhance
the individual and collaborative programs of the principal investigators and
stimulate the research endeavors of other scientists.