* 8914546
* RUI: Field Study and Modeling of Lake-Effect Snow Near Lake Ontario
* GEO,AGS
* 02/15/1990,01/31/1993
* Gregory Byrd, SUNY College at Brockport
* Continuing Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 01/31/1993
* USD 165,000.00

Anyone who lives to the lee of the Great Lakes is familiar with a mesoscale
meteorological phenomenon know as "lake effect snow storms". Lake effect snows
are relatively local weather events that can cause some areas to receive as much
as 100 cm of snow while other locations only a few tens of kilometers away may
experience barely a trace. In particular, Lake Ontario, because of its length
and orientation with respect to the prevailing winds, has an unusually well
defined snowbelt with annual snowfall accumulations that exceed 500 cm. Lake
effect snows have been recognized and studied for some time with much progress
having been made in determining causative factors. Gaps, however, still exist in
our knowledge as is evidenced by an inability to consistently predict the
timing, location and amount of heavy snows. During the winter of 1990, a private
power company, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration and the
Pennsylvania State University will collaborate in a joint field effort called
the Lake Ontario Winter Storms Project (LOWS). The project will focus on
improved understanding and prediction of intense local snowfalls to the lee of
Lake Ontario. The field component will bring to bear on this problem advanced
mesoscale measuring systems such as Doppler radar, wind and thermodynamic
profiling systems, and a microwave radiometer. Under the National Science
Foundation's program for Research in Undergraduate Institutions (RUI), the
Principal Investigators (PIs) proposes to participate in the LOWS Project. The
PIs bring to the project not only their meteorological expertise, but also they
will contribute directly to the observational effort by fielding two mobile
atmospheric sounding systems which will be operated by undergraduate students
from RUI colleges in the area. Post field experiment research will concentrate
on diagnostic studies and numerical simulations with the ultimate goal of
gaining a better understanding of the environmental structure and physical
mechanisms involved in the formation and maintenance of lake effect snows. The
activities of the PIs complement nicely the other scientists involved in the
project. //