* 8914705
* Dissertation Research:  Systematics and Biogeography of     Cryosophila (Palmae)
* BIO,DEB
* 01/15/1990,12/31/1991
* William Anderson, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 12/31/1991
* USD 12,000.00

Graduate student Evans, under the direction of faculty adviser Anderson at the
University of Michigan is studying the species relationships and geographical
distributions of palms of the genus Cryosophila of Central and South America.
This is a group of medium-sized, primarily low-elevation rainforest palms,
distributed from Pacific coastal Mexico to northwestern Colombia. There are
probably fewer than 10 distinct species of Cryosophila, but the exact number as
well as the defining characteristics and distributions of each species are
unknown. The first objective of this study is to identify, define and classify
all Cryosophila species and determine their natural distributions. Once this
basic taxonomic information is known, the evolutionary history of the species
within the genus will be hypothesized using phylogenetic (cladistic) analysis,
including study of Chelyocarpus and Itaya palms. Cryosophila belongs to the most
primitive group of palms, the subtribe Thrinacinae. Whereas specialized groups
of palms tend to be restricted to either the northern or southern hemisphere,
thrinacine palms are more or less equally represented in both hemispheres. In
the New World, however, Cryosophila is the only thrinacine palm having a
distribution centered in Central America with extensions into both South America
and Mexico. The direction of evolution of new species in the genus should help
determine areas of speciation and timing of speciation events. The family Palmae
is a morphologically diverse tropical to subtropical group having approximately
2600 species, most of which are restricted to rainforest habitats. Due to the
rapid destruction of these forests and the fact that a large majority of palm
species are found only in the wild and have never been cultivated, species
diversity in the palm family is seriously threatened. Since most palms have
historically been poorly collected and consequently are greatly under-
represented in herbarium collections, the disappearance of palms in the wild
will mean that the incredible diversity within the family will forever remain
poorly understood. From an economic standpoint, declining palm populations will
have major consequences for tropical nations because palms provide an enormous
array of useful products for local and regional use as well as for export.
Unfortunately, the severity of the problem is difficult to assess and protective
measures difficult to implement because many palm species are poorly defined
and/or their distributions are only partially understood. That is, good
taxonomic and biogeographic data are critical for palm conservation efforts, for
only when species are identifiable and their distributions known can actions be
taken to harvest them in sustainable fashion and to protect them. The research
supported by this grant is designed to provide just such information for one
group (the genus Cryosophila) of Mesoamerican palms.