* 8914899
* U.S.-Japan Joint Seminar: Processing, Microstructure        Development and Properties of Advanced Ceramics and Their   Composites/August 1990/Tokyo, Japan
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/1990,10/31/1991
* Robert Davis, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Turczak
* 10/31/1991
* USD 16,900.00

This award will support a three-day U.S.-Japan seminar entitled "Processing,
Microstructure Development, and Properties of Advanced Ceramics and Their
Composites." Advanced ceramics have unique properties, with potential
applications ranging from heat engines (high-temperature structural ceramics) to
electric power transmission (new superconducting ceramics with high transition
temperatures). Their unique properties are not only due to their chemistry,
bonding, and crystalline structure, but also to unique microstructures developed
during their processing. However, variability in the production of these
microstructures during processing leads to considerable variability in the
resulting ceramic materials. The reliable utilization of structural and other
advanced ceramics thus depends importantly on processing reliability. Recent
advances in the processing of ceramics, primarily by materials scientists in the
U.S. and Japan, have pointed to new directions for achieving reliable ceramics.
These advances will be discussed at the seminar by leading scientists in this
field in the two countries. The seminar will be held August 20-22, 1990, near
Tokyo, Japan. Seminar co-organizers are Dr. Robert F. Davis, Department of
Materials Science and Engineering, North Carolina State University; Dr.
Shiushichi Kimura, Department of Inorganic Materials, Tokyo Institute of
Technology; and Dr. Takashi Yamaguchi, Department of Science and Technology,
Keio University, Yokohama, Japan. Specific topical areas to be addressed at the
seminar are powder science; precursor chemistries; new consolidation methods;
densification and microstructure control; microstructure and mechanics; and
joining, machining, and deformation. The emphasis will be on exploring the
interrelations of processing, microstructure, and properties of advanced
ceramics and their composites. It is expected that the discussions will also
identify new research directions aimed toward improving processing reliability.