* 8914984
* US-France Cooperative Research:  Numerical Simulation by    Spectral Element Method
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1990,09/30/1992
* Anthony Patera, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 09/30/1992
* USD 13,850.00

This award will support collaborative research in computational fluid dynamics
and numerical analysis between Dr. Anthony Patera, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology and Dr. Yvon Maday, Laboratory for Numerical Analysis, University of
Pierre and Marie Curie, Paris, France. The objective of the proposed project is
a rigorous analysis of certain aspects of spectral methods as applied to
equations governing fluid flow. The numerical simulation of phenomena governed
by partial differential equations is currently of major interest. This has
become even more true as computers have become more powerful and able to solve
problems that used to be intractable on previous machines. In order to be able
to provide a numerical solution with sufficient accuracy, the numerical methods
have to become more precise and the standard methods often fail to give a
satisfactory accuracy. The research of new high order methods is thus of
fundamental importance. Spectral methods are amongst the most accurate numerical
methods currently available for the numerical simulation of physical phenomena.
In this project, the investigators propose to continue the development of the
Spectral Element method, along with a rigorous mathematical theory. The project
will benefit from the complementary expertise of the two investigators.
Professor Maday is a leading mathematician and has made many contributions to
the rigorous development of spectral and finite element methods. The Spectral
Element Method was introduced by Patera and is an important contribution to the
development of spectral methods.