* 8914799
* Mathematical Sciences: Operator Algebras, K-Theory and IndexTheory
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1989,12/31/1992
* Nigel Higson, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 12/31/1992
* USD 63,825.00

Professor Higson's project has to do with the use and management of index
information in the theory of operator algebras. One major thrust will be in the
Dirac operator approach to relative K-homology for manifolds with boundary
advocated by Baum, Douglas, and Taylor, with an emphasis on developing
techniques for computing one of the connecting homomorphisms in the six-term
exact sequence for this theory. Another area of investigation is index theory
for the C*-algebra generated by bounded smoothing operators supported in a
uniform neighborhood of the diagonal on an open manifold. Certain distinguished
subalgebras of this algebra will also be considered. The notion of index
pervades a great deal of mathematics. Elementary manifestations can be found in,
for instance, the winding number that measures the number of times a point
moving in a closed planar orbit winds around a fixed point inside, and the
number of arbitrary constants in the general solution of a linear differential
equation. An important theorem, now a couple of decades old, relates index
behavior for differential equations on a manifold (surface or higher-dimensional
analogue) to information about the manifold's general shape, or topology,
expressible in terms of things like winding numbers. It has been discovered more
recently that richly structured mathematical systems called operator algebras
provide an auspicious framework for powerful extensions of the original index
theorem. The work of Professor Higson will expand and strengthen this framework.