* 8914525
* US-France Cooperative Research:  Program to Study the       Southwestern Atlantic
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1990,09/30/1992
* Silvia Garzoli, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 09/30/1992
* USD 7,450.00

This award will support collaborative research in physical oceanography between
Dr. Silvia Garzoli, Lamont-Doherty Geological Observatory of Columbia University
and Dr. Christine Provost, Laboratory of Oceanography and Climate, University of
Pierre and Marie Curie, Paris, France. The objective of the project is to
analyze data from an international high resolution study of the confluence zones
of the Brazil and Malvinas currents. A large international effort by the US,
France and Argentina to study the dynamics of the Southwestern Atlantic will be
completed by early 1990. The program consists of intensive field work based
primarily on the deployment of a large array of instruments (inverted echo
sounders and current meter moorings) for a period of 18 months, the collection
of infrared satellite images for a period of two years, and the realization of
three hydro- graphic/nutrients extensive surveys. The study will result in a
jointly-collected, valuable and extensive set of oceanographic data available
for calibration, reduction, and analysis. This award will provide funds for Dr.
Garzoli to visit France for the purpose of establishing standards for common
data calibration. This will facilitate the joint data analysis and consequent
joint scientific interpretation of the whole system of circulation and
thermohaline variability in the Southwestern Atlantic.