* 8914635
* Dissertation Research:  The Slipper Orchids:  Molecular,    Morphological, and Ontogenetic Insights into the Evolution  of Constrained Floral Diversity
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/1990,08/31/1992
* Mark Chase, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 08/31/1992
* USD 10,000.00

Among the vast floral diversity of the orchid family (Orchidaceae), the four
genera of the slipper orchids (subfamily Cypripedioideae) stand out as an easily
defined assemblage. Their stereotyped flowers, adapted for pollination by
temporarily trapping insects in their pitcher-like lips, nevertheless exhibit a
secondary level of floral modifications attractive to a wide variety of
pollinators. Because the floral parts of slipper orchids are so similar for
functional reasons, only shape and color become available as criteria for
establishing relationships based on flowers. Structure of the plant body itself
offers little more data, the most recent work on this subject dating to 1966.
Chloroplast DNA analysis, which has proven helpful in resolving relationships in
other orchids and plant groups, will be applied to the slipper orchids in hopes
of uncovering numerous characters (mutations in the DNA) that can be used to
assess relationships more reliably. Chloroplast DNA exists separate from the
chromosomal DNA that codes for plant and flower development, so it should serve
as an excellent internal indicator of relationships in a stereotyped orchid
group for which such external features are difficult to define and relate to one
another. Characters of the plant and flower parts will be studied relative to
the relationships uncovered with chloroplast DNA analysis in hopes of
understanding more about their evolution. Additional features of the plants will
also be examined for comparison to the molecular work, including external
sculpturing of the seed walls. Following the work on evolutionary relationships
of the slipper orchids, their geographic history will be traced. The slipper
orchids display an unusual distribution, and no formal studies of this
arrangement have yet been undertaken. This research will no doubt be aided by
knowledge of the genetic relationships (by chloroplast DNA) of the plants in
question. No fossil record exists for the Cypripedioideae, and it is hoped that
by studying current distributions with respect to past continental movements, an
approximate time and place of their origin may be obtained. An additional aim of
this study will be an attempt to understand an evolutionary mechanism that may
be responsible for some of the diversity seen in the slipper orchids. Changes in
the timing of events that occur during the development of a plant can have
drastic consequences for the final shape and size of both plant and floral
parts. A system of two similar species of Mexican slipper orchids will be
studied for such changes. One species appears to be a juvenile version of the
other; this hypothesis will be tested by comparing shapes of flower parts in
buds and open flowers of both species and by comparing the relative rates of
growth of the two flowers.