* 8914758
* US-France Cooperative Research:  Rapid Kinetics of Electron Transfer Reactions of Nitrosomonas
* O/D,OISE
* 02/01/1990,07/31/1995
* Alan Hooper, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 07/31/1995
* USD 15,850.00

This award will support continued collaborative research between Dr. Alan
Hooper, University of Minnesota and Dr. Claude Balny, French National Institute
for Health and Medical Research (INSERM), Montpellier. This research is aimed at
understanding the chemical functioning of hydroxylamine oxidoreductase (HAO), a
key enzyme employed by the nitrifying bacterium Nitrosomonas in aerobic
oxidation of soil-bound nitrogen. In the proposed project, the investigators
will use the techniques of stopped-flow to study spectral changes in HAO and
other chromophoric electron transfer components. They will further study the
structure of the active site by comparing the rate of reaction of the subtrates
with the rate of reaction of subtrate analogs and binding of competitive
inhibitors. In addition, they will investigate the kinds of electron carriers
mediating between HAO and the terminal oxidase. Dr. Hooper is an internationally
recognized expert on bacterial-nitrification. The expertise of Dr. Balny on
stopped-flow in general and on this enzyme system in particular makes
continuation of the collaboration appropriate. In addition, Dr. Balny has one of
the few facilities in the world where kinetics can be measured at highly
controlled temperature and high hydrostatic pressures. The results of this
research will contribute to increased understanding of enzymic oxidation of
fertilizer ammonia in soils. Beyond fundamental interest to biochemists, this
work has important potential applications to understanding the soil nitrogen
cycle and to control the agricul- tural loss of soil nitrogen through various
denitrification mechanisms.