* 8914522
* US-France Cooperative Research:  Structural and Functional  Study of Thioredoxins
* O/D,OISE
* 02/01/1990,01/31/1993
* Bob Buchanan, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 01/31/1993
* USD 11,770.00

This award will support collaborate research between Dr. Bob Buchanan,
University of California at Berkeley and Dr. M. Miginiac- Maslow, University of
Paris-Sud, Orsay. The overall goal of the project is to relate the structure and
function of the newly identified extrachloroplastic thioredoxin h of leaves and
other plant tissues and of the m-type thioredoxins present in the green
eukaryotic alga Chlamydomonas reinhardtii. Theoredoxins are low- molecular-
weight proteins that are widely distributed in nature. In pursuing the proposed
work, the investigators will identify the structural domains involved in the
interaction of thioredoxins with different target enzymes. They plan to perform
site-directed mutagenesis experiments to confer different activities (specifici-
ties) to the higher plant and algal thioredoxins and convert them to either a
more bacterial or animal-like character. These results will provide insight into
the structural features that determine the specificity of thioredoxins, not only
of plants, but also of animals and bacteria. Research from this study will add
fundamental new knowledge to several fields, including biochemistry, medicine
and biotechnology. The complementary interests and expertise of the Berkeley and
Orsay groups, together with their long-standing record of successful scientific
cooperation, will help insure the success of the proposed research.