* 8914452
* US-France Cooperative Research:  Coordination Compounds of  Polyoxomolybdate Anions
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1990,08/01/1990
* Jon Zubieta, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 08/01/1990
* USD 0.00

This award will support collaborative research between Dr. Jon Zubieta, State
University of New York at Albany, and Dr. Yves Jeanin, Laboratorie de Chimie des
Metaux de Transition, University of Pierre and Marie Curie Paris, France. The
objective of the project is the investigation of coordination compounds of
polyoxomolybdate anions. Since heterogeneous metal oxide surfaces play an
increasingly important role in the chemical industry, the chemical processes
which occur on these surfaces are of considerable interest. The chemistry of
polyoxomolybdates with organonitrogen species is of particular importance in
providing chemical models for abiological nitrogen fixation and industrial
ammoxidation. In this joint project, the investigators will exploit currently
developed synthetic methodologies for organohydrazido complexes of polyoxo-
molybdates to the coordination chemistry of polymetalates with organoimido
ligands. The experimental plan will concentrate on the synthesis of organoimido
derivatives of organic soluble polyoxomo- lybdates, of polyoxomolybdate
complexes stabilized by coligands, and of lacunary polyoxometalates. The
complexes will be character- ized using X-ray crystallography, multinuclear NMR
and electro- chemistry. Thermal and photochemical decomposition reactions of the
organoimido derivatives, as well as their reactions with allyalcohol and alkenes
will be investigated. The project will benefit from the complementary expertise
of the US and French investigators; the two laboratories have been studying
related aspects of the coordination chemistry of polyoxometalates with
organonitrogen ligands for several years.