* 8914412
* US-France Cooperative Research:  Radio Observations of FlareStars
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1990,09/30/1992
* George Dulk, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 09/30/1992
* USD 12,100.00

This award will support collaborative research in radio astronomy between Dr.
George Dulk, University of Colorado and Dr. Alain Lecacheux, Observatory of
Paris, Meudon, France. The investigators propose to perform a joint analysis of
radio observations of two flare stars made using the new wide-band, high
resolution French radio spectrometer at Meudon. Rapid releases of energy called
flares occur frequently on the Sun and on certain classes of stars, particularly
"flare stars". The manner by which the energy is released is largely unknown,
and even the location of the stored energy remains controversial. The main
objective of the proposed research is to study the temporal and spectral
properties of the radio radiation of flares on a small number of active flare
stars, to compare them with the properties of solar flares, and to infer the
emission mechanisms and the conditions in the flaring volume. The project will
benefit from the complementary skills of the US and French groups. Dr. Dulk has
considerable experience in astrophysical plasma physics, as well as in the
observation, interpretation and theory of solar and stellar radio emissions. The
group at the Observatory of Paris has significant expertise in the theory and
observation of solar and planetary radio emissions. The proposed project will
add valuable new information on the character of stellar fires and may yield new
insight into the mechanism of energy release in stellar and solar flames.