* 8915906
* Dolomitization of a Miocene Reef Complex, Mallorca, Spain
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/1990,01/31/1993
* William Meyers, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 01/31/1993
* USD 51,622.00

This project investigates the diagenesis of a partially dolomitized sequence of
Upper Miocene reefal limestones cropping out on the island of Mallorca, Spain.
Unusually good exposures of these ancient reefs has allowed Dr. Luis Pomar
(Univ. of the Balearic Islands) to define a detailed sedimentological and
stratigraphic framework and to relate periods of reef growth and erosion to
changes in relative sea level. This previous work is an ideal framework for our
proposed detailed study of post- depositional changes (diagenetic alterations)
that took place when the reefs and carbonate sediments were transformed to
limestone and dolomite. In collaboration with L. Pomar we have begun field work,
and have begun petrography and geochemistry at Stony Brook. The fundamental goal
of our project is to quantitatively decipher the dolomitization processes and
their rates. Our approach is to combine detailed field work with laboratory
studies: petrography (plane-light, luminescence, scanning electron microscopy),
transmission electron microscopy, fluid inclusion work, geochemical studies (O,
C, Sr, B isotopes; Ca, Mg, Sr, Mn, Fe, Na abundances) of dolomites and
associated diagenetic calcites. Quantitative modeling of geochemical data and of
potential dolomitizing fluids will be used within the geologic constraints to
develop a model(s) for the diagenetic processes acting on the reef complex.