* 8915854
* Collaborative Research: Comprehensive Geochemical Sampling and Multicomponent Thermochemical Equilibria of Volcanic Emissions
* NONE,NONE
* 02/01/1990,07/31/1992
* Mark Reed, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* John L. Snyder
* 07/31/1992
* USD 27,000.00

This project is for continued studies directed at comprehensive field sampling
and measurement of volcanic emission products at active volcanoes. It will
involve continued multi-method field sampling and measurement efforts at two or
three field sites in the next two years. The new data and samples will be
analyzed and interpreted using new thermochemical models which now address more
than 40 components and over 500 species; these models form the basis for
understanding the multitude of chemical reactions which happen when emission
products, especially gases, ascend from depth, cool and oxidize in the earth's
atmosphere. The PIs will use a new field measurement technique, Raman
spectroscopy, which can measure emission rates of many different species. Based
on experience in air pollution monitoring, the new Raman technique can measure
two or more species contemporaneously in real time; this may prove to be useful
for eruption forecasting. This work will add to the inadequate data base on
volcanic emissions, allow for more accurate scaling of phenomena of small
eruptions, help guide models of the impact of volcanism on atmospheric chemistry
and possibly provide a better understanding of some kinds of ore deposits. This
is a collaborative project between William Rose of Michigan Technical University
and Mark Reed of the University of Oregon.