* 8915668
* Advanced Compilation Techniques for Novel Architectures,    NSF-NCRD Workshop
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/1990,06/30/1991
* Marina Chen, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Alice C. Hogan
* 06/30/1991
* USD 16,000.00

ABSTRACT NARRATIVE Description: This proposed workshop, the fifth National
Science Foundation-National Council of Research and Development of Israel
(NCRD)workshop formalized by a May 1985 Memorandum of Understanding, supports
the attendance of six U.S. scientists (other invited U.S. scientists may attend
at their own expense) and the collaboration of Dr. Marina C. Chen, Yale
University as the U.S. workshop co-chair and with Dr. Ron Pinter, IBM Israel
Scientific Center, the Israeli co-chair. The workshop to be held in 1990,
probably in October in Jerusalem, will focus on advanced compilation techniques
in at least four major areas of compilation techniques in novel computer
architectures. Attendees will give or provide papers during the workshop. These
papers along with workshop discussions will be published as a book through
separate arrangements, made outside the scope of this proposal, with the
publishers, Springer-Verlag. The co-chairs and a publisher editor will edit the
publication, which should be available by late Spring 1991 to the U.S. and
Israeli science communitities. Scope: This proposal will continue a series of
workshops convened to consider areas of mutual scientific interest to the
Foundation and the Israeli NCRD. The subject of this workshop is important to
the U.S. as it is necessary for this country to remain competitive in the world
of supercomputing. Compiler technologies are deemed crucial to the effective use
of new generations of supercomputers. The Israeli parallel computing community,
while small, is growing and has made several interesting contributions to the
field, both in theory and in practice. This workshop has the possibilities to
foster some important exchanges of scientific knowledge in computer science that
could benefit each country and also to provide international science a new
source of publication reference