* 8915208
* U.S.-Japan Joint Seminar: Environment-Behavior Research/    July 1990/Kyoto, Japan
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1990,06/30/1991
* Robert Bechtel, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Turczak
* 06/30/1991
* USD 14,854.00

This award will support the participation of six U.S. scientists in a joint
seminar on "Environment-Behavior Research," to be held in Kyoto, Japan, July
19-20, 1990. The central theme of the seminar is progress in cross-cultural
collaboration in environment-behavior research psychology. Topics covered will
be theory building, landscape perception, work and learning environments,
housing and family, public behavior, and safety and traffic. This is the third
U.S.-Japan seminar on environmental psychology. Since the first one in 1980,
Japanese-U.S. collaboration in this area has expanded and diversified to create
a body of interdisciplinary literature that relates to both theoretical and
applied areas of architecture, landscape architecture, sociology, anthropology,
traffic safety, industrial management, and the building industry. Participants
in this seminar will benefit from sharing new results, evaluating the progress
of current projects, and promoting future cross-cultural collaborative research.
The co-organizers of the seminar are Professor Robert B. Bechtel, Department of
Psychology, University of Arizona, and Dr. Yasumi Yoshitake, President, Kobe
Design University, Japan. The United States and Japan are leading industrial
nations, and environmental issues and concerns are becoming of increasing
importance in both countries. The topics for discussion at this seminar are of
mutual interest, and they lend themselves to cross-cultural investi- gation.
There are enough differences in the experiences and perceptions in the two
countries to make such cross-cultural studies potentially useful to both sides.