* 8915893
* Mathematical Sciences:  Banach Spaces and Convexity Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1989,06/30/1991
* Elisabeth Werner, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* William Y. Velez
* 06/30/1991
* USD 25,762.00

This Research Opportunities for Women award supports Professor Werner's work in
Banach space theory. One part of her project concerns properties of Banach
spaces that can be characterized by the existence of appropriate renormings, for
instance the property of containing a subspace isomorphic to the space of
absolutely summable sequences. She will also investigate the geometry of convex
bodies in Euclidean space. The theory of Banach spaces is about analysis in
infinitely many dimensions. For each finite dimension n, there is only one
n-dimensional space, in most respects as well understood in general as in the
familiar cases when n is 1, 2, or 3. These are used to keep track of situations
in which there are only finitely many degrees of freedom. When the number of
degrees of freedom becomes infinite, as would for instance be necessary to
describe the configuration of a piece of string, there are many possible
reasonable choices for the ambient space in which to perform analysis. A key
element of structure that distinguishes these spaces one from another is the way
in which distance is measured. Professor Werner's project is concerned with how
the ability to rescale the distance measurement in certain ways impinges on the
geometrical structure of the space.