* 8915479
* A Study of Isoprene Emission from Plants
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/1990,03/31/1992
* Thomas Sharkey, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Bruce L. Umminger
* 03/31/1992
* USD 79,000.00

Isoprene emission from trees is a significant source of hydrocarbon gases in
the atmosphere. In this project the conditions which promote isoprene emission
from oak trees will be investigated. This will contribute to our understanding
of the atmosphere and our ability to predict changes in the atmosphere. Isoprene
is released by plants to the atmosphere at a rate of 2% or more of the rate
photosynthesis. This isoprene emission from plants is an important interface
between the biosphere and the atmosphere; it is estimated that 350 X 1012 g of
isoprene is released to the atmosphere each year. The PI proposes to determine
what conditions accelerate the rate of isoprene emission from intact leaves and
to determine what effects, if any, isoprene has on the physiology of plants.
Specifically, he will test (1) the proposed relationship between isoprene
emission and photorespiration, (2) the relationship between isoprene emission
and the light reactions of photsynthesis, and (3) the relationship between
isoprene emission and photosynthetic carbon metabolism. In addition experiments
will be undertaken to assist in generating hypotheses. Experiments will be
conducted with intact leaves. Isoprene formation is likely to involve glycolytic
metabolism inside chloroplasts, which is also required for synthesis of
tyrosine, tryptophan, leucine, isoleucine and valine, amino acids essential for
human nutrition. Preliminary studies of how to begin biochemical studies of
isoprene synthesis and glycolytic reactions inside chloroplasts will also be
undertaken.