* 8915021
* Cores of Early-Type Galaxies
* MPS,AST
* 04/15/1990,03/31/1994
* John Kormendy, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Millissa J. Evans
* 03/31/1994
* USD 95,000.00

Dr. Kormendy, one of the worlds leading experts in high resolu- tion
spectroscopy and photometry of early type galaxies, is here funded to make a
systematic investigation of the cores of early- type galaxies. This work is made
possible by the excellent seeing at the Canada-France-Hawaii Telescope, which
exhibits star images a factor of two smaller than elsewhere. For the first time,
cores will be resolved in many galaxies. A variety of problems of core structure
are to be investigated. Surface photometry, stellar rotation, and velocity
dispersion measure- ments will be obtained for galaxies over a wide range of
luminos- ity. This program will provide basic galaxy scaling laws: corre-
lations between characteristic size, central density, velocity dispersion and
luminosity. These will provide basic constraints for theories of galaxy
formation; for example, they may show that lower-luminosity ellipticals formed
with more dissipation than high-luminosity ellipticals. "Second parameter"
effects in these correlations, i.e., the origin of the scatter, will be studied.
Dynamical modeling using Richstone and Tremaine's maximum entropy code will be
used to study anisotropies in the velocity distribu- tion and to measure mass-
to-light ratios as a function of galaxy luminosity. Surprisingly, dust is
detected in over half of the galaxies already surveyed. This will be illustrated
in an atlas of photographs. Dust distributions will provide constraints on the
intrinsic shapes of ellipticals, fueling scenarios for cen- tral black holes,
and X-ray cooling flows. Other nuclear phenom- ena which may be investigated
include extra nuclei superimposed on cores, dynamical evolution and collapse in
the smallest cores, and the formation of nuclear black holes. A search for
supermas- sive black holes will be made by looking for large gradients in
central rotation and velocity dispersion curves. Evidence for central mass
concentration has already been found in at least five galaxies.