* 8915649
* U.S.-Japan Joint Seminar: Cross-cultural Perspective on     Computational Alternatives to Paper-Pencil Computations for the 21st Century/August 1990/Honolulu, HI
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/1990,08/31/1991
* Robert Reys, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Turczak
* 08/31/1991
* USD 13,798.00

This award will support the participation of eight U.S. mathematics education
researchers in a joint U.S.-Japan seminar on "Cross-cultural Perspective on
Computational Alternatives to Paper-Pencil Computations for the 21st Century."
Paper-and-pencil computation has traditionally been central to elementary school
mathematics programs in the U.S. and Japan (and elsewhere), and paper-pencil
algorithms designed to produce exact answers have long dominated the way
computation has been taught. However, it is becoming increasingly apparent that
alternative forms of computation, such as the use of calculators, mental
computation, and estimation, deserve more attention in the elementary
mathematics curriculum. The widespread availability and use of the hand- held
calculator provides an efficient and low-cost means for finding exact answers to
problems that would otherwise involve tedious paper-and-pencil calculations.
Mental computation is a useful option in some problems, and has been especially
valued and emphasized in Japanese mathematics education. For many real-world
situations, estimation is a still better approach. Mental computation and
estimation are generally recognized as making use of higher-order thinking
skills as well as providing many opportunities for mathematical problem solving;
both are likely to assume more significant roles in mathematics education in the
years ahead. It is the purpose of this seminar to bring leading mathematics
education researchers in the two countries together to describe and exchange the
results of recent research on these alternatives, to identify the curricular and
instructional implications of the results, and to discuss ways this knowledge
can be used to establish a better balance among these computational alternatives
within elementary school mathematics programs in both countries. The seminar
will be held August 13-17, 1990, in Honolulu, HI under the auspices of the
U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science Program. Co-organizers are Dr. Robert E. Reys,
Professor of Mathematics Education, University of Missouri-Columbia, and Dr.
Nobuhiko Nohda, Professor, Institute of Education, University of Tsukuba, Japan.