* 8915283
* U.S.-Japan Joint Seminar: Inorganic and Organometallic      Polymers/March 1991/Nagoya, Japan
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1990,09/30/1991
* Krzysztof Matyjaszewski, American Chemical Society (ACS)
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Turczak
* 09/30/1991
* USD 17,260.00

This award will support the participation of six U.S. scientists in a joint
U.S.-Japan seminar on the topic of inorganic and organometallic polymers. This
field is of current interest and importance because of the potential utilization
of these substances as electronic materials, biomedical polymers, and precursors
to ceramics. The seminar will emphasize preparation, characterization, and
applications of various polymers including polyphosphazenes, polysiloxanes,
polysilanes, polysilazanes, and polyborazines. Both traditional and novel
synthetic methods will be covered, and a variety of instrumental methods for
determining the structures and other properties of these polymers will be
discussed, as will structure-property relationships. Though the emphasis of the
meeting is to be on basic research, some attention will be given also to new
applications of the research developments. The U.S. and Japan are two leading
countries in the field of inorganic polymers. There is complementary research in
the two countries, with stronger emphasis on synthesis and applications in the
U.S. and on characterization in Japan. Participating in the seminar will be U.S.
and Japanese scientists active in polymer synthesis, polymer physics,
instrumental methods of polymer characterization, solid state polymer
properties, and various polymer applications. The seminar will be held March
25-27, 1991, in Nagoya, Japan. The organizers are Dr. Krzysztof Matyjaszewski,
Department of Chemistry, Carnegie-Mellon University; Dr. Kenneth Wynne,
Chemistry Division, Office of Naval Research; Dr. Kenkichi Murakami, Department
of Material Science, Teikyo University, Utsunomiya, Japan; and Dr. Katzumichi
Ono, Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan.