* 8915060
* U.S.-Japan Cooperative Research:  Study of Polymers by      Positron Annihilation
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1990,03/31/1993
* John McGervey, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Turczak
* 03/31/1993
* USD 26,760.00

This award will enable Professor John D. McGervey, Department of Physics, Case
Western Reserve University, and U.S. colleagues to collaborate with Professor
Yusuke Ujihira, Engineering Research Institute, The University of Tokyo, and
other Japanese researchers in a study of polymers by the technique of positron
annihilation. The basis of this technique is the fact that the lifetime of a
positron in a variety of materials has been found to be dependent upon the
electron density in its surroundings. In regions of relatively low electron
density--in holes or defects in a solid, for example--the lifetime is measurably
longer (though still measured in trillionths of a second) than in other, higher
density regions. The lifetime is measured by observing the gamma ray which
signals the creation of a positron, followed by a second gamma ray which appears
when the positron is annihilated. In polymers, the longer lifetime is thought to
be the result of the formation of an "atom" of ortho-positronium (o-Ps), which
is more stable toward annihilation by an electron than is a positron itself. The
lifetime of positronium is thus a measure of the size of the free- volume
element ("hole") in which it finds itself. In the case of polymers the o-Ps
appears to be formed or trapped in the free- volume elements that exist between
the strands of polymer molecules. The greater the number and volume of such
elements, the greater is the probability of forming o-Ps. From the measured
positron lifetime distribution in a polymer sample it is possible to partially
characterize the sample in terms of the size distribution of its free-volume
elements. Such information is useful in studies aimed at understanding the
relationship between free volume and such polymer properties as viscosity,
elasticity, and gas permeability; the change (decrease) in free volume with
polymer aging; and the response of polymers to variables such as temperature and
pressure. The cooperating scientists have had considerable experience in the
positron lifetime technique. In this cooperative effort they plan to pursue
further its application to polymer studies by developing standardized methods
for sample preparation and characterization, as well as procedures for dealing
with possible sources of systematic error. The technique will be applied to
various polymers, including some that may be used in advanced engineering
plastics.