* 8915680
* Microfluorometric and ENG'G Analyses of Immobilized Recom-  binant Cell Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/1990,07/31/1992
* David Ollis, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Fred G. Heineken
* 07/31/1992
* USD 118,333.00

Genetically engineered cells hold promise for production of a wide range of
biologically important compounds under relatively mild and controllable
bioreactor conditions. The immobilization of genetically engineered cells is now
being considered more frequently in industry, as this configuration allows the
presence of a high concentration of the biological catalyst (the cells), and
thus holds promise for high volumetric production rates. The proposed research
will apply the technique of scanning microfluorimetry to immobilized cell
populations for the first time in order to answer the following questions: Does
immobilization increase recombinant plasmid stability in succeeding generations?
Does immobilization influence plasmid copy number, product formation rates, and
cell metabolism? Can the measured biological rates be described with an extended
version of a structured biochemical engineering model for recombinant cell
metabolism, previously developed by one of the investigators for chemostat and
other uniform environments? A novel high resolution fluorescence microscope will
be used to examine genetically engineered bacterial cells grown to very high
concentrations. The results from this research will allow design of more
efficient reactors to take advantage of the many fundamental discoveries which
the new biotechnology has produced. The present engineering research will assist
the pace of commercialization of processes based on these novel biological
systems, by providing quantitative observation of these cells under commercially
realistic conditions.