* 8915826
* The Role of Dissimilar Subunits in the Recognition and      Aminoacylation of Transfer RNA
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1990,08/31/1993
* Glenn Nagel, CSU Fullerton Auxiliary Services Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 08/31/1993
* USD 124,000.00

This research explores the manner in which glycyl-tRNA synthetase recognizes and
charges glycine-specific tRNA and makes an essential contribution to the process
of protein biosynthesis. The work will employ site-specific labeling reagents
which are chemical analogs of the normal substrates, tRNA and ATP, to locate
domains within the enzyme essential to catalysis and to its biological function.
The proposed experiments are aimed at obtaining amino acid sequences of peptide
segments involved directly and in proximity to the enzyme's catalytic site. In
these experiments, emphasis will be given to the dissimilar alpha and beta
subunits comprising the enzyme. An effort will be made to determine how these
subunits are arranged in the native enzyme, how they form or constrain its
catalytic site, and how they cooperate in recognizing glycine-specific tRNA and
reject non-cognate tRNA. In order to investigate the generality of these
findings, it is proposed that some parallel experiments with phenylalanyl-tRNA
synthetase be conducted. This enzyme is the only other synthetase which contains
dissimilar subunits. This work will provide important information regarding the
molecular mechanism of protein-RNA recognition and the manner in which the
aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases are able to minimize error in the expression of
genetic information in DNA.