* 8915999
* Dissertation Research: Gene Flow and Mitochondrial DNA      Evolution in a Cooperatively Breeding Songbird, the Grey-   crowned Babbler (Pomatostomus temporalis)
* BIO,DEB
* 12/01/1989,11/30/1991
* James Patton, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 11/30/1991
* USD 12,786.00

Scott V. Edwards, working under Allan C. Wilson in the Department of
Biochemistry and James L. Patton in the Museum of Vertebrate Zoology, Department
of Integrative Biology, will employ new molecular techniques to study patterns
and causes of geographic variation in a social songbird. The species to be
studied, the Grey-crowned Babbler (Pomatostomus temporalis), is found throughout
the northern portions of Australia and in southern New Guinea. It is well known
for its conspicuous social system called "cooperative breeding" in which
several, often related, individuals forsake breeding on their own to assist the
main breeding pair in building nests, guarding territories and raising young.
Evolutionary biologists have been intrigued by such systems because they may
result in genetic differences between local populations due to inbreeding within
populations; on the other hand, geographic differences among populations may be
due more to extrinsic factors such as topographic or environmental barriers that
serve to isolate populations from one another. Each scenario predicts different
patterns of genetic diversity and relatedness at the family-group, population,
and regional levels. The recently devised polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
provides a method whereby high resolution genetic data can be obtained simply
and rapidly from large numbers of individuals of a species. Edwards will collect
blood samples from babbler populations throughout its range with the goal of
obtaining adequate numbers of individuals within families, populations, and
biogeographic regions. The genetic research will focus on an extremely variable
region of a maternally inherited molecule found in the mitochondria of all
higher organisms--mitochondrial DNA. The PCR when applied to this region will
highlight the genetic differences among individuals within an among family
groups as well as geographic populations, and will provide a means whereby the
contribution of social and/or historical factors determine genetic structure in
the Grey-crowned Babbler.