* 8915359
* Dissertation Research:  Use Alteration of Pottery
* SBE,BCS
* 10/15/1989,09/30/1991
* William Longacre, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 09/30/1991
* USD 8,152.00

Under the direction of Dr. William Longacre, Mr. James Skibo will conduct a
series of analyses on traditional Kalinga ceramics. The results will provide the
basis for his doctoral dissertation thesis. The Kalinga, traditional Philippine
agriculturalists, are one of an ever decreasing group of peoples in the world
who still manufacture ceramics for their own use. For many years, Dr. Longacre
and his students have recorded this process and watched how the finished
products are employed in everyday activities. A large series of such vessels
have been observed in use, collected, and now reside at the University of
Arizona. Mr. Skibo will carry out two kinds of analysis on a sample of them.
First, he will conduct an SEM study to examine surface wear and abrasion.
Because detailed information on actual use is available, he should be able to
match human induced cause with microscopic effect. Secondly, he will attempt to
extract fatty acids, which are absorbed into the ceramic fabric during cooking,
to test the feasibility of determining food contents. These acids are not heat
destroyed during the cooking process. Because pottery resists degradation and
has been widely used for over 10,000 years, it constitutes a major class of
archaeological remains. While prehistorians have devoted great deal of attention
to the stylistic analysis of ceramic materials, satisfactory techniques do not
exist to determine actual uses. Mr. Skibo's research will, hopefully, serve to
develop several which will be general enough to allow application in a wide
variety of circumstances. Because so much information is available for the
Kalinga materials, they provide an excellent controlled situation for such a
technique development project.