* 8915027
* Cutting and Shaping of Hard Ceramics with a CO2-Laser
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/1990,02/28/1993
* Michael Modest, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* mary chen
* 02/28/1993
* USD 210,000.00

Extremely hard ceramics such as silicon nitride and silicon carbide have
generated considerable interest in recent years as potential materials for many
high-temperature engineering applications. In their dense high-strength forms,
these materials are being proposed for use as structural materials in power-
generating gas turbines to increase their efficiency by allowing gas inlet
temperatures to about 1400oC. These materials are also being considered for
automotive gas turbines, small thermal reactors, roller bearings, and advanced
combustion chambers. An important drawback to silicon compound ceramics is their
extreme hardness, which makes their processing and shaping an extremely
difficult, tedious and expensive procedure. Preliminary work has already shown
that vastly higher removal rates are possible with a CO2 laser as compared to
the conventional diamond grinding. To demonstrate the feasibility of laser
shaping of hard-to-machine materials, a multi- disciplinary research effort has
been undertaken to study the basic mechanisms governing the interaction between
a high- powered CO2-laser beam and silicon compound ceramics. The research
program is looking at the heat transfer, material property and manufacturing
aspects of the laser-shaping process. A heat transfer model is being established
to predict shape and depth of single, multiple-pass and overlapping grooves,
material removal rates, surface roughness, etc. Material properties relevant for
the model are being measured, including surface reflectivity (as function of
temperature, angle and beam polarization), surface temperatures and ejected
material properties (particle size and number density). Material characteristics
of the ceramics before and after laser treatment are being investigated, such as
microstructure, chemical composition of elements on the surface, flexure
strength an thermal shock resistance. Laser machining is being carried out with
variable operating conditions, and measurements are being made to determine
quality, uniformity, reproducibility and predictability of the process.
Machining results from single and overlapping grooves are being used to validate
the heat transfer model.