* 8915247
* U.S.-Japan Joint Seminar: Molecular Strategies of Pathogens and Host Plants/April 1990/Honolulu, HI
* O/D,OISE
* 02/15/1990,01/31/1991
* Suresh Patil, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Turczak
* 01/31/1991
* USD 12,806.00

This award will support the participation of eight U.S. scientists in a joint
seminar on "Molecular Strategies of Pathogens and Host Plants," to be held in
Honolulu, HI, April 15-20, 1990. The main topics to be discussed are the
pathogenicity of bacterial and fungal pathogens, and mechanisms of defense of
host plants. In addition, there will be overview presentations on recent
biochemical and molecular research into host-pathogen interactions. The co-
organizers of the seminar are Professor Suresh S. Patil, Department of Plant
Pathology and Biotechnology Program, University of Hawaii, and Professor Seiji
Ouchi, Laboratory of Plant Pathology, Kinki University, Japan. This meeting is
the sixth in a series of U.S.- Japan seminars beginning in 1966 on the
physiology and biochemistry of plant disease. Each has been effective in
promoting information exchange and collaborative research between the two
countries, as well as contributing to general research progress in the field.
The U.S. and Japan are world leaders in the study of biochemical and molecular
determinants of plant-pathogen interactions. Work in this field is critical to
an understanding of the factors that regulate plant infection and disease
resistance, and thus is of great importance in improving plant productivity. The
significant progress that has occurred in both countries since the last seminar
in 1985 in the elucidation of the molecular basis of microbe-host plant
interactions makes this an opportune time to hold the seminar in order to review
and discuss this progress. As with previous meetings in the series, this one
will lead to the publication of a book based on the presented papers and
discussion.