* 8915924
* Oxygen Isotope Record from McMurdo Dome and its Relation    to the Geological Climate Record of the Dry Valleys
* O/D,OPP
* 05/15/1990,10/31/1997
* Pieter Grootes, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Julie Palais
* 10/31/1997
* USD 1,235,585.00

This proposed research will obtain a stable isotope climate record covering the
Holocene (the last 10,000 years) and the last part of the last glaciation from a
small ice dome near the head of Taylor Valley, South Victoria Land ("McMurdo
Dome" about 77 40' to 77 50'S, 158 10' to 159 20'E). An independent time scale
will be derived from an ice-flow model adjusted to the depth of the glacial-
interglacial transition and to oxygen isotope-derived variations in accumulation
rate down the core. Comparison of this isotope proxy climate record with a
radiocarbon-dated proxy record of climate, derived from perched deltas,
strandlines and moraines, in the nearby Dry Valleys allows a dual approach that
could be crucial for the interpretation of both the oxygen isotope fluctuations
observed in ice cores during the Holocene and the lake levels and ice margin
positions during this time span. The location of the dome, just west of the
Transantarctic Mountains, is expected to have been sensitive to changes in ice
cover of the Ross Sea, but protected against direct influences of glacial-
interglacial sea level rise. The dome's isotope record may, when compared with
the Dry Valley glacial record, and with long East and West Antarctic isotope
profiles from ice cores at Vostok, Dome C and Byrd Station will reveal the
response of the East and West Antarctic Ice Sheets to the glacial-interglacial
temperature increase and sea level rise.