* 8915445
* Collaborative Research on Study of Halo Cataclysmic         Variables
* MPS,AST
* 01/01/1990,09/30/1992
* Paula Szkody, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* minette wilson
* 09/30/1992
* USD 65,900.00

Cataclysmic variables (CVs) are stellar systems that are characterized by sudden
brightness changes. They include novae and nova-like variables. All CVs are
close binary stars, consisting of a compact object, usually a white dwarf, and a
red star. CVs are found among the disk and the halo population of stars in our
Galaxy. The Principal Investigators* (PIs) propose to observe photo- metrically
and spectroscopically 40 to 50 CVs that are candidate members of the halo
population of our galaxy. The chief observing tool will be two-dimensional
charge-coupled devices (CCDs), which will allow accurate photometric studies
despite the objects' extreme faintness. The goal of this research is to
determine the orbital and physical properties of halo CVs and to compare them
with data of galactic disk CVs. The results of this observational program and of
other CV systems already in the literature should provide information on how
age, chemical composition, and parent population affect the formation of binary
stars and, in particular, CVs. The PIs expect to be able to choose between
conflicting theories on the properties and formation of CVs. This proposal is
one of three identical proposals, each with its own budget, submitted by
Principal Investigators (PIs) from three different institutions. The other two
PIs are Steven Howell of the Planetary Science Institute (NSF Proposal 8914866)
and Joseph Patterson of Columbia University (8916995).