* 8915252
* U.S.-Japan Cooperative Research: Studies in Astrochemistry
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/1990,03/31/1993
* Paul Goldsmith, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Turczak
* 03/31/1993
* USD 17,338.00

This award supports collaboration in astrochemistry between Professors William
M. Irvine, Paul F. Goldsmith, and F. Peter Schloerb, of the University of
Massachusetts; and Professor Shuji Saito, Nagoya University, Japan, as well as
other Japanese investigators at Nagoya University, Toyama University, and the
Nobeyama Radio Observatory. The researchers will cooperate in several studies
aimed at increasing understanding of the chemical composition and processes in
interstellar molecular clouds, using the techniques of high-frequency radio
astronomy and modern laboratory molecular spectroscopy. The laboratory work will
be carried out primarily in the Department of Astrophysics at the University of
Nagoya, while astronomical observations will be made at the Five College Radio
Astronomy Observatory (FCRAO), which is operated by the University of
Massachusetts, and at the Nobeyama Radio Observatory. Chemistry plays an
increasingly well-recognized role in the study of important astronomical
environments, including the interstellar molecular clouds where stars are
believed to form, the envelopes expelled by both young and evolved stars, and
cometary comae. In this project, the strengths of three research facilities are
brought together, one in the U.S. and two in Japan. Both the U.S. and Japanese
investigators bring significant experience and expertise in astrochemistry to
this effort. The 14-meter diameter radio telescope of the FCRAO is the largest
single-dish millimeter wavelength telescope in North America. Used in
conjunction with various state-of-the-art receivers developed at FCRAO, it
provides extremely high sensitivity in several spectral frequency regions of
interest in these studies. The 45-meter radio telescope at Nobeyama is the
largest radio telescope in the world for observations at millimeter wavelengths,
and so offers the highest resolution at these wavelengths available with any
single dish antenna. Members of the Molecular Spectroscopy Group in the
Department of Astrophysics at Nagoya are among world leaders in the laboratory
study of highly reactive, unstable molecular species. Cooperation among these
three groups has existed for several years, and this award will permit the
collaboration to be strengthened and expanded. Specific projects proposed for
study include spectral surveys of cold, quiescent interstellar clouds to better
determine their chemical composition, investigations of possible molecular
formation or equilibration on interstellar grains, studies of the degree of
chemical saturation in different environments, and determination of the relative
abundance of closely related molecular species in order to investigate reaction
pathways.