* 8915497
* Site-Directed Bioreagent Immobilization for Development     of Microbiosensor Arrays
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/1989,08/31/1993
* A. Rees Midgley, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 08/31/1993
* USD 570,986.00

This project will attempt to merge microelectronics, chemical- selective
membranes, and bioreagents (enzymes and antibodies) to produce integrated
biosensor arrays. It will capitalize on recent advances in all three of these
areas. The enabling technology to be developed under this proposal is the
ability to selectively bind bioactive species to specific sites on the
underlying chemical sensor chip, in a methodology which allows processing of
full wafers (thousands of sensors) at once. This will be done using
photoreactive heterobifunctional cross-linking reagents in process steps which
are similar to conventional integrated circuit photolithography, and require
only slight modifications to standard integrated-circuit processing equipment.
Microbiosensor arrays for multianalyte analysis will be formed by repeating the
immobilization procedure on a wafer, using different bioreagents, and a
photomask aligned to select different immobilization sites. The well-controlled
linking process should yield biomolecule layers which have a high and
predictable activity. This general approach is directly adaptable to detecting a
very wide range of compounds by varying the immobilized biological components.
The resulting biosensors will utilize the natural recognition, affinity and
catalysis of bioreagent species in conjunction with selective chemical
transducers and integrated electronics. These sensors will significantly advance
capabilities for low-cost direct measurement of pollutants, drugs, hormones and
metabolic compounds.