* 8915070
* U.S.-Brazil Cooperative Science Research in the Study of    Amorphous Hydrogenated Germanium
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/1990,02/28/1994
* William Paul, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Emily B. Rudin
* 02/28/1994
* USD 18,121.00

This award supports cooperative materials research in the applied physics of
semiconductors to be conducted by William Paul of Harvard University and Ivan
Chambouleyron of the University of Campinas in the state of Sao Paulo, Brazil.
This work will involve a study of the fundamental properties of amorphous
hydrogenated germanium, especially those important for photoelectronic
applications. While a similar material, amorphous hydrogenated silicon is the
usual material used for thin film solar cells and field-effect transistors, this
research will seek more fundamental understanding of non- crystalline
semiconductors made of hydrogenated silicon- germanium alloys and unalloyed
amorphous hydrogenated germanium. This work will combine the efforts of two
laboratories, each of which has special facilities. They will exchange samples,
apply new research techniques and collaborate in the analysis of results to
arrive at improved theories for the germanium materials and the alloys. Specific
facilities at Harvard include glow discharge, photo-chemical vapor deposition
and sputtering: those at Campinas, sputtering and reactive evaporation. Campinas
has Mossbauer spectroscopy available while Harvard has special facilities for
differential scanning calorimetry, gas evolution and time of flight
measurements. Clearly, the facilities, experience and expertise of these two
groups will complement each other and the collaboration will advance the
scientific and device parameters of amorphous semiconductors.