* 8915015
* Sources, Distribution, and Fate of Hydrocarbons in the      Vicinity of the Bahia Paraiso Spill, Arthur Harbor,         Antarctica
* O/D,OPP
* 11/15/1989,10/31/1991
* Mahlon Kennicutt, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 10/31/1991
* USD 198,517.00

The grounding and subsequent leakage of petroleum from the Bahia Paraiso into
the relatively pristine area of Arthur Harbor, Antarctic raised the spectre of a
major ecological disaster caused by man's activities in polar climates. In
response to initial reports of the release of substantial amounts of
hydrocarbons to the environment, a multidisciplinary team of biologists,
chemists and microbiologists was dispatched to the area. The environmental
chemistry component of this program was directed at determining the extent of
hydrocarbon contamination and its ultimate fate in the environment. Sampling
included tissues (invertebrates and macroalgae), sediments, and water in both
impacted as well as control areas far from the spill site. Concurrent biological
effects programs were initiated by other investigators. This proposal involves
the chemical analysis of samples collected during the field portion of this
survey as well as follow.up monitoring of selected sites approximately one year
later. The analytical program has several major components including: (l)
characterization of fluids leaking from the vessel by molecular and isotopic
analysis; (2) development of unique fingerprints to identify environmental
hydrocarbons derived from the spill; (3) determination of the partitioning of
hydrocarbons between the atmosphere, water, sediments and organisms after
release to the environment; (4) documentation of the redistribution of
hydrocarbons in the environment with time since the spill; (5) identifying and
uniquely fingerprinting other sources of hydrocarbons in the area including
natural biological sources (macroalgae, plankton, etc.) and (6) providing
supportive analytical data for biological effects studies. Longer range goals of
this program are to develop a broad understanding of the sources, fate and
distribution of hydrocarbons in polar climates, as well as assessing the
chemical contamination derived from field stations. These studies will assist in
a better evaluation of the significance and impact of petroleum releases to the
environment associated with man's activities in polar regions.