* 8915504
* U.S.-Japan Joint Seminar: Quantum Electronic Manipulation   of Atoms and Fields/September 1990/Kyoto, Japan
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/1990,04/30/1991
* William Phillips, NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF STANDARDS AND TECHNOLOGY
* Interagency Agreement
* Cassandra Turczak
* 04/30/1991
* USD 17,082.00

This award will support the participation of six U.S. scientists in a joint
U.S.-Japan seminar on the subject of quantum electronic manipulation of atoms
and electromagnetic fields. Research in this area is producing both fundamental
new insights and new possibilities for applications. Current efforts include the
manipulation of atoms and ions through laser cooling and trapping; the
manipulation of fields through laser frequency stabilization and by the
production of so- called "squeezed" states; and the control of radiative atomic
processes through application of principles of cavity quantum electrodynamics.
This newly acquired ability to produce "unconventional" states of light and
matter that are very different from their normal states is bringing fundamental
new insights into quantum mechanics, as well as giving rise to potential
applications in such areas as high resolution spectroscopy, precise frequency
standards, and gravity wave detection efforts. This comes about because of the
possibilities these techniques offer, for example, in reducing both amplitude
noise and frequency noise in laser light, and in significantly reducing Doppler
effects in atomic spectroscopic studies, leading to more accurate determinations
of atomic energy levels and precise measurements of frequencies and time.
Specific topics to be discussed at the seminar include (1) physics and
applications of trapped, cooled ions; (2) laser cooling and trapping of neutral
atoms; (3) ultrahigh precision control of lasers; (4) generation of
unconventional states of light; and (5) cavity quantum electrodynamics.
Participants will include many of the U.S. and Japanese researchers most active
in this set of strongly interrelated topical areas. The seminar will be held
September 3-7, 1990, in Kyoto, Japan. Co-organizers are Dr. William D. Phillips,
Center for Atomic, Molecular, and Optical Physics, National Institute of
Standards and Technology; and Dr. Fujio Shimizu, Faculty of Engineering,
University of Tokyo, Japan. Previous related U.S.-Japan seminars in laser
spectroscopy, quantum optics, and quantum electronics served to keep the
relevant research communities in the two countries abreast of each other's
current progress, and to stimulate collaborative projects and exchanges of
scientists. This seminar is expected to be similarly effective.