* 8915646
* Evaluation of the Manufacturability of Machined Components  Using Axiomatic Design Principles
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/15/1990,09/30/1992
* Cynthia Jara-Almonte, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 09/30/1992
* USD 31,510.00

The product development process begins with the definition of needs and ends
with the production of a product to meet those needs. Through the process, many
design decisions are made which affect the ultimate configuration, appearance,
and function of the product. Oftentimes, these decisions are made without a
rational basis or realistic assessment of the impact of the decision. The
outcome of this research project will be a methodology to assess the
manufacturability of machined components and to identify areas where redesign is
necessary. This methodology will be structured such that it can be implemented
early in the design process and will allow the user to optimize the component
design so that it can be efficiently and economically manufactured. This
approach to evaluating manufacturability utilizes the concept of information
content from the principles of axiomatic design. The specific areas of research
which are involved with developing this methodology are definition of a metric
by which manufacturability can be measured and development of a design
representation scheme which facilitates the evaluation of manufacturability. The
outcome of this work will contribute to the ongoing effort to establish a
rational basis for design decisions and to the need to develop strategies which
more closely couple the design and manufacturing activities.