* 8915790
* U.S.-Japan Joint Seminar: High-Pressure Research in Mineral Physics--Application to the Study of the Earth and PlanetaryInteriors/January 1991/Ise, Japan
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1990,03/31/1992
* Murli Manghnani, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Turczak
* 03/31/1992
* USD 16,712.00

This award will support the participation of six U.S. scientists in a U.S.-Japan
joint seminar on high-pressure research in mineral physics. Participants will
discuss and exchange the latest experimental and theoretical results in
interdisciplinary research on the physical and chemical properties of Earth and
planetary materials, and will consider the implications of these results to
conditions in the interior of the Earth and other planets. The agenda includes
consideration of progress made with current state-of-the-art ultrahigh pressure
and temperature techniques and their geophysical and geochemical applications.
Seminar co-organizers are Dr. Murli H. Manghnani, Hawaii Institute of
Geophysics, University of Hawaii at Manoa, and Dr. Yasuhiko Syono, Institute for
Materials Research, Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan. The seminar will take
place January 15-18, 1991, in Ise, Mie-ken, Japan, under the auspices of the
U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science Program. Mineral physics is the scientific study
of Earth and planetary materials. Significant advances have been made recently
in high-pressure research in mineral physics in the U.S. and Japan, particularly
in the applications of ultrahigh pressure and temperature techniques to
geochemical and geophysical studies related to the Earth and planetary
interiors. It is now possible to conduct experiments under temperature and
pressure conditions equaling those in the Earth's mantle and core, and in the
outer portions of the interiors of the major planets. This seminar will provide
an opportunity for a number of U.S. and Japanese scientists, as well as a few
researchers from other countries who are active in this area, to exchange ideas
and information on the subject, and to promote possible future joint research
projects.