* 8915562
* An Actualistic Model of Cementation Patterns in a Modern    Regional Carbonate Aquifer
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/1990,09/30/1992
* David Budd, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 09/30/1992
* USD 100,897.00

This is a systematic and integrated petrographic, hydrologic, and hydrochemical
study of carbonate cementation in the Ocala and Suwannee Limestones of the upper
Floridan aquifer in southwestern Florida. The objectives are to determine (1) if
cements are forming and if so, why, (2) what is the source of the cements, and
(3) how the cementation history of these rocks relates to hydrogeochemical
history of the aquifer. Work includes evaluation of the distribution, nature,
and geochemical signatures of the aquifer cements and the relationship of these
attributes to the hydrology and hydrochemistry of the aquifer. The diagenetic
products will be characterized by standard petrographic techniques, and
microprobe and isotopic analyses. The hydrology and hydrochemistry will be
investigated using existing data. Groundwater flow paths, flow volumes, and
chemical mass fluxes will be calculated. Chemical evolution along flow paths
will be compared to the traversed geology and cement geochemistry. The result of
this study will be an actualistic, predictive model of carbonate cementation in
a modern, regional carbonate aquifer. The results will tell what happens
diagenetically, where, and why. This will be the first comprehensive
investigation of a modern, regional, confined aquifer with respect to
cementation. As such, it will serve as a test of the ideas and models derived
from the many examples of carbonate cementation in ancient regional aquifers.