* 8915778
* Collaborative Research: Molecular Organization of the       Contractile Ring
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/1990,09/30/1993
* Thomas Schroeder, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 09/30/1993
* USD 166,068.00

The contractile ring is the array of microfilaments located beneath the plasma
membrane of the cleavage furrow of dividing cells and represents the
intracellular machinery responsible for cytokinesis. Because it is composed of
cytoskeletal proteins it has been characterized superficiallly as a muscle-like
organelle. The contractile ring has defied detailed experimental or
compositional analysis because it is too small, transient, and labile for
conventional isolation. This joint research project will exploit a promising new
method of preparing contractile rings in large numbers that will allow the first
detailed analysis of the macromolecular composition and organization of this
important cytoskeletal structure and its association with the plasma membrane.
The cell fraction enriched in contractile rings will be prepared from
synchronously dividing sea urchin eggs. In one set of studies, the morphological
organization of the actin-myosin-membrane complex of the contractile ring will
be explored by immunofluorescence and electron microscopy, utilizing available
antiactin and antimyosin antibodies already known to be effective. In another
set of studies, new monoclonal and polyclonal antibodies will be generated in
order to discover and identify as yet unknown regulatory and stabilizing
molecules, using combined microscopic and immunochemical techniques. A final set
of experiments is designed to ascertain the extent of myosin phosphorylation in
the contractile ring and to evaluate its role in myosin organization. The
results of this collaborative research should elucidate the macromolecular
machinery responsible for the separation of two daughter cells during cell
division.