* 8915373
* US-France Cooperative Research:  Effects of Arochlor 1254   on Bacteriostatin Synthesis
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1990,03/31/1995
* Edwin Cooper, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 03/31/1995
* USD 14,650.00

This award will support collaborative research between Dr. Edwin Cooper,
University of California at Los Angeles and Dr. Philippe Roch, Institute for
Animal Biology, University of Bordeaux, France. The objective of the project is
to develop a non-mammalian model biotic assay system using the earthworms
Lubricus terrestris and Eisenia fetida for rapid, sensitive and inexpensive
screening and prediction of deleterious effects of environmental xenobiotics on
immune function. The earthworm possesses many components of an effective animal
model for screening immunotoxic effects: 1) it has immunological functions which
are analogous to those in higher animals, including mammals, 2) its
immunobiology is well understood, 3) it has a history of use as a bioassay
organism, particularly with biocides, 4) compared to mammals, it is an extremely
cost effective animal, and 5) being an invertebrate, it is a non-controversial
animal. Preliminary work by the investigators of the immunotoxicity of Arochlor,
a known immunotoxicant in mammals, strongly supports the earthworm's suitability
as a model organism for analyzing xenobiotics. The proposed research will extend
this work by examining the humoral immune system of the earthworm using Arochlor
to identify how the earthworm's antibacterial response is immunosuppressed and
to understand the mechanisms of immunosuppres- sion at the mRNA level. Drs.
Cooper and Roch have had a long standing and productive collaboration in studies
of invertebrate immunity and this project will benefit from their complementary
expertise.