* 8915792
* Relations Between Diagenesis of Organic and Inorganic Phasesand Tectonic Processes:  Formation of Anthracite Coal
* GEO,EAR
* 01/15/1990,12/31/1993
* Stephen Altaner, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 12/31/1993
* USD 164,927.00

Two orthogonal cleat (fracture or joint) sets in anthracite coal from eastern
Pennsylvania contain mineralogically and chemically distinct authigenic clay
minerals which formed during coalification. Minerals in one cleat suggest that
metasomatic, hydrothermal fluids flowed through these fractures. This study will
test the hypothesis that the hydrothermal circulation was driven by Alleghanian-
age uplift and associated deep basinal flow, and will evaluate the contribution
of heat by the hydrothermal fluids to coalification in this region. The goal is
to gain a better understanding of the interaction between tectonic processes and
diagenesis of inorganic and organic phases. To achieve this objective,
analytical procedures willinclude synchrotron X-ray microprobe, hydrothermal
experiments (for selected distribution coefficient values), deuteron probe, K/Ar
and oxygen isotopes, SEM, XRD, petrography, fixed carbon analysis, electron
microprobe, IR spectroscopy and computer modeling of the composition,
temperature and hydrology of paleofluids. Results may suggest important
modifications to existing models of coalification and should have impact to
studies of sedimentary diagenesis, thermal and burial histories of sedimentary
basins and structural/tectonic studies of the Alleghany orogeny. Finally, we
expect to obtain fundamental new information on the trace element composition of
clay minerals.