* 8915315
* U.S.-Japan Joint Seminar: The Structure and Evolution of    Neutron Stars/November 1990/Kyoto, Japan
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1990,05/31/1992
* David Pines, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Turczak
* 05/31/1992
* USD 17,482.00

This award will support the participation of six U.S. scientists in a U.S.-Japan
joint seminar on the internal structure, dynamical behavior, formation, and
evolution of neutron stars. Emphasis will be placed on theoretical work on these
topics which is relevant to understanding X-ray, optical, and pulsar- timing
observations, including the superfluidity and equation of state of hadron
matter, the role of neutrinos and hot equations of state in neutron star
formation and earliest evolution, theories relating to the recent supernova in
our galaxy (SN1987A), and mechanisms of cooling and heating neutron stars.
Participants in the meeting represent major U.S. and Japanese research groups
concerned with the fundamental physics and astrophysics of neutron stars.
Seminar co- organizers are Dr. David Pines, Department of Physics and Center for
Advanced Study, University of Illinois at Urbana- Champaign, and Dr. Ryozo
Tamagaki, Department of Physics, Kyoto University, Japan. The seminar will take
place November 6-10, 1990, in Kyoto, under the auspices of the U.S.-Japan
Cooperative Science Program. Since the discovery of pulsars and galactic X-ray
sources, significant progress has been achieved in the field of neutron star
physics. The discovery of Supernova 1987A in our galaxy stimulated much
observational and theoretical work in this area, both in the U.S. and Japan.
Though various meetings have been held to consider recent observational results,
there has been much less opportunity for U.S. and Japanese neutron star
theorists to meet and discuss their work relevant to understanding the
observations. This seminar is intended to enhance significantly the interaction
and exchange of knowledge among the currently most active experts of both
countries in this field.