* 8915730
* Antarctic Bottom Water Formation
* O/D,OPP
* 03/15/1990,02/28/1994
* Theodore Foster, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Bernhard Lettau
* 02/28/1994
* USD 331,849.00

This project is a two-year investigation into the dynamics and processes of deep
water mass formation in the western Weddell Sea, combining physical and chemical
oceanographic techniques to produce a coherent picture of the importance of this
unique region to the structure of the world ocean. In the global context, this
area is a major water mass modification site, involving open ocean convective
events, the continental margin, and the ice cover. At this time the various
water types that combine to form Weddell Sea Deep Water and Antarctic Bottom
Water, and the conditions under which these water masses form, are not known
well enough to establish direct physical links and volumetric budgets. It is
suspected that the outflow from the Weddell Sea is restricted to quite narrow
boundary currents flowing near the base of the continental shelf, and
consequently may be observed with conventional current meter moorings from the
shelf into the deep ocean. Two oceanographic expeditions to the western Weddell
Sea are planned as part of this study: the first in the 1990/91, and the second
in 1991/92. The objectives will be to measure the flow of newly-formed bottom
water and to explore the sinking process of near-surface waters in the open
ocean to see how these affect the deep water flows. In the first year the
primary objective will be to set out an array of eight current meters in the
bottom water core, while a secondary objective will be to grapple for an
existing array that was set out in early 1988 but could not be recovered in 1989
because Antarctic Program ship resources had to be diverted to deal with the oil
spill at Palmer Station. In the second year the array will be retrieved.
Hydrographic cruises in order to define the upper ocean temperatures and
salinity structure in the outflow region where unusually large step structures
have been found in the past. A chemistry program consistent with the objectives
of the World Ocean Circulation Experiment (WOCE) and presently planned
experiments in the South Atlantic Ocean, will be integrated into the cruises
carried out under this project.