* 8915297
* Mitochondrial DNA as a Tool for Studying the Genetic        Relationships of Marine Invertebrates with Planktonic       Larvae:  Research Fellowship in Marine Biotechnology
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/1989,08/31/1992
* Lani West, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 08/31/1992
* USD 84,000.00

A fundamental problem in the study of marine ecology is to identify natural
populations and understand how they change through time. This problem is
especially challenging in marine organisms that metamorphose during development
or change habitats throughout their life cycle. Adult stages of many species are
benthic (e.g. barnacles), while their larval stages are planktonic and may
disperse over long distances. Many aspects of the ecology of adult populations
of coastal invertebrates have been intensively studied, but the effects of
larval dispersal on genetic structure of populations are unclear and potentially
extensive. The goal of this fellowship research is to gain knowledge of the
degree to which dispersal and selection combine to affect variation between
populations. Genetic differences may arise via natural selection, genetic drift,
non-random mating, and mutation. Differentiation is reduced by gene-flow between
populations: dispersal of propagules such as eggs, sperm, larvae, cysts, or
adults. These two forces are usually in a state of flux and the genetic patterns
we see at one point in time depend on the relative strengths of these forces.
Dr. West will compare individual mitochondrial DNA sequences of planktonic
barnacle larvae and newly settled juveniles collected adjacent to adult sites.
Differences between these groups and possibly changes within cohorts through
time will yield a new perspective on formation and maintenance of the genetic
structure of these populations. Mitochondrial DNA analysis can reveal the degree
to which larvae travel as clouds of closely related individuals. Continued
sampling of these patterns through time gives clues to the amount of genetic
fluctuation that a population may naturally experience. The studies are made
possible by means of primer-directed enzymatic DNA amplification using the
polymerase chain reaction (PCR).