* 8915019
* U.S.-Japan Cooperative Research: Structure-Function         Relationships of Anti-Carbohydrate Antibodies
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/1990,12/31/1993
* Donald Marcus, Baylor College of Medicine
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Jones Tsuchitani
* 12/31/1993
* USD 9,110.00

This award will facilitate cooperation between Professor Donald M. Marcus,
Baylor College of Medicine, and Dr. Akemi Suzuki, The Tokyo Metropolitan
Institute of Medical Science, Japan, and colleagues in both countries working
with them. They will collaborate in a study of the molecular basis of the
interaction between certain carbohydrate antigens and the specific antibodies
that "recognize" them. The work is of biomedical significance because of the
protection such antibodies provide against microorganisms, and because of their
role in blood transfusion and organ transplantation. The researchers will carry
out experiments aimed at learning the sequence of amino acids and the molecular
geometry in that portion of the antibody responsible for binding to the
carbohydrate. Using the technique of site-directed mutagenesis, they will alter
selectively the amino acid sequences in the antibody molecule, and observe the
resulting effect on the binding. They will also employ nuclear magnetic
resonance (nmr) studies and computer modeling in this effort to better
understand the structure of the antibody combining site. Professor Marcus is an
immunologist, with expertise in determining the structure of immunoglobulin
genes. His Japanese colleagues are biophysicists with considerable experience in
the use of nmr in determining the three-dimensional structures of carbohydrates
and proteins. The complementary strengths of the two groups will permit a
multidisciplinary approach that should enhance an understanding of the mechanism
of the antibody-carbohydrate interaction and, more generally, provide additional
information on the characteristic specificity of antigen-antibody reactions.