* 8915847
* Multi-level Processing of Natural Language Texts for        Information Retrieval
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/1990,07/31/1993
* Gerard Salton, Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* Ron Ashany
* 07/31/1993
* USD 236,330.00

The existing methods for handling natural-language texts for information
retrieval are applicable only to relatively homogeneous texts of approximately
equal length and style covering related subject matter. The available
methodologies for text analysis and indexing, text classification, text linking
of related text excerpts, and text retrieval need to be extended to cover large
heterogeneous texts, such as collections of messages of the kind now being
circulated on electronic networks, and collections of encyclopedia articles. In
these cases, the articles differ in length and subject matter, and often also in
style and structure. Such articles may also include extraneous materials, such
as quotations from other texts, and bibliographic citations and cross-
references. Two main tasks are undertaken, consisting of an automatic text
analysis and text linking system capable of recognizing text excerpts covering
related subject matter. When similar text portions are appropriately linked, a
network structure is produced for each text collection which then guides the
user during the text retrieval operations by producing reading prescriptions in
response to particular user queries consisting of chains of related texts or
messages. The results obtained in this research are expected to lead to the
implementation of new text handling systems in practical environments that are
of interest to a wide variety of users.