* 8915381
* Assessment of Potential Statewide Impact on Alaska Natives  Resulting from the Valdez Oil Spill
* O/D,OPP
* 06/01/1989,05/31/1991
* Julie Kitka, Alaska Federation of Natives
* Standard Grant
* Tammy Butler
* 05/31/1991
* USD 20,000.00

The Alaska Federation of Natives, a non-profit organization representing the
twelve instate Alaska Native regional corporations, proposes to undertake a
planning study of potential regional and statewide effects on Alaska Native
communities of the March 1989, Prince William Sound oil spill. The study
addresses the direct and indirect topics of concern with emphasis on subsistence
and rural lifestyle choices; processes and methods for collecting pertinent
information and data, mechanism of coordination with other existing and planned
state, federal, public and private socio-economic activities, and identification
of gaps and research opportunities to address Alaska Native concerns. The study
will review previous socio-economic studies, interviews with key personnel,
review of draft documents resulting from the oil spill and their responsiveness
to Alaska Native concerns. Several university groups, with prior socio-economic
expertise in Alaska will assist in the study. The results of this initial study
will be applicable to assessments of resource development in other parts of the
Alaskan Arctic. The study addresses the findings and recommendations resulting
from the Arctic Research and Policy Act of 1984 in which Native Residents are a
part of planning and conduct of research, particularly those aspects related to
subsistence and related lifestyles. Further, it addresses several priority
research areas identified in the 1989 National Academy of Sciences report,
"Arctic Social Science: An Agenda for Action."