* 8915155
* U.S.-Japan Cooperative Research: Comparative Biochemistry of1-Aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylate Synthase Isolated from    Plant Tissues
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1990,09/30/1993
* Shang Fa Yang, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Turczak
* 09/30/1993
* USD 17,130.00

This award will facilitate collaboration under the U.S.-Japan Cooperative
Science Program on a project concerned with the role of ethylene as a plant
hormone which regulates many aspects of plant growth and development, including
fruit ripening, leaf senescence, and flower fading. The chemical precursor of
ethylene in plants is the compound 1- aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylic acid (ACC).
This compound in turn is produced from S-adenosylmethionine (SAM). The rate-
limiting step in ethylene biosynthesis in plants has been shown to be the
conversion of SAM to ACC, catalyzed by the enzyme known as ACC synthase. It is
the study of this enzyme, isolated from plant tissues, that forms the subject of
this cooperative project. It is known that various developmental, hormonal, and
environmental factors, such as auxin treatment or plant wounding, cause the
induction of ACC synthase, resulting in marked increase in ethylene production.
However, the ACC synthase induced in these different ways appears to show
differences in its immunological and physicochemical properties. The goal of
this research is to elucidate, at both the protein and gene levels, the
comparative biochemistry of ACC synthase induced in different tissues by
different factors. The U.S. principal investigators in this project are Dr.
Shang Fa Yang and Dr. Alan B. Bennett, Department of Vegetable Crops, University
of California, Davis. Their Japanese colleagues are Dr. Hidemasa Imaseki, Nagoya
University, and Dr. Shigeru Satoh, Tohoku University. The U.S. group is working
with tomato and apple, and the Japanese group is studying the same process in
squash and other plants. Purified materials isolated by the two groups will be
exchanged and tested, and information and expertise will be shared. Results
obtained during these studies should lead to further understanding of those
basic plant processes regulated by ethylene. This knowledge can potentially be
exploited in the control of these processes via biotechnology, with resulting
significance in agriculture.