* 8915227
* U.S.-Japan Joint Seminar:  Advanced Materials Based on      Macromolecules/October 1990/Tokyo, Japan
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/1990,10/31/1991
* David Tirrell, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Turczak
* 10/31/1991
* USD 18,070.00

This award will support the participation of six U.S. scientists in a joint
seminar entitled "Advanced Materials Based on Macromolecules," to be held under
the auspices of the U.S.- Japan Cooperative Science Program. The focus of the
meeting will be on recent advances in polymer synthesis that provide new levels
of control of polymer structure and that underlie future developments in
optical, electronic, biomedical, and high-strength materials. Previous
U.S.-Japan seminars in areas of polymer synthesis served as opportunities for
research groups in the two countries to share ideas and information, and in
several cases led to cooperative research projects and exchange visits. Similar
results are expected from the present meeting. Specific topics to be discussed
at the seminar include recent advances in the control of polymer chain
structure, advances in optical properties of polymeric materials and in
conducting polymers, liquid crystalline polymers, radiation-sensitive polymers,
polymers in biology and medicine, and polymers in composite materials. The
seminar will be held October 29 - November 2, 1990, in Tokyo, Japan. The co-
organizers are Professor David A. Tirrell, Department of Polymer Science and
Engineering, University of Massachusetts at Amherst, and Professor Eishun
Tsuchida, Department of Polymer Chemistry, Waseda University, Tokyo, Japan.
Advanced materials underlie current and projected developments in electronics,
communications, aerospace, automotive, and health care industries, among others.
Considerable research on advanced materials based on macromolecules is being
carried out in the United States and Japan. This seminar will highlight recent
advances in polymer synthesis in the two countries that point the way to future
materials development.