* 8915360
* Analysis of the Yeast Suppressor of Clathrin Deficiency
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/1990,01/31/1994
* Sandra Lemmon, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 01/31/1994
* USD 278,175.00

We are studying the role that clathrin-coated vesicles serve in intracellular
transport in the endocytic and secretory pathways of eukaryotic cells. We
previously cloned the clathrin heavy chain gene (CHC1) from Saccharomyces
cerevisiae and generated a gene deletion in order to test whether clathrin is
essential for viability of yeast. It was found that yeast can survive without
clathrin heavy chains in some genetic backgrounds, but not in others. This
difference was due to a second genetic locus which was termed suppressor of
clathrin deficiency (SCD). With SCD1 allele, clathrin deficient yeast are not
viable, and with the scd1 allele, cells lacking heavy chains survive. The goal
of this project is to perform a molecular characterization of the SCD locus and
its gene products. The SCD1 and scd1 alleles will be cloned and sequenced, and
null mutations will be generated by gene disruption. Antibodies to the Scd1
protein will be made in order to identify the gene product in cell extracts and
for cellular localization. These studies will allow us to elucidate the function
of the Scd1 protein and to determine how the scd1 allele compensates for the
lack of clathrin. Clathrin's ubiquity among eukaryotic organsims, and the
complex regulation of clathrin assembly and disassembly, suggest that clathrin's
function in cells is extremely important. Elucidation of the Scd gene product
and its role in allowing cell survival in the absence of clathrin will provide
important new insights into the biology of clathrin itself.