* 8915194
* Dynamic Structure of Graphite-Supported Iron-Iridium and    Iron-Palladium Catalyst Particles
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/1990,11/30/1993
* Jonathan Phillips, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Farley Fisher
* 11/30/1993
* USD 229,631.00

Earlier work on iron-rhodium bimetallic catalysts supported on carbon is
extended to two additional systems: iron-iridium and iron-palladium. The
previous study showed that varying the pretreatment conditions produced
different surface states of the iron-rhodium bimetallic, ranging from isolated
(separate) metals to an intimate alloy. Preliminary studies on iron-iridium
indicate not only that the segregation effects occur in this system, but that it
is possible to obtain catalysts with the high activity associated with iridium
but displaying the strong selectivity associated with the much less active iron.
In this study, iron-iridium and iron- palladium catalysts are studied using
Mossbauer spectroscopy, X-ray diffraction, electron microscopy, calorimetry, and
reaction probes. The initial reaction probe is 1-butene
hydrogenation/isomerization. This work is exciting for its practical
implications. Adoption of automotive emissions standards by the European
Community has placed a great strain on the world supply of noble metals, and a
major objective of much research is to develop means of controlling emission
that do not rely on these very expensive and scarce materials. This approach
does not eliminate the need for noble metals, but it greatly reduces the amounts
required, perhaps by as much as 80%, replacing it with readily available iron.
The work is also significant for insights into alloy formation and stability.