* 8915305
* Bacteria Transmission in Endosymbiont-Containing Bivalves   Resolved using In Situ Hybridization Techniques:  Research  Fellowship in Marine Biotechnology
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/1990,11/30/1992
* Stephen Cary, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 11/30/1992
* USD 84,000.00

Since the discovery of deep-sea-floor hydrothermal vents, bivalves that contain
endosymbiotic bacteria have been identified in a wide variety of reducing marine
environments. These novel symbioses have attracted much research into
understanding the relationship between the host and bacteria. A major problem
that has eluded investigators is the mechanisms by which the symbionts are
transmitted from generation to generation. This problem, until recently, was
unapproachable because the early life stages of these bivalves were not
available nor was there a technique that could resolve bacteria at a fine enough
scale. Several species of symbiont-containing bivalves can now be cultured
through metamorphosis, and provide an ideal model system to address this
problem. In situ hybridization techniques incorporating the use of
oligonucleotide fluorescent probes are now routinely used to differentiate and
enumerate eukaryotic and prokaryotic cells. Employing these techniques, it will
be possible to determine the initial site of infection and the cellular process
of the incorporation of the symbiont during the early developmental stages of
the host. This research will address three specific questions: what is the
mechanism of symbiont transmission, what are the cellular processes of symbiont
incorporation into the host tissue, and what is the metabolic state of the
symbiont during the process of incorporation?