* 8915109
* Support of the 1990 Gordon Conference on Organic Thin Films;February 12-16, 1990; Los Angeles, CA
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/1990,07/31/1990
* Alexander Cruickshank, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 07/31/1990
* USD 15,000.00

This award provides partial support for the February 1990 Gordon Conference on
organic thin films. The chairperson is Joel M. Schnur of the Naval Research
Laboratories in Washington, D.C. The conference will focus on the fundamental
aspects of organic thin films from a molecular point of view. The relationship
between the molecular structure of the films and the macroscopic properties
exhibited by them such as wetting, adhesion, and lubrication will be examined.
The ability to molecularly engineer films for potential applications will be
explored. Application topics include biosensor fabrication, advances in sub-
micron microlithographic resists, and non-linear optical thin films. State of
the art techniques such as atomic force and ion conductance microscopies will be
examined in the context of their utility for the study of organic thin films.
The conference will bring together chemical, material, and electronic engineers,
biologists, physicists, and chemists. This conference indirectly supports the
major thrust of the Chemical and Thermal System's Material Chemistry and
Chemical Processing initiative. Approximately 125 attendees are expected. The
NSF support enables participation of young investigators, such as graduate
students, as well as faculty with inadequate resources to attend. Under-
represented groups will also be targeted for support. Three international
experts will be invited to participate from Japan and Western Europe.