* 8915990
* The Political Structure of Iron Age Economies in Southern   Africa
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/1990,01/31/1992
* James Denbow, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 01/31/1992
* USD 85,034.00

In the late first millennia A.D. the interior of southern Africa witnessed the
rise of complex societies, based both on agriculture and pastoralism and
characterized by large towns with central enclosures surrounded my massive
carefully faced stone walls. The most famous of these, Zimbabwe, is located in
the fertile highlands of the country with the same name. Work by Dr. James
Denbow and other archaeologists has demonstrated that this same phenomenon
extended into the less hospitable Kalahari Desert to the west and that several
easily defended mesas contain evidence of dense settlement. Data also suggest
that such sites served as central places in large settlement systems which
covered thousands of square miles. With National Science Foundation support Drs.
James Denbow and Edwin Wilmsen will continue their research on these Botswana
Iron Age settlements. In the first of two field seasons they will excavate at
the sites of Botsutswe and Mmapudi. The former is a large mesa site, the latter
a smaller one which presumably is part of the same system. Through surface
survey and excavation the size and distribution of materials at each site will
be determined. Analysis of materials such as ceramics and trade goods will
provide information on both external contacts as well as status differentiation
both between and within sites. In the second season the team will conduct
exploratory research in an outlying area, presumably with little contact with
the core, to locate sites for potential excavation. This research is important
for several reasons. It will shed light on how complex societies arise and are
maintained. It will also provide insight into how humans adapt to harsh and
unpredictable desert environments. The conclusions may provide guidelines for
successful herd management strategies in drought ravaged areas of Africa today.