* 8915200
* U.S.-Japan Cooperative Research: Electronic Interaction of  Germanium with Orbitals on Carbon
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1990,08/31/1993
* Joseph Lambert, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Turczak
* 08/31/1993
* USD 11,194.00

This award will support a two-year cooperative research project between
Professor Joseph B. Lambert, Department of Chemistry, Northwestern University,
and Professor Takeuchi Yoshito, Department of Chemistry, The University of
Tokyo. The scientists will collaborate in fundamental studies of the chemistry
of the element germanium, particularly compounds containing germanium-carbon
bonds, so-called organogermanium compounds. Germanium is in the same group of
the periodic table of the elements as are carbon and silicon, and its chemistry
shows some similarities to those elements, especially silicon. Organosilicon
compounds have been well studied in the past twenty years, and much is known
about their structure, reactions, and practical applications. The chemistry of
germanium is less well developed, but the successful results of the earlier
silicon work have given rise to considerable interest in pursuing analogous
studies of this less common element. Professors Lambert and Yoshito have
independently pursued programs of study of germanium chemistry, and plan now to
cooperate in a joint investigation of several organogermanium compounds
especially selected for their potential in leading to a basic understanding of
the bonding in these molecules. The scientists bring both similar as well as
complementary expertise and facilities to the joint project. Some of the
chemical syntheses of the substances under investigation will be carried out by
the Tokyo group, and others by the Northwestern researchers. Experimental
techniques to be used in this examination include those of chemical kinetics as
well as nuclear magnetic resonance, electron spin resonance, and ultraviolet
photoelectron spectroscopies. Associated theoretical calculations will also be
carried out. The basic chemical information sought in this cooperative study is
expected to lay some of the important ground work needed for the development of
later practical applications of germanium chemistry, possibly in chemical
synthesis, electronics, pharmaceuticals, and other areas. The project brings
together two research groups with considerable experience in this field. By
collaborating, the scientists expect to enhance their individual programs, and
thus our knowledge of the chemistry of germanium, significantly.