* 8915308
* U.S.-Japan Cooperative Research: Preparation of Chiral,     Catalyst-coated Graphite Felt Electrodes for Electro-       synthesis
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/1990,12/31/1992
* James Bobbitt, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Turczak
* 12/31/1992
* USD 17,150.00

This award will enable Professor James M. Bobbitt and members of his research
group at the University of Connecticut to collaborate with Professor Tetsuo Osa,
Pharmaceutical Institute, Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan, and colleagues, over
a period of two years. The scientists will cooperate in preparing and utilizing
special graphite felt electrodes coated with various catalysts, in particular,
organic nitroxides, to carry out preparative, specific oxidations of organic
molecules. These electrodes have very high surface areas, which make them
especially valuable in preparing significant amounts of compounds through
electrosynthesis. Furthermore, by selecting nitroxides with chiral (left-handed
or right-handed) characteristics, i.e., distinguished only by the spatial
arrangement of constituent groups around one or more atoms in the molecule, it
may be possible to create catalytic electrodes capable of carrying out stereo-
specific reactions. Such coated electrodes might, for example, be used to
produce one enantiomer in preference to another, or to catalyze the oxidation of
one of a pair of enantiomers. The work has practical applications in synthetic
organic chemistry, particularly if preparative-scale procedures can be
developed. The U.S. and Japanese scientists in this effort have complementary
strengths. Professor Bobbitt is a synthetic organic chemist. Professor Osa ia an
electroanalytical chemist, with experience in attaching various chemical species
to graphite electrodes. Together they hope to make significant progress toward
their goal of developing chiral catalyst-coated electrodes which can be used to
carry out enantioselective oxidations and stereospecific formation of chiral
centers in selected molecules.