* 8915720
* Measuring Changes in Nutritional Status, Growth Rate, and   Reproductive Condition of Deposit Feeders in Response to    Sediment Transport - Methods
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/1990,11/30/1992
* Gary Taghon, Oregon State University
* Continuing grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 11/30/1992
* USD 214,160.00

Sediment transport is a ubiquitous oceanographic process. Theoretical models and
limited laboratory studies indicate that sediment transport influences the
quantity and quality of organic matter supplied to benthic deposit feeders, but
the magnitudes and directions of the influences (i.e., positive or negative) in
the field are essentially unknown. If sediment transport acts to enhance food
resources, the response by deposit feeders might be manifested as increased
individual growth rates, by accumulation of energy storage products, or by
increased reproductive output. Conversely, negative responses in these
properties should be seen if sediment transport adversely affects food
resources. Such responses might occur singly or in various combinations. Methods
to measure these parameters in animals collected from the field are needed in
order to provide realistic tests of hypotheses about the effects of sediment
transport on the energetics of deposit feeders and ultimately, on population
dynamics. To begin moving in this direction, Drs. Taghon and Prahl will
determine how nutritional status, growth rate, and reproductive condition of
several species (including echinoderms, polychaetes, and molluscs) vary under
different laboratory feeding regimes. They will measure changes over time in 3
properties to evaluate their use in tracking the response of deposit feeders to
sediment transport: the accumulation or use of lipid stores (index of
nutritional status), RNA:DNA ratios (index of growth rate), and reproductive
condition.