* 8915089
* Population Genetics of a Clonal Gorgonian:  Research        Fellowship in Marine Biotechnology
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/1990,12/31/1993
* Mary Alice Coffroth, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 12/31/1993
* USD 126,000.00

Clonal growth is a common reproductive strategy among sessile marine
invertebrates. Although the pervasiveness of this strategy implies success, the
relative contribution of asexual versus sexual reproduction to long term
population dynamics in invertebrates has rarely been quantified. This fellowship
research will pursue the use of molecular genetic techniques to determine the
genetic diversity and population structure of the clonal gorgonian, Plexaura sp.
Differentiation of genotypes will be attempted using DNA fingerprinting to
characterize the clonal structure of the population. These data on population
structure will be used to deduce the long term effects of clonal reproduction on
the population. The relatedness of different populations and species will be
measured by examining DNA sequence variation and restriction fragment length
polymorphisms of mitochondrial DNA. The adaptation of these techniques for use
with gorgonians will allow the quantification of the relative importance of
sexual and asexual reproduction; the extent of larval dispersal between reefs
and populations; the relationship between phenotypic and genotypic variation;
and the systematics of the genus. The training in molecular genetic techniques
will provide Dr. Coffroth with the ability to apply these techniques to other
marine systems and other questions in biological oceanography.