* 8915472
* Mechanisms of Platinum-Group Element Enrichment and the     Nature of the Hydrothermal System at the Babbitt Deposit,   Duluth Complex, Minnesota
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/1990,03/31/1993
* Edward Ripley, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* John L. Snyder
* 03/31/1993
* USD 80,000.00

A continuation of research dealing with the distribution and genesis of PGE and
the Babbitt Cu-Ni deposit, Duluth Complex Minnesota, is proposed. Our
preliminary results indicate that throughout the basal zone mineralization at
Babbitt, Ir, Os, Ru, Rh, and Re have behaved as relatively immobile elements,
and their distribution is related to primary magmatic processes. Pt and Pd show
very different behavior, exhibiting poor correlations with Cu and S, and strong
evidence of remobilization. A PGE- enriched zone has been detected which is
spatially removed from the area of highest grade Cu-Ni ore, and is characterized
by anomalous @34S values, and sulfide-oxide mineralogy. Synchrotron X-ray
microprobe studies reveal ppm quantities of Pd in copper minerals from high bulk
Pd samples, and Pd-enrichment in mackinawite produced during hydrothermal
alteration. Detailed studies of bulk rock and mineral chemistry, alteration
reactions, and S, H, and O isotopes are proposed to delineate the relationship
between the PGE-enriched zone and the remainder of basal zone mineralization.
Microsampling of individual sulfide minerals will be pursued using laser
ablation-mass spectrometry (@34S values) and synchrotron X-ray fluorescence
microprobe techniques (PGE values). Progressive changes in the chemical and
isotopic measurements. The possible involvement of an externally-derived fluid
in PGE localization will also be investigated.