* 8915633
* Studies of Large Scale Structure in the Universe
* MPS,AST
* 04/01/1990,09/30/1993
* Marc Davis, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Morris L. Aizenman
* 09/30/1993
* USD 248,500.00

With NSF support the Principal Investigator has completed obser- vations of an
IRAS selected redshift survey, has performed sta- tistical analyses of this
survey as well as other NSF supported redshift surveys, and has continued his
investigations of the evolution of structure in the Universe via N-body
techniques. This research is now to be extended in two directions: (1) The
redshift determination of IRAS selected galaxies will be extended to those with
60 micron flux greater than 1.2 Janskys. This will double the available sample
size and permit much improved comparison to measurements of the peculiar
velocity field of galaxies. (2) The N-body investigations of the formation of
structure in the Universe are to be continued. Alternative techniques for
inclusion of gas dynamical effects in the simulations will be investigated.
Inclusion of additional physical processes beyond gravitation will be a powerful
tool for study of the formation of galaxies, as well as the cooling of hot gas
in gravitational potentials comprised of baryonic and non-baryonic material. Dr.
Davis is a leading contributer to research on the theory and observation of the
large-scale structure of the universe. He is the Chairman of the Astronomy
Department at the University of California at Berkeley.