* 8915090
* Translational Control Mechanisms in Circadian Rhythms:      Research Fellowship in Marine Biotechnology
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/1989,02/29/1992
* Steven Sczekan, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 02/29/1992
* USD 84,000.00

Circadian rhythms are a universal feature of eucaryotic systems. They are
typified by a daily oscillation in some physiologic response, usually to a
light/dark cycle, that persists even in the absence of such an external cue.
Such rhythms include thermoregulation, cell division, cellular response to
applied drugs, and the levels of several mRNA species, such as opsin and
vasopressin. While many such cyclic phenomena have been detected, the underlying
mechanism responsible for the "clock" has remained elusive. This fellwoship
research will deal with the mechanisms of translational control of circadian
bioluminescence in the marine dinoflagellate Gonyaulax polyedra. A
luciferin/luciferase system is responsible for the generation of time-dependent
expression of bioluminescence. A luciferin-binding protein (LBP) is required to
stabilize the high energy substrate prior to photon release. This protein is
expressed only during a brief period at the onset of night phase, as a result of
rapid synthesis, and is selectively degraded several hours later. Northern blot
analysis of LBP mRNA levels indicate that the transcript for the LBP is
constitutively expressed, indicating the increased expression of the LBP is a
result of activation of latent mRNA (translational control), rather than
increased gene activity (transitional control). This project will serve the dual
purpose of broadening knowledge of dinoflagellate gene expression and
elucidating the mechanism of circadian regulation of specific proteins.