* 8915997
* Lithotectonic Controls on the Reduced Granite Belt of the   Western Sierra Nevada and its Relation to the Mother Lode   Gold:  Trace Element, Mineral Chemistry & Isotopic Studi
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/1990,12/31/1991
* George Brimhall, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* John L. Snyder
* 12/31/1991
* USD 85,225.00

We propose a two-year study focused on clarifying the field, age, spatial, and
genetic relationships of strongly contaminated and reduced I-type "I-SCR"
granite plutons, sensu stricto, with specific pre-batholith wall rocks occurring
as roof pendants within the Western Sierra Nevada batholith along the south
eastern projection of the Metamorphic Foothills belt near Mariposa, California
(Fig. 1). We will also address the origin of gold and tungsten in the Mother
Lode gold quartz vein belt which occupies the Melones Fault within the
Metamorphic Foothills belt. The latter ends abruptly near Mariposa where
invasion on the eastern and southern margins by the Sierra Nevada batholith in
Jurassic and Cretaceous time position the northern end of the colinear reduced
granite belt on strike with the Mother Lode and extends from there southwards
towards the southern end of the Sierra Nevada batholith. This lithotectonic
correlation with magma characteristics will be detailed through regional
sampling of metamorphic wall rocks and plutons followed up with whole rock and
mineral chemistry to better explain the distribution of reduced I-SCR granites
which we have hypothesized to have form either by their derivation through
partial melting of hydrous graphitic pelites or assimilation of these wallrocks
by ordinary I-type magmas. To accomplish this we will perform graphite furnace
atomic absorption (AAS) and ICP mass spectrometry trace element analysis of
selected metals (Au, W, Sn, Mo, Ti, V, Mn, Fe, Co, Ni, Cu, Zn, Zr, Nb, C, S and
Ag). it is impossible to resolve source rock problems without using isotopic
tracers as trace element data alone are insufficient. Therefore two isotope
studies will be conducted. First, in collaboration with Jason Saleeby of Cal.
Tech, we propose to perform lead isotope analysis on University of California
Geology Museum galena specimens from several Mother Lode deposit along the
Melones Fault zone to the immediate north west of Mariposa and to compare these
with whole-rock lead isotope ratios of nearby metamorphic wallrocks, including
Shoo Fly, Calaveras, Mariposa, Don Pedro hypabyssal rocks and each of the pluton
types we have identified near Mariposa including I- SCR, as well as I-WC, MC,
and SC. This study will be directed at inferring the nature of wall rocks
traversed by hydrothermal fluids coursing through the vein flow path. Secondly,
in collaboration with Don DePaolo at Berkeley, we propose to use Rb- Sr and Nd-
Sm isotopes to confirm conclusions made from Pb systematics on magmatic source
rocks and to establish the extent and reductive efficacy of metamorphic wall
rock assimilation on magma properties. Using the empirical igneous amphibole
aluminum geobarometer of Hammarstrom and Zen (1986) to expand on our earlier
conclusions about the regional depth of crystallization within the batholiths,
we will place magma-wallrock interaction effects and hydrothermal gold quartz
veins in a more quantitative geobarometric framework focussing on potential
source rocks and selective release mechanisms of ore metals, particularly Au,
Ag, Pb, W, Sn. However, since I-SCR plutons rarely contain amphiboles, only
pluton types other than I-SCR which do contain amphibole, are of similar age to
the veins, and have appropriate bulk compositions for application of the
geobarometer are suitable for this purpose.