* 8915084
* Iron Limitation and Phytoplankton Photosynthesis:  Research Fellowship in Marine Biotechnology
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/1990,11/30/1991
* Richard Geider, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 11/30/1991
* USD 39,419.00

Recent evidence has indicated that the availability of iron may limit
phytoplankton biomass and primary production in many oceanographic regions. Iron
is a key component of the photosynthetic electron transport chain; reductions in
the rate and efficiency of photosynthesis are expected when phytoplankton growth
is iron-limited. In the fellowship research, biophysical, biochemical and
immunological techniques will be used to examine the phenotypic response of the
photosynthetic apparatus of marine phytoplankton to iron deficiency under
controlled conditions in iron-limited chemostat cultures. Interspecific
comparisons will be made between organisms from two taxonomic groups, a diatom
and a coccolothophorid. The concentrations of the PS I reaction center
chlorophyll (P700), the cytochrome b complex and the soluble electron carriers
ferredoxin and flavodoxin will be measured spectrophotometrically. Oxygen flash
yields will be used to determine the concentration of active PS II reaction
centers, and flash fluorescence techniques will be used to determine the
fraction of total PS II reaction centers which are active. Polyclonal antibodies
from marine algae or higher plants will be used to determine the relative
abundances of the carboxylating enzyme ribulose biphosphate carboxylase, the
thylakoid ATP synthetase, several components of the PS II reaction center
complex and light harvesting complex proteins.