* 8915623
* US-France Cooperative Research:   Large-Scale Clustering of Dwarf and Low-Brightness Galaxies
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/1990,02/28/1993
* Trinh Thuan, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 02/28/1993
* USD 12,490.00

This award will support collaborative research in galactic astronomy between Dr.
Trinh Thuan, University of Virginia and Dr. Rene Pellat and Jean-Michel Alimi of
the Paris Observatory, Meudon, France. The objective of the proposed research is
a study of the comparative distribution of dwarf and giant galaxies. The
investigators propose to study the spatial distribution of dwarf and low-surface
brightness galaxies in the northern hemisphere, using as the data base a 21 cm
redshift survey developed by Dr. Thuan of approximately 1800 galaxies classified
as dwarf, magellenic and irregular in the Uppsala General Catalogue of Galaxies.
These data represent an important new source of information on the spatial
distribution of intrinsically faint galaxies. Specifically, they will examine
the clustering properties of dwarf galaxies, compared to those of bright
galaxies. They also plan to compute other statistics, such as the mean number of
dwarf galaxies associated with a bright galaxy of a given absolute margin. This
type of statistic is of prime importance for the understanding of other
astrophysical phenomena. The results of this project may have an important
influence on present ideas on the "biassing" of galaxy formation and the
question of whether the Universe contain enough dark matter to be closed. The
project will benefit from the combined expertise of Dr. Thuan in dwarf galaxies
and the French experience in statistical techniques to analyze galaxy
clustering.