* 8915207
* Conducting Polymers as Macromolecular Systems: Comprehensive Studies in Solution, in the Melt, and in the Solid State
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/1990,06/30/1993
* Alan Heeger, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing grant
* None
* 06/30/1993
* USD 234,000.00

This research is a comprehensive program of magnetic resonance, spectroscopic
and structural studies on conducting polymers. It will focus on specific polymer
systems: 1) High-quality materials with relatively high molecular weight which
are chain aligned and have relatively high crystallinity in the solid state;
examples include polyaniline, PPV (and its derivatives), and PTV. 2) Polymers
which are processible either as conjugated systems from solution or in precursor
form from solution (or both, as in the case of the substituted PPV). The
research includes the following: dilute one-dimensional chains of polyaniline in
solution: small-angle Neutron scattering from Polyaniline in solution in
sulfuric acid: molecular-weight dependences of the electronic properties of
polyaniline: ESR measurements of PPV (and derivatives) to monitor conversion
from prepolymer to conjugated polymer: electronic and optical Properties of
molten conjugated polymers; ESR Studies of polarons and bipolarons in high-
quality polymers with a nondegenerate ground state; polarons and bipolarons in
dihexyloxy-PPV in solution; determination of whether or not heavily doped PPV
(and derivatives) and PTV are true metals; forced Rayleigh scattering by
conjugated polymers in solution; and crystal structures and chain packing in
highly ordered conducting polymers.