* 8915613
* In vitro Reconstruction and Biochemical Characterization of the Agrobacterium T-DNA Transfer Process
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/1990,03/31/1996
* Patricia Zambryski, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Hans J. Bohnert
* 03/31/1996
* USD 450,000.00

The proposed research will allow for a further understanding of cell
transformation. Studies to data have used whole Agrobacterium cells to identify
several (vir) protein products essential for the production of a transferable
DNA copy, the T-strand. The proposed experiments will use predominantly
biochemical approaches to analyze T-strand synthesis and processing into a
T-strand-protein complex (T- complex) using purified components in vitro.
Specifically, these studies will (1) reconstruct T-strand synthesis in vitro
using a DNA substrate and purified vir proteins. If necessary, commercially
available enzymes (DNA polymerases, topoisomerases) or whole cell extracts from
Agrobacterium will be used to supplement the reaction. (2) Assays will be
carried out to determine whether the T-complex characterized to date (and
assembled in vitro) consisting of T-strands and VirE2 and VirD2 is capable of
transforming plant protoplasts. As other proteins of the T-complex are
identified they will be added to the T-strand-VirD2-VirE2 complex to test their
role in enhancing plant cell transformation. (3) Additional proteins that
potentiate T-complex transfer will be defined by their affinity to columns
carrying covalently bound VirD2 or VirE2 and by a recently developed assay for
proteins that mediate export of T-strands from whole Agrobacterium cells. (4)
The functional domains of proteins required for T-strand synthesis and
processing will be defined by assaying for activity subfragments of these
proteins produced by deletion mutants or proteolytic digestion. (5) By using a
sensitive in vitro assay for integration of exogenous DNA it will be determined
if the T-complex has an integrase function. The proposed experiments are
relevant to the biology of the Agrobacterium-plant cell interaction and to DNA
transfer technology. In nature, Agrobacterium transfers a specific DNA segment,
the T-DNA, into a plant nucleus where, following stable integration, the genetic
material is expressed in the plant cell. This property of Agrobacterium has
prompted an intense investigation of the requirements for transfer and has led
to the design of vectors capable of transferring any DNA of interest to plant
cells without interfering with normal plant growth and differentiation. While
Agrobacterium can now be used routinely as a vector to transfer DNA to many
plant cells without the need to understand the underlying mechanisms involved,
it is important to understand the biology of the system so that advances in the
use of the vector properties of the system can be made. This research will
investigate the detailed steps involved during the DNA transfer process so that
improved methods to allow directed DNA transfer to plant cells can be achieved.