* 8915157
* U.S.-Japan Joint Seminar: Dynamical Excitation by Exotic    and Highly Charged Ions/June 1990/Anchorage, AK
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1990,12/31/1990
* John Reading, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Turczak
* 12/31/1990
* USD 17,090.00

This award will support the participation of eight U.S. scientists in a joint
seminar on "Dynamical Excitation by Exotic and Highly Charged Ions," to be held
in Anchorage, Alaska, June 18-22, 1990. The seminar will focus on topics of
mutual interest to leading American and Japanese experts in the field of
fundamental processes in the physics of ions. Recent advances in the field, such
as the development of low energy antiproton beams, the higher energies of the
accelerator facilities available for atomic collision experimentation, the
imminent availability of storage rings, and other developments, make this a
propitious time for a joint seminar. The central objective of the program will
be to identify the limitations of our current understanding of fundamental
processes in the physics of exotic and highly charged ions and to delineate new
ways in which particle accelerators can be used to advance science in this area.
The co-organizers of the seminar are Professor John F. Reading, Department of
Physics, Texas A &amp; M University, and Professor Fuminori Fujimoto, The
Institute of Scientific and Industrial Research, Osaka University, Japan. Two
previous U.S.-Japan seminars in this field were very successful in exploring
topics of mutual interest to participants from both countries, in defining new
research directions, and in promoting joint research efforts. This seminar has
similar goals. The physics of atomic collisions plays an important role in
determining the behavior of matter at the atomic and molecular level. Research
in atomic and molecular collision phenomena, therefore, can have an important
influence not only on various areas of physics, such as plasma physics, surface
physics, condensed matter physics, and astrophysics, but also on other
disciplines and technologies such as weather forecasting and forensic medicine.
Researchers in both the United States and Japan are very active in this field,
and leaders from both countries will participate in the seminar. It is planned
to publish the proceedings of the seminar in a special issue of Nuclear
Instruments and Methods.