* 8915332
* U.S.-Japan Joint Seminar:  Bioorganic Marine Chemistry/     December 1990/Honolulu, HI
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1990,12/31/1991
* Francis Schmitz, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Turczak
* 12/31/1991
* USD 13,798.00

This award will support the participation of eight U.S. scientists in a joint
U.S.-Japan seminar on "Bioorganic Marine Chemistry," to be held in Honolulu,
Hawaii, December 3-7, 1990. The principal areas for discussion are (a) cultured
marine microorganisms as sources of drugs, (b) isolation, structure
determination, and pharmacological evaluation of bioactive compounds from marine
organisms, (c) marine chemical ecology, and (d) synthesis and biosynthesis of
marine natural products. The co-organizers of the seminar are Professor Francis
J. Schmitz, Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Oklahoma,
and Professor Takeshi Yasumoto, Faculty of Agriculture, Tohoku University,
Japan. The field of marine natural products is a flourishing one in which a wide
variety of bioactive compounds with novel structures, many of them quite
distinct from terrestrial natural products, are being discovered. Researchers in
the United States and Japan are especially active in this field, and the seminar
will permit representatives of several research groups in the two countries to
meet, exchange information, and develop relationships that could lead to more
extensive research collaboration. There is considerable interest in exploring
the oceans for bioactive substances useful as antitumor, antifungal, and
antiinflammatory agents, and for other medicinal purposes. Other compounds from
the sea are finding use as biochemical and pharmacological tools for studying
mechanisms of action in life processes. There has been recent attention to the
role of marine microorganisms in the production of bioactive compounds,
including marine toxins which threaten human health. Because of the large amount
of basic and applied research being carried out in the United States and Japan
in bioorganic marine chemistry, information and ideas shared at this seminar can
be expected to have a significant impact on future progress in the field, at
both the fundamental and practical levels.