* 8915014
* Magma-Vapor Evolution in Granitic Systems of Cornwall, SW   England:  The Role of Boron
* GEO,EAR
* 12/15/1989,06/30/1992
* David London, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* John L. Snyder
* 06/30/1992
* USD 38,458.00

The granites and associated pegmatites, aplites, and mineralized greisens of
Cronwall, southwest England, constitute an archetypal system of post-orogenic,
highly differentiated silicic magmatism and associated hydrothermal Sn-W-Cu
mineralization. The late-stage evolution of these granites, in particular the
temporal and compositional aspects of melt-vapor equilibria, represent a
critically important stage of magmatism from both scientific and economic
perspectives. Among the volatile or fluxing components in the Cornish granite
systems, the role of boron may be the most important and least understood. This
proposed work will document the abundance and geologic associations of boron (as
tourmaline) in this environment, and the tourmaline will be studied for fluid
inclusions that may uniquely reveal the compositions and physical states of
fluids generated in the granites and associated veins and host rocks. In
addition, analyses of the boron isotopic composition of tourmaline (11B/10B)
will help to identify the provenance (source rocks) of the granitic magmas, the
extent of mixing and pathways of fluid flow between granites and their host
rocks (if multiple reservoirs of boron are found), and with the aid of
experimental calibration of isotopic fractionation, the pressures, temperatures,
and possibly pH of fluids at various stages of tourmaline crystallization. The
results of this developed by the principal investigator to further elucidate the
geochemical cycle of boron in magmatic-hydrothermal systems. The results may be
generally applicable to similar deposits that are common and widespread in space
and time, and will serve as a model for others to follow.