* 8915863
* Physical Properties and Structural-Stratographic Variations of Frazil, Platlet and Congelation Sea Ice, Ross Sea,       Antarctica
* O/D,OPP
* 09/01/1990,02/28/1994
* Wilford Weeks, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Bernhard Lettau
* 02/28/1994
* USD 277,133.00

This project is an examination of the mechanical and structural properties of
the antarctic ice pack in the Ross Sea, with the goal of defining the
geographical variability of various ice types, the deformation processes that
are active in the antarctic ice pack, and the large-scale thermodynamics and
heat exchange processes of the ice-covered Southern Ocean. Four specific
objectives have been defined for this project: (1) A determination of the
fraction of frazil, platelet, and congelation ice of the Ross Sea pack ice; (2)
an examination of differences in the salinities of these ice types, and a study
of whether salinity variations are related to ice structure and stratigraphy;
(3) a documentation of grain size and morphology variations in frazil and
platelet ice and their relation to salinity differences; and (4) an
investigation of the brine exclusion process, and how salt is lost from the sea
ice. Differences in ice types are the result of differences in the environment
in which the ice forms; frazil ice is formed in supercooled sea water, normally
through wind or wave-induced turbulence, while platelet and congelation ice is
formed under quiescent conditions. The fraction of frazil ice (which has been
observed to be generally in excess of 50% in Weddell Sea ice floes) is an
important variable in the energy budget of the upper ocean, and contributes to
our understanding of the redistribution of salt, sediment, and micro-organisms
in the ocean, and will improve our understanding of microwave and synthetic
aperture radar images of sea ice to be obtained form a new generation of polar
orbiting satellites.