* 8915316
* U.S.-Japan Joint Seminar: High Resolution Focused Ion Beams/December 1990/Portland, OR
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/1990,05/31/1991
* Jon Orloff, Oregon Graduate Institute of Science & Technology
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Turczak
* 05/31/1991
* USD 9,594.00

This award will support ten U.S. participants in a joint U.S.- Japan seminar on
the subject of high resolution focused ion beams (FIB), a field which has
developed primarily in the United States and Japan. FIB technology has been
applied to integrated circuit fabrication, mask repair, and surface analysis. It
has potential applications in low-energy implantation during molecular beam
epitaxy and in nanostructure fabrication. Focused ion beams produced with field-
ionization- type sources can have large current densities with small beam sizes.
Such beams can be used to alter surfaces in a variety of ways, including
micromachining, implantation, and deposition. The applications of focused ion
beams to integrated circuit fabrication include (1) direct, maskless, resistless
implantation of dopants in Si or GaAs, (2) micromachining or ion milling, (3)
ion beam lithography, (4) ion-assisted etching or deposition, (5) microanalysis,
and (6) scanning ion microscopy. Because of the significant technological
promise of the field, as well as its potential application to the study of basic
scientific problems in electronic materials, the seminar organizers believe the
time is opportune for the convening of this workshop. It will bring many of the
main workers in FIB together to exchange and discuss their recent research
results and to consider possible joint research projects. The directions of
research in FIB technology are somewhat different in the U.S. and Japan, and the
seminar will thus allow workers from complementary areas in the two countries to
compare results. Both the U.S. and Japan should benefit from such an exchange. A
particular effort will be made to ensure attendance by U.S. graduate students.
Though there will be some discussion of ion sources and optics at the seminar,
the emphasis will be on the novel applications possible only with high
resolution focused ion beams. The seminar will be held December 3-6, 1990, in
Portland, Oregon. Seminar co-organizers are Dr. Jon Orloff, Oregon Graduate
Institute of Science and Technology, and Dr. Kenji Gamo, Department of
Electrical Engineering, Osaka University, Japan.