* 8915182
* U.S.-Japan Cooperative Research: Statistical Spectroscopy   of Unimolecular Dynamics
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/1990,02/28/1993
* Robert Field, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Turczak
* 02/28/1993
* USD 29,000.00

This award will facilitate collaboration between Professor Robert W. Field,
Department of Chemistry, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, and Professor
Soji Tsuchiya, University of Tokyo, Japan, and members of their respective
research groups. The scientists will utilize experimental and theoretical
approaches to obtain information about unimolecular (single molecule) chemical
reactions from rotation- vibration spectra of highly excited small polyatomic
molecules (molecules containing more than two atoms) such as hydrogen cyanide,
sulfur dioxide, and acetylene. Such spectra are intrinsically uninterpretable in
the traditional spectroscopic sense. This collaboration will explore new
experimental ways to generate large quantities of high-quality, interpretable
spectra as well as new, statistically based ways to obtain information from
these spectra. If successful, the effort will permit, for the first time, the
extraction of detailed information about certain chemical processes, such as
unimolecular isomerization, from high resolution spectra of highly energized
molecules. Knowledge of the factors controlling intramolecular energy flow will
lead to opportunities to diagnose, design, and effect excitations localized in
specific parts of a molecule. The purpose of this project is to gain a
fundamental understanding of intramolecular vibrational energy redistribution in
isolated, small polyatomic molecules that are energized with chemically
interesting amounts of internal rotation-vibration excitation. These molecules
are simple enough that they can be examined in detail by state-of- the-art
experimental and supercomputer-based theoretical techniques. For example, the
isomerization of HCN to HNC following excitation of the molecule may be studied
in this way. Complementary experimental and theoretical approaches in the two
research groups will be utilized. As a significant part of this project,
graduate students in Professor Field's group will make approximately one-month
working visits to the University of Tokyo laboratory, and associates of
Professor Tsuchiya will make similar visits to MIT.