* 8915064
* U.S.-Japan Cooperative Research: Particle Flux Studies in   the Central Subarctic Pacific
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/1990,02/28/1993
* Kozo Takahashi, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Jones Tsuchitani
* 02/28/1993
* USD 14,664.00

This award supports collaboration in oceanography between Dr. Kozo Takahashi,
Department of Geology and Geophysics, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, and
Dr. Yoshiaki Maita, Hokkaido University, Japan. These scientists, and colleagues
working with them, are carrying out oceanographic and ecological studies in the
central subarctic Pacific Ocean, including the Bering Sea. This region is one of
high biological productivity, and the researchers are measuring seasonal fluxes
there of biogenically produced particles that variously contain silica, calcium
carbonate, and/or organic carbon compounds. The data will be used to assess
surface biological productivity and water column ecosystems of the region.
Cooperation with the Japanese scientists allows Dr. Takahashi and his colleagues
to participate in Japanese cruises to this area for the purpose of deploying and
recovering the sediment traps needed for data collection. Water samples and
hydrographic data at the research sites are also taken. Physical classification
and chemical analyses of the collected samples will be carried out. Historical
data sets obtained from this region by Japanese scientists over the past several
decades are also available to the U.S. researchers. Funds from this award will
support the travel of U.S. scientists in this project to Japan in order to meet
with their Japanese colleagues to discuss and exchange data, as well as plan
future field work cooperation. A second meeting a year or so later, after
additional field studies, will be held in the U.S. for this purpose.