* 8915391
* Collaborative Research:  The Movement of Gas &amp; Crystals     Beneath Kilauea
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/1990,12/31/1992
* Alfred Anderson, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* John L. Snyder
* 12/31/1992
* USD 88,990.00

This is a collaborative project between Alfred Anderson of the University of
Chicago and Dork Sahagian of Ohio State.The main goal of the project is to
establish whether gas accumulates beneath Kilauea's summit. The idea is that gas
accumulation at the structural apex can cause persistent localization of a
summit vent. Additional goals are: 1) to use melt inclusions to establish the
depths of olivine crystallization beneath Kilauea: and 2) to confirm the initial
bulk concentration of C02 and H20 in Kilauean parent magma. Subaerial and
submarine Kilauean basalts will be studied. Inclusions of glass in Olivine
phenocrysts will be analyzed for major elements and S by electron microprobe and
for H20 and C02 by infra-red spectroscopy. In addition the size, abundance and
gas pressure of vesicles in glassy submarine basalts will be measured. The sizes
and gas pressures of gas bubbles in glass inclusions will be measured for
comparison with the vesicles in host glasses. Calculations will be performed to
assess the coalescence and rate of rise of bubbles in the evolving body of magma
beneath Kilauea. The results will be compared with existing data on the
historical rates of outgassing, magma influx, and eruption. The data and
computations will be used to test and refine existing models of the outgassing
and evolution of Kilauea volcano. Overall, the PIs will test the idea that
Kilauea is a centralized volcano because rising gas seeks and maintain a vent at
its summit.