* 8915663
* Axiomatizing Program Equivalence in Typed Functional        Languages with Imperative Features
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/1990,12/31/1993
* John McCarthy, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Forbes D. Lewis
* 12/31/1993
* USD 298,667.00

Very little work has been done on the nature of program equivalence for typed
higher-order languages with imperative features. In this project, investigations
will continue into reasoning about programs with side-effects and other
imperative features such as control abstractions. In particular, the semantics
of various typed lambda calculi with references or pointers will be
investigated. Simple types will be studied initially and a variety of extensions
including polymorphism, effect systems, and control abstractions will then be
explored. One aim of the research is to develop calculi of constrained
equivalence which take into consideration the fact that a program or expression
will only be used in certain contexts. In addition, the problem of providing for
object-oriented programming in typed languages will be studied. This includes
specifying classes of objects and defining notions of equivalence for objects
and specifications of classes. This work can be seen from two points of view.
First as studying typed fragments of untyped languages, axiomatizing program
equivalence relative to a set of typed contexts and developing formal mechanisms
for embedding typed fragments in untyped languages. Second as adding reference
types and other imperative features and studying the effect of these additions
on various type systems and on the nature of program equivalence.