* 8915983
* Collaborative Research:  Form, Spacing and Internal         Structure of Eolian Ripples
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/1990,07/31/1993
* Peter Haff, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 07/31/1993
* USD 111,484.00

Despite their ubiquity in present-day deserts and coastal regions, and despite
their importance in the geological record and for the understanding of modern
transport processes, no general theory exists for the complex interactions of
wind and sand responsible for the formation of eolian ripples, and for the
associated micro-stratigraphy. We propose to study this smallest class of eolian
bedforms through simulations that directly extend prior analytical work. Ripples
will be followed from birth to their mature, finite amplitude state, where the
dispersion of velocities among waves forces interactions between ripples that
result in the growth of the mean wavelength and decay of its standard deviation
through time. Multiple grainsize systems will be addressed after an
understanding of the monodisperse system is obtained. The resulting micro-
stratigraphy will be tracked as it develops. Ripples will be modeled by cellular
automation methods that have been shown to produce realistic bedform shapes and
motion, and that physically mimic the motion of grains in actual ripples. The
saltation impact events that drive ripple dynamics will be studied by simulation
of individual impacts as well as by comparison with data on saltation collisions
collected using high-speed photographic techniques. This latter work is being
carried out at the University of Aberdeen by Dr. B.B. Willetts, with whom we
have a N.A.T.O. travel collaboration grant. Additional constraints on the nature
of ripple fields, both as they evolve and at steady state, will be derived using
newly developed photographic techniques both in the wind tunnel and in local
dunefields in southern California. Both the methods and the results of the
proposed research should have a salutary effect upon the general field of
sediment transport, including subaqueous systems.