* 8915536
* Apatite, Magnesian Calcite, and Silica:  An Experimental    Approach to their Reactivity in Natural Environments
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/1990,07/31/1992
* Fred Mackenzie, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 07/31/1992
* USD 110,376.00

Apatite, magnesian calcite, and silica are, along with clays, the most abundant
phases in marine sediments. Knowledge of the physical and chemical properties of
magnesian calcites is necessary if we are to understand their biogenic
production, the carbonate cements in the marine environment, the role of
magnesian calcites in the CO2 budget of the earth, and their fate during
diagenesis. Apatite stabilities and reaction rates in solution are needed
because of the importance of apatite in the sedimentary cycle of phosphorus, in
the formation of phosphorite deposits, and in controlling the fertility of the
ocean. Stability and reaction rate data on silica will help to explain the
series of modifications silica undergoes during diagenesis, and help to define
the role of silica in the sedimentary cycle. Unfortunately, previous
investigations in these systems have failed to produce universally accepted
models of their stabilities, partly because of the inadequacy of materials used
in stability and kinetic experiments. A thorough understanding of the chemistry
and solid solution nature of synthetic samples is necessary before the
stabilities and solution behavior of natural phases can be evaluated. Our
approach is to compare the characteristics of homogeneous, well- crystallized
synthetic phases to natural materials. We will extend our previous measurements
on magnesian calcites to span the composition range of natural samples. We will
also extend our syntheses to apatite and opal. Stability determinations will be
made throughout a temperature range corresponding to diagenetic conditions. SEM,
x-ray, electron microprobe, Raman, and IR analyses of both synthetic and natural
samples will provide a basis for interpretation of the solution behavior of
these minerals, and thus their reactions in the natural environment.