* 8915831
* Geochemical Cycles of 9-Be and 27-Al
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/1990,12/31/1992
* Christopher Measures, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 12/31/1992
* USD 88,138.00

This project began as an attempt to establish the systematics of the stable
isotopes of Be and Al in the oceans with a view to using their cosmogenic radio-
isotopes as geochronologic tools. There is an explicit analogy here to C-14.
Carbon is involved in the biogeochemical cycle; hence the effect of decay on the
distribution of the radio-isotope is overprinted by non- radiogenic processes.
However the stable isotope C-12 is affected only by the biogenic processes and
hence can be used to correct for their effects on the radio-isotope. The success
of this approach is greatly facilitated by the fact that the carbon isotopes
share a common, well-mixed reservior, the atmosphere. The latter is known not to
be the case for Be and Al. The objective of this project is to establish whether
the residence time and chemical behaviours of these elements in seawater is such
that isotope equilibrium is achieved in the oceanic reserviour. If this were
true, then direct radiometric dating of marine sediments would be feasible in
the range 0 to -15 million years. Support is requested to complete the first
phase of the investigations concerning the geochemical cycle Al with a view to
developing Al and Be isotopes as geochronometers. The effort will extend
coverage into several new basins in the South Atlantic and examine the evolution
of the isotope distribution as the Atlantic water masses propagate from their
northern source 8915831 Measures This project began as an attempt to establish
the systematics of the stable isotopes of Be and Al in the oceans with a view to
using their cosmogenic radio-isotopes as geochronologic tools. There is an
explicit analogy here to C-14. Carbon is involved in the biogeochemical cycle;
hence the effect of decay on the distribution of the radio-isotope is
overprinted by non- radiogenic processes. However the stable isotope C-12 is
affected only by the biogenic processes and hence can be used to correct for
their effects on the radio-isotope. The success of this approach is greatly
facilitated by the fact that the carbon isotopes share a common, well-mixed
reservior, the atmosphere. The latter is known not to be the case for Be and Al.
The objective of this project is to establish whether the residence time and
chemical behaviours of these elements in seawater is such that isotope
equilibrium is achieved in the oceanic reserviour. If this were true, then
direct radiometric dating of marine sediments would be feasible in the range 0
to -15 million years. Support is requested to complete the first phase of the
investigations concerning the geochemical cycle Al with a view to developing Al
and Be isotopes as geochronometers. The effort will extend coverage into several
new basins in the South Atlantic and examine the evolution of the isotope
distribution as the Atlantic water masses propagate from their northern source
areas.