* 8915304
* Interactive Aspects of Seaweed Chemical Defenses and a      Functional Evaluation of Ascidian Secondary Metabolites:    Research Fellowship in Marine Biotechnology
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/1989,02/29/1992
* Mark Hay, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 02/29/1992
* USD 81,960.00

Terrestrial studies of chemically mediated plant-herbivore interactions have
contributed significantly to the discovery and development of biotechnological
applications for plant natural products. While our understanding of marine
chemical ecology has developed more slowly, recent collaborations between
ecologist and chemists have been very productive and produced well designed
studies revealing the ecological and evolutionary importance of chemically
mediated interactions between marine organisms. An increased understanding of
the ecology and evolution of these chemically mediated interactions in marine
communities should help build an ecologically-based framework for rationally
approaching the biotechnological development of marine natural product. This
fellowship work by Dr. Lindquist will investigate the intraspecific variations
in seaweed defenses, biotic and abiotic factors producing thee variations and
how variations in chemical defenses interact with other defensive mechanisms.
Additionally, since the chemical data base for ascidians is not nearly as
extensive as that of marine algae and no published studies have experimentally
addressed potential adaptive roles for ascidian secondary metabolites, further
studies will make an evaluation of ascidian metabolites as (1) feeding
deterrents to generalist predators, (2) antifouling agents, (3) aids in spatial
competition, (4) larval survival mechanisms and (5) a dynamic defense capable of
being modified to minimize adverse affects from changing environmental stresses
as the animals mature. These potential roles are suggested for ascidian
secondary metabolites by preliminary experimental data and extensive ecological
observations.