* 8915715
* Chromatin Structure
* BIO,MCB
* 11/01/1990,04/30/1994
* Ada Olins, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 04/30/1994
* USD 285,000.00

This proposal addresses the question of how chromatin is organized in the
eukaryotic nucleus, by examining a novel hypothesis. The hypothesis is that
proteins associated with the telomeres, or ends, of chromosomes (telomeric
proteins, or TP) are nuclear lamins, which in turn are members of a large group
of proteins called intermediate filaments (IF). Their ability to assemble and
disassemble into filaments would then be responsible for maintenance of nuclear
organization. The organism to be used in these studies is the hypotrichous
ciliate Euplotes eurystomus, which is particularly advantageous because of the
unusually short lengths of individual chromosomal elements in the macronuclei,
resulting in approximately 100,000,000 telomere-bearing DNA pieces, in which the
telomeric DNA sequences are all the same. Furthermore, the macronucleus contains
clearly defined regions of condensed, dispersed, and replicating chromatin. The
higher order organization which determines the structure of each of these
functional regions is not known. These properties make Euplotes an excellent
system for the study of telomeres and eukaryotic nuclear structure and function.
The experiments proposed for this study involve characterization of TPs by
cloning the gene and determining its sequence. The sequence will be compared
with sequences of known IFs. Immunofluorescent localization and STEM mass
determination will be used to determine TP nuclear sites and stoichiometry with
DNA. In situ electron microscopic analysis and immunolocalization will be used
to characterize the 10 nm filaments. Reconstitution experiments will be
performed to determine factors which affect chromatin organization. It is
expected that this study will clarify one of the functions of telomeres and the
role of lamins in organizing chromatin structure in a eukaryotic nucleus. Thus,
the project addresses one of the central issues of cell biology, namely, the
architectural organization of the genome within the nucleus.