* 8915369
* US-France Cooperative Research:  Doubly Excited Rydberg     Atoms
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/1990,08/31/1993
* Thomas Gallagher, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 08/31/1993
* USD 11,200.00

This award will support collaborative research between Dr. Thomas Gallagher,
University of Virginia and Dr. Pierre Camus and Pierre Pillet, Laboratoire Aime
Cotton, Orsay, France. The objective of the project is to study highly
correlated atomic systems in which two of the atomic electrons are in similar
orbit. Atoms with two highly excited, correlated electrons present one of the
major challenges to present day atomic physics. Although there have been many
theories proposed, there remains very little experimental information to guide
the formation of the theories. The investigators propose to study such atomic
states experimen- tally. Specifically, they propose to use multistep laser
excitation of Ba atoms, which have two valence electrons, coupled with state
selective detection of the doubly excited states. Such studies, using rather
different techniques, are currently underway in both laboratories. By combining
the approaches and exploring new avenues, the investigators expect to be able to
view the doubly excited atoms from different perspectives, gaining valuable new
insights into their properties and guiding future theoretical developments. Both
the US and French groups have substantial research records in the study of
highly excited states in general, and have developed many of the techniques upon
which the proposed program rests. In addition, both research groups have ready
access to theoretical groups with expertise in correlated atomic systems.