* 8916968
* Mathematical Sciences: Analysis: Partial Differential       Equations, Fourier &amp; Complex Analysis and Group Project in  Mathematical Wavelets
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/1989,01/31/1993
* Peter Jones, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 01/31/1993
* USD 787,738.00

Modern techniques of mathematical analysis will be applied to fundamental
problems in differential equations, complex analysis, wavelet theory, and
dynamical systems in this group research project. Work on inverse scattering
continues efforts to study higher dimensional problems by means of a new
approach derived from methods of several complex variables: the d-bar method.
Although this approach has had considerable formal success in two space
dimensions and some success in higher dimensions, very few problems have been
analyzed rigorously. In particular, work will be done on problems with large
potentials or with general singular scattering data. Recent analyses of the
d-bar-Neumann problem associated to domains in a complex manifold have shown
that the corresponding trace of the heat kernel (for the heat equation) has a
small time asymptotic, expansion whose coefficients are integrals of local
geometric invariants, including the logarithmic terms. Very little is known
about these invariants beyond some general results about their form and degree
of homogeneity. Work will continue in efforts to elicit more concrete
information. New proofs of the boundedness of the Cauchy integral and other
singular integral using special bases has opened up areas of exploration both in
operator theory and numerical analysis. Using basic Littlewood-Paley theory, one
can translate the T(1) theorem of David and Journe into an effective numerical
tool. This powerful result establishes the boundedness of a singular operator
solely through its action on the constant functions. Work will be done in
representing integral operators in wavelet bases as matrices which decay rapidly
off the diagonal. These techniques can be shown to produce considerable
reduction in complexity in the discrete approximation to the operators. A wide
range of applicability of these ideas to signal and image processing is expected
as a consequence of this research. Other work will focus on relationships
between the Cauchy integral, analytic capacity and rectifiable sets. Work
directed at characterizing rectifiable curves has led to new insights into the
traveling salesman problem. Further applications will be considered relative to
the problem of estimating the integral of the derivative of a conformal mapping
and on determining the relationship between analytic capacity and Favard length
of compact planar sets. Although they are not equivalent quantities, it is
likely that they do agree on sets of finite one-dimensional Hausdorff measure.
Work will be done to resolve this issue. //