* 8916621
* Characterization of Clathrin Coated Vesicles Involved in    Transport of Vacuolar Proteins in Plants
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/1990,10/31/1993
* Leonard Beevers, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 10/31/1993
* USD 232,000.00

Developing pea cotyledons are sites of synthesis of specific reserve proteins.
The synthesis of these proteins is developmentally regulated and tissue
specific. Within the parenchyma cells of the developing pea cotyledons the
reserve proteins accumulate in sub-cellular organelles termed protein bodies
which arise by sub-division of the large central vacuole originally present in
the cells. The reserve proteins are synthesized on the rough endoplasmic
reticulum and pass through the Golgi. This laboratory has established that the
transport of the reserve protein lectin and other vacuolar hydrolases from the
Golgi involves clathrin coated visicles. To date only limited information is
available on the biochemistry and function of coated vesicles in plant systems.
The proposed research will capitalize on the rich source of coated vesicles
present in developing pea cotyledons to conduct a detailed study of aspects of
their biochemistry and function. The immediate aims of this research are to
characterize the clathrin light chain which has only recently been identified in
plants. The primary sequences of the light chain peptides will be determined and
the mechanism of their interaction with the heavy chain establshed. Kinase
activities will be assayed in the coated vesicles from developing peas to
determine whether, in similarity to animal systems, the light chain peptide is
phosphroylated. The results of these studies will contribute to our knowledge of
the biology of plant cells and will enhance our understanding of the selectivity
of intracellular protein transport.