* 8916196
* Land Plants in Phanerozoic Biogeochemical Cycles:  The      Evolving Global Balance
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/1990,07/31/1992
* Jennifer Robinson, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 07/31/1992
* USD 50,000.00

The genetic evolution and changing geographical ecology of land plants
(phytogeography) has been important in the Phanerozoic history of the
biogeochemical cycles in which plants massively participate, especially the
cycles of carbon, oxygen, nitrogen, phosphorus, and soluble bases. The
relationship is bi- directional, with the atmosphere and substrate both shaping,
and being shaped by, the evolution and distribution of plants. Support is sought
to: (A) Integrate information from numerous disciplines toward more complete and
more quantitative descriptions of the mechanisms by which land plants have
interacted with the physical and chemical Earth system over Phanerozoic time;
(B) Initiate work on a structure to track the spatial distributions of the
evolution of the land biota and to deduce the geochemical ramifications of
phytogeographic distributions; and (C) Undertake simple experiments on the
effects of atmospheric composition, especially O2 level, on the combustion and
decomposition of plant tissues. The proposed research will elucidate Phanerozoic
trends in the creation, decomposition, and burial of refractory Corg; improve
specifications of the effect of atmospheric O2 level on fire, and thereby, on
the organization of the land biota and on geochemical balances; improve the
representation of the land biota in one dimensional geochemical models; and lay
a foundation for incorporation of vegetative cover into a three dimensional
linked geochemical-climate model.