* 8916635
* A Cooperative Paleoclimatic Study of the Guliya Ice Cap,    China:  Relationship to Global Climate Variability
* GEO,AGS
* 02/01/1991,01/31/1996
* Lonnie Thompson, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* Herman Zimmerman
* 01/31/1996
* USD 581,800.00

Ice core drilling has provided some of the most important paleoclimatic
information for the Quaternary interval of earth history. With ice core samples
it has been possible to determine the relationship between climate change and
atmospheric gas composition. In some low latitude regions the accumulation rate
of snow is high enough to resolve annual variations in climate and ENSO scale
events. This proposal requests support to drill such an ice cap, the Guliya ice
cap in China. Located on the northwestern edge of the Qinghai-Tibetan Plateau,
it is the largest and highest subtropical ice cap in the world. Thus it is
likely to contain the best, uninterrupted record of paleoclimate and atmospheric
chemistry from the low latitudes. Using the ice core samples, along with others
they collected from low latitude sites in China and Peru, the PIs will oversee a
comprehensive analysis of past climate, and atmospheric gas and dust
composition. This research is important because it will provide the first low
latitude record of atmospheric gas composition and its relationship to climate
change. It will also provide us with the best record of the relationship of low
latitude, high elevations climate to the record of monsoon variability in
southern Asia and thus provide information on the relationship between ENSO
events and monsoon activity.