* 8916127
* Cloning and Transgenic Expression of Higher Plant Inhibitors  of Pathogen Polygalacturonases
* NONE,NONE
* 02/01/1990,01/31/1994
* Alan Bennett, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 01/31/1994
* USD 174,500.00

A number of plant pathogens produce pectolytic enzymes whose activity degrades
polygalacturonic acid within the host cell wall during the process of infection.
This pectolytic cell wall degradation may contribute to pathogenesis by allowing
physical penetration of the invading pathogen and perhaps in providing monomeric
sugars to support energy metabolism of the pathogen. Pectic fragments produced
through the action of pathogen polygalacturonases may, in addition, elicit
defense responses in the infected host. Plant-derived inhibitors of pathogen
polygalacturonases have been identified in several plant tissues and their
presence has been shown to be associated with resistance to pathogen attack. It
has been proposed that the presence of these proteinaceous polygalacturonase
inhibitors may directly inhibit pathogen colonization and indirectly function to
enhance the host defense response. This research will develop the biochemical
and molecular genetic basis for critically assessing the role of plant
inhibitors of pathogen polygalacturonases in altering pathogen susceptibility in
transgenic plants. The specific objectives are to: 1) purify polygalacturonase
inhibitors from pear and tomato fruit, 2) raise antibodies to purified
polygalacturonase inhibitors and determine N-terminal and internal amino acid
sequences, 3) construct appropriate cDNA libraries from pear and tomato and use
antibody and oligonucleotide probes to isolate cDNA clones encoding pear and
tomato polygalacturonase inhibitors and, 4) characterize the polygalacturonase
inhibitor cDNAs by sequence analysis and patterns of mRNA accumulation. The
results of these studies will provide the basis for designing strategies of
over-expression or anti-sense depression of the polygalacturonase inhibitor
cDNAs in transgenic plants. Losses of agricultural products to plant pathogens
are substantial. While losses can often be controlled through the application of
fungicides, the enhancement of endogenous plant defense systems by molecular
genetic means has provided the hope of reducing the dependence upon chemical
control of pathogens. The possible role of plant-produced polygalacturonase
inhibitors (PGIs) in pathogen defense is widely recognized but has received
little attention in recent years. This research will examine the role of PGIs in
pathogen resistance. If proven effective in enhancing plant pathogen resistance,
molecular manipulation will provide a powerful tool for achieving pathogen
resistant crops.