* 8916712
* Late Holocene Climate History Recorded in Laminated         Sediments from the George V. Coast, Antarctica
* O/D,OPP
* 04/01/1990,03/31/1992
* Amy Leventer, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* Bernhard Lettau
* 03/31/1992
* USD 85,329.00

This Research Opportunity for Women (ROW) award is a study of laminated
sediments from the antarctic continental shelf in order to reconstruct the
Holocene (the most recent 2500 years) climatic record. Existing sediment cores
from the George V. Basin, a deep inner continental shelf basin located off the
Wilkes Land Coast, will be sampled in this effort. These are ideal for high
resolution study because of the detail preserved in the undisturbed and unmixed
laminated sections, and because of the relatively high (approximately three
millimeters per year) sedimentation rates. It is hypothesized that the laminated
segments originated because extensive primary productivity in a necessarily ice-
free ocean environment resulted in high carbon fluxes to the sea floor and the
development of anoxic conditions below the sediment-water interface. Alternating
intervals of non-laminated (mixed, and probably bio-turbated) sediments record
deposition under a more extensive or persistent sea ice cover. The measurements
obtained from the cores will be used to model the history of basin deposition in
the time interval since the retreat of the antarctic ice sheet form the
continental shelf to its present position. Radiocarbon dates will allow the
correlation of the sediment cores to other high resolution proxy climate data
(e.g. from ice cores), and will serve as a link between the marine and
terrestrial climate records. Ultimately it is expected that these results can be
used to predict where similar high resolution proxy records may be found in
other antarctic marginal basins, so that the analysis may be extended to assess
the effects of geologically recent climatic change on oceanographic and
depositional conditions in the Southern Ocean.