* 8916146
* U.S.-Japan Cooperative Research:  Cellular Biomechanics in  Blood Vessels and Vascular Grafts
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1990,03/31/1992
* Robert Nerem, Georgia Tech Research Corporation - GA Tech Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Turczak
* 03/31/1992
* USD 29,000.00

This award will support a collaborative effort between teams of U.S. and
Japanese researchers aimed at furthering our understanding of the interaction of
blood flow with both normal blood vessel walls and with vessels engineered from
substitute materials. The application of this information includes fluid
dynamics as a factor in vascular disease, but more importantly the development
of biological tissue substitutes for the restoration of cardiovascular function,
i.e. tissue engineering. The engineering development of small-bore grafts is
urgently needed, and to successfully do this requires an understanding of the
fluid dynamic environment of such grafts and the interaction of flow with the
vessel wall at a cellular level. In this effort, the U.S. and Japanese
investigators will conduct both complementary and joint studies over a two-year
period. Specific experiments will be directed at defining the flow environment
and determining associated cellular responses, including both the adhesion of
blood cells and alterations in endothelial cells, the cells which line the inner
arterial walls and interface directly with flowing blood. The principal
investigators are Dr. Robert M. Nerem, Georgia Institute of Technology, and Dr.
Norio Ohshima, University of Tsukuba, Japan. Other co-investigators are from the
Biomechanics Laboratory at Georgia Institute of Technology and from three
Japanese institutions: the University of Hokkaido, the Kawasaki Medical School,
and the University of Tsukuba.