* 8916355
* Nontectonic influences on continental basin-fill sedimenta- tion and post-orogenic sedimentation in a late Cenozoic     Extensional Basin
* NONE,NONE
* 02/01/1990,01/31/1993
* Gary Smith, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 01/31/1993
* USD 99,992.00

The project will evaluate the sedimentology and stratigraphy of the Pliocene-
early Pleistocene St. David Formation in southeastern Arizona. The St. David
Formation was deposited in a Basin and Range valley after near cessation of
relative motion between range fronts and valley floor. This setting allows for
examination of the characteristics of basin sedimentation in the absence of
active deformation along the basin margins. Preliminary study reveals an
approximately 150 m thick coarsening-upward sequence with considerable vertical
and lateral variability. In the absence of active tectonism, temporal changes in
depositional style must be caused by climatic changes and evolving drainage
patterns related to regional drainage integration. Some of these changes are
tentatively correlated to marine paleoclimatic records. This project represents
the first concerted effort to evaluate the sedimentology of a largely pre-
Quaternary continental basin-fill unit with emphasis on climate and
paleogeomorphological changes, rather than tectonism, to produce temporal and
spatial variations in sediment grain size and facies distribution. The results
will be used to a) charactertize the nature of late-stage basin sedimentation,
b) evaluate the validity of current hypotheses relating stratigraphic variation,
apriori, to episodic tectonism, and c) attempt correlation of a Pliocene-early
Pleistocene nonglacial continental record to marine paleoclimatic records.