* 8916045
* RUI:  Petrogenesis of a Layered, Massif-Type Anorthosite
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/1990,06/30/1991
* Robert Wiebe, Franklin and Marshall College
* Standard Grant
* Thomas O. Wright
* 06/30/1991
* USD 28,000.00

It is proposed to undertake a detailed petrogenetic study of an exceptionally
well exposed section through a major layered pluton of massif-type anorthosite:
the Paul Island intrusion, Nain, Labrador. Most mapping and sampling and much
preliminary petrography and geochemistry have been completed. The Intrusion
displays a stratigraphic section about km thick that contains most of the
textural and compositional varieties of massif-type anorthosite and a
comfortable lens (1.5 km thick) of the most primitive mafic cumulates in the
Nain complex. Characteristics of the earliest unit suggest crystallization of
about 50% plagioclase at great depth prior to diapiric emplacement. Later, fluid
replenishments established a chamber that permitted bottom accumulation of
anorthosite. Zoning of phenocrysts in the uppermost unit implies that
plagioclase remained suspended within an actively convecting, periodically
replenished chamber. Many fine-grained anorthosite and mafic dikes have
compositions and occurrences that are appropriate for parental liquids to
different cumulate units. The major goals of this study are: (1) to establish
the character and origin of parental magmas to the anorthosites, (2) to
establish the state of the magma and the mode of emplacement, and (3) to
understand processes that operated in anorthositic magma chambers.