* 8916841
* Causes and Consequences of Variable Recruitment in the AcornBarnacle, Semibalanus Balanoides
* GEO,OCE
* 01/15/1990,09/30/1994
* Mark Bertness, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 09/30/1994
* USD 367,492.00

While it is widely believed that variation in recruitment (the introduction of
new individuals to a population) can influence the structure and dynamics of
marine populations, the specific causes and consequences of variable recruitment
are poorly known for any species with planktonic larvae. The present evidence
suggests that recruitment of the acorn barnacle, Semibalanus balanoides, is
strongly influenced by oceanographic features that dictate larval supply.
Moreover, the resulting recruitment variation hypothetically can strongly
influence the distribution, abundance, demography, and genetic structure of
barnacle populations in previously unsuspected ways. On the basis of these
preliminary data three young scientists Drs. Gaines, Bertness and Geyer will
initiate a regional study to examine the links between a specific coastal
oceanographic feature (embayment flushing time), water column larval abundance,
benthic recruitment variation, and population processes in Semibalanus
balanoides. Specifically, this investigation will: 1) examine the hypothesis
that variation in flushing rates among sheltered bays and among years generates
variation in larval abundance and shoreline settlement rates, 2) evaluate
experimentally the relative importance of this regional and temporal variation
in recruitment to the distribution, abundance, and demography of barnacle
populations, and, 3) test the hypothesis that variation in larval retention
among sheltered bays predictably affects the degree of local adaptation of
barnacle populations by altering rates of gene flow. This work will address
critically important issues in our understanding of the ecology and evolution of
species with complex life histories.