* 8916809
* Aromatization in Brain and Pituitary:  Regulation of        Reproduction in Vertebrates
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/1990,03/31/1996
* Gloria Callard, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Kathie L. Olsen
* 03/31/1996
* USD 462,750.00

Circulating androgen derived from gonadal secretions is converted to estradiol
(neuroestrogen) within the brain and pituitary. This transformation, which is
catalyzed by an enzyme complex termed aromatase (P450arom), is essential for the
full expression of androgen actions on brain sex differentiation, sex behavior
and reproductive neuroendocrinology. Because the brain and pituitary are
structurally and functionally complex and the quantity of neuroestrogen is very
small, it has been difficult to determine how P450arom is regulated, its precise
cellular and subcellular location, and the cellular targets and mechanisms by
which neuroestrogen exerts its actions. Dr. Callard has identified an animal
model, the goldfish, in which P450arom activity is 100-to-100- times higher than
in conventional laboratory species. Moreover, brain androgen receptors are
correspondingly elevated. Based on this correlation and results of experiments
during the last project period, she postulates a functional interrrelationship
between P450arom and androgen receptors in which locally synthesized estrogen
acts as a positive feedback regulator of quantifiable endpoints for elucidating
the parahormonal role of neuroestrogen in brain and pituitary. To this end, she
proposes to isolate and characterize cDNA probes for the goldfish P450arom and
androgen receptor genes, to develop antibodies for measuring their protein
products, and to apply these new tools to unanswered questions using the
goldfish model.