* 8916421
* Cytoplasmic Structure and Compartmentalization in Living    Cells
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/1990,03/31/1994
* Katherine Luby-Phelps, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center
* Continuing grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 03/31/1994
* USD 280,000.00

The aim of this project is to use computer-aided fluorescence microscopy to
probe the structure and compartmentalization of cytoplasm in living cells. The
research is aimed at three broad goals: 1, to understand the physical- chemical
basis for the gel properties of cytoplasm; 2, to measure the solvent viscosity
of the fluid that fills the spaces in the gel; and 3, to understand the
functional implications of apparent subcellular variations of cytoplasmic
structure that lead to compartmentalization of the cytoplasmic volume. In
pursuit of the first goal, the technique of fluorescence recovery after
photobleaching (FRAP) will be used to study the tracer diffusion of size-
fractionated, inert, fluorescent particles both in the living cell and in
solutions and gels reconstituted from biological components. In order to map
solvent viscosity in living cells, a novel ratio imaging approach will be
employed, which has been recently developed by Dr. Luby-Phelps. In addition, the
ratio imaging techniques will be applied to the study of cytoplasmic
compartmentalization during a variety of cellular functions. Although it has
been studied for over 150 years, the submicrosopic architecture of cytoplasm
still is not completely understood. From these studies, it is hoped that a
"picture" of cytoplasm can be built up that can serve as a framework for
understanding cellular biochemistry and metabolism.