* 8916265
* Biosynthesis of Isoflavonoid Phytoalexins in Pea
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/1990,03/31/1993
* Hans. VanEtten, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Machi F. Dilworth
* 03/31/1993
* USD 225,000.00

Plants often synthesize antibiotic compounds (phytoalexins) in response to
infection, and considerable effort is currently being devoted to research on
regulation of their biosynthesis. This research examines some of the terminal,
phytoalexin-specific reactions in the biosynthetic pathway for the pea
phytoalexins, (+)pisatin and (-)maackiain. The isoflavone reductase which
produces the first chiral intermediate of the pathway has been purified and is
being characterized. Other enzymes to be studied are pterocarpan synthase, which
performs the terminal step of maackiain synthesis, and 6'-deoxychalcone
synthase, the first enzyme of the stress-induced branch of the flavonoid
pathway. The penultimate step in pisatin synthesis was previously thought to be
an oxygenase reaction, but this hypothesis is not consistent with recent
findings. Work to be done on this project to resolve this question includes
labeling experiments in vivo and enzyme studies. Antibodies against the purified
enzymes are being used to obtain corresponding cDNA clones. This approach
provides information about how the specificities of the pathway enzymes
determine and chemical diversity that exists among legume phytoalexins. Cloned
genes for these enzymes can eventually allow further evalation of the role of
phytoalexins in disease resistance by modifying the phytoalexin complement of
transgenic plants. It is well-established that many plant species synthesize
phytoalexins in response to infection by pathogens. It is often proposed that
the production of these antimicrobial compounds respresents an active mechanism
of defense against potential pathogens. However, direct evidence supporting this
hypothesis has been difficult to obtain. Recent work carried out with pea plants
and a fungus that causes disease in pea argues that phytoalexins can play an
important role in the determination of plant resistance. The goal of this
reaearch is to examine phytoalexin biosynthesis in pea. Such findings are useful
in addressing interesting questions concerning the regulation of the
biosynthetic pathway and the role of phytoalexins in disease resistance. Future
implications of this work are novel strategies for enhancing the effectiveness
of the phytoalexin defense response.