* 8916466
* Evolutionary Genetics of Environmental Adaptation
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1990,08/31/1995
* Richard Hoffmann, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* W. Scott Armbruster
* 08/31/1995
* USD 240,000.00

Most organisms possess genetic variation for enzymes involved in basic
metabolism, but the functional significance of this variation is poorly
understood. The investigators are examining the function of enzyme variation at
a number of levels of biological organization, including biochemical, metabolic,
physiological and populational, to understand adaptive mechanisms thoroughly in
a sea anemone, Metridium senile. Previous work has shown that there are
differences in properties of variants for the carbohydrate-metabolizing enzyme
glucosephosphate isomerase (Gpi) and that these differences result in alteration
of carbohydrate metabolism. During the course of the present project the
investigators will determine whether enzyme differences affect other levels of
metabolism. Specifically, this phase of the project will investigate the
modulation of lipid metabolism and additional portions of carbohydrate by
metabolism Gpi variants. The working hypothesis is that differences in
properties of Gpi variants contribute to adaptation to environmental
temperature. Experiments will be conducted using radiolabeled compounds to
determine whether modulation of carbohydrate metabolism in turn affects lipid
synthesis. These experiments will provide essential information to test the
hypothesis that natural selection by thermal environments is the cause for
observed geographic variation in proportions of Gpi variants long the northeast
coast of the US. The project will contribute to basic understanding of
mechanisms by which organisms become genetically and metabolically adapted to
environmental differences. Because enzyme-genetic variation is found in all
living things, our results will shed light on a question of fundamental
importance in understanding the process of adaptation. More specifically, the
project will yield understanding of genetic aspects of temperature adaptation,
of potential practical importance in determining likely consequences of human
alterations of the thermal environment. The result may also shed fundamental
light on the importance of small differences in enzyme properties for metabolic
regulation.