* 8916126
* Molecular Analysis of Photoregulated Development
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/1990,03/31/1994
* Lawrence Yager, Temple University
* Continuing Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 03/31/1994
* USD 296,100.00

The objective of this proposal is to develop a detailed understanding of the
mechanisms involved in photoregulated developmental gene expression in A.
nidulans. One aim of this work is to identify and characterize light-specific
genes. The wild-type function of the velvet gene is required for photoregulated
development, but mutation of this gene does not interfere with the formation of
differentiated structures. This gene has been cloned by mutant complementation
and experiments are proposed to characterize its expression and to determine its
pattern of transcription in the wild-type and in specific developmental mutants.
A functional analysis of the velvet gene through the use of gene fusions will be
initiated. Additional light-specific genes have been identified by mutation and
will be analyzed by light-dark shifting experiments. Methods are also proposed
to isolate novel loci involved in the photoresponse. Another aim of this project
is to identify conidiation-specific genes that require light for their
expression and to deduce possible cis-acting regulatory sequences that control
the transcription of these genes. The study of Photoregulated conidiation in
Aspergillus nidulans will help elucidate the complex regulatory mechanisms that
affect cellular differentiation in eukaryotes, using an organism that is highly
amenable to detailed genetic and molecular analyses. Light is critically
required for the normal growth and development of most plants. Plants possess
mechanisms for sensing and responding to light, and some of these responses
involve the activation of specific genes. Relatively little is known about the
mechanisms of these responses, largely because it is only recently that
molecular genetic analysis has been applied to these responses in plants. The
author of this proposal has, during a period of previous NSF support, made the
unexpected discovery that light is critically required for the completion of the
developmental cycle of the mold Aspergillus nidulans, and that the mechanism of
the mold's response to light appears similar to that of higher plants. He here
proposes a detailed molecular genetic analysis of this response. The ease of
genetic manipulation of the mold promises rapid and important new insights into
the mechanism of light responses.