* 8916284
* Stable Isotopes as Transmembrane Tracers
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/1990,02/28/1994
* Raymond Sjodin, University of Maryland at Baltimore
* Standard Grant
* Maryanna P. Henkart
* 02/28/1994
* USD 200,000.00

The purpose of the proposed investigation is two-fold: 1) to study the
regulation of magnesium ions in excitable cells by measuring the fluxes of
stable isotopes in and out of these cells, and in the process, 2) to develop and
perfect a general technique for measuring fluxes and flux parameters by the use
of stable isotopes as tracers. The technique of mass spectrometry will allow
calculation of the fluxes through determination of the shifts in the ratios of
the different stable isotopes of magnesium to each other. At present there is a
great lack of quantitative information on magnesium ion fluxes in excitable and
other cells, particularly concerning how magnesium movements are coupled to
energy sources. Part of the reason for the deficiency in information stems from
the difficulty previous workers have had in obtaining the only radioactive
tracer of magnesium, namely, the short-lived isotope 28Mg; thus, the use of
isotopes that do not decay will permit continuous and uninterrupted research.
Another major advantage of using this approach is that bidirectional fluxes of
two or more ionic species can be simultaneously measured in the same experiment.
Successful completion of all aspects of this project will make available badly
needed new knowledge of the direct and indirect energy sources affecting
magnesium movements, the calculation of the stoichiometries of any magnesium
counter-exchange involved, the definition of the possible role of the membrane
potential in magnesium counter-ion transport, and an understanding of how these
factors may work in concert to maintain physiological levels of intracellular
magnesium ion. This proposed study should serve as a model for flux studies of
other ions as well. One of the important mechanisms by which cells receive
signals and transduce external signals to intracellular biochemical messages
involves the movement of ions across the cell's external membrane or from one
compartment to another within the cell. Studies of these processes often require
the measurement of ion fluxes, and ion fluxes are usually measured by the use of
radioactive isotopes as tracers. This research will develop and apply an
alternative approach to the measurement of transmembrane cation fluxes. This
method employs stable isotopes as tracers and uses mass spectrometry to measure
shifts in isotope ratios of a given element in a sample from a cell or the
cell's external medium. These measurements, when coupled with measurements of
the concentration of that element in a sample (e.g. by atomic absorption
spectroscopy) make it possible to determine fluxes in and out of cells. The
technique will be applied to the study of magnesium fluxes. Considerable
evidence suggests that magnesium movements may play important physiological
roles, but radio- active isotopes of magnesium are very difficult to work with
and very expensive, so few measurements have been made of magnesium fluxes. This
research will provide a new method for studying ion fluxes without radioactive
isotopes, and new information on the physiological movements of magnesium in
cells.***//