* 8916586
* Genetics, Mechanism, and Regulation of Cellulose Synthesis  in A. tumefaciens
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/1990,12/31/1994
* Ann Matthysse, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Machi F. Dilworth
* 12/31/1994
* USD 210,000.00

Incubation of Agrobacterium tumefaciens with host cells results in synthesis by
the bacteria of cellulose fibrils. These fibrils serve to anchor the bacteria
firmly to the host cell surface. Using transposon mutants which are unable to
synthesize cellulose, the genes required for cellulose synthesis are being
identified and characterized. The subcellular localization of these gene
products and the steps involved in cellulose synthesis are being determined and
the regulation of bacterial cellulose synthesis by the presence of host cells
examined. Although there is some information available on the mechanism of
cellulose synthesis, there is little knowledge of the genes and gene products
involved in its synthesis in any organism. In addition, cellulose synthesis in
A. tumefaciens is an interesting example of the regulation of the synthesis of
an exopolysaccharide involved in bacterial adhesion by the presence of the host
cells to which the bacteria bind. Cellulose is the most abundant polymer in the
cell walls of higher plants and is of enormous importance globally. Other
organisms (besides higher plants) are also capable of synthesizing cellulose and
are more amendable to biochemical and molecular manipulation. The plant
pathogen, Agrobacterium tumefaciens, synthesizes cellulose which appears to play
an important role in its interaction with its host. There is very little
information available about the mechanism of cellulose synthesis in any system
and almost nothing is known of the genes involved or their regulation. A.
tumefaciens provides a good system in which to examine the mechanisms and genes
required for cellulose synthesis not only in this organism, but higher plants as
well.