* 8916835
* An Investigation of Vesicle Distributions in Basalt as a    Tool for the Determination of Paleo-Atmospheric Pressure -  Phase I:  Calibration
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/1990,08/31/1991
* Dork Sahagian, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* John L. Snyder
* 08/31/1991
* USD 31,700.00

The PI has devised a method to determine atmospheric pressure based on vesicle
size distributions in basaltic lava flows. The size and space distributions of
vesicles is dependent on migration and coalescence processes which can be
modelled, as well as flow thickness and atmospheric pressure. The atmospheric
pressure dependence arises from the sensitivity of the size distribution to
decompressive expansion during bubble rise through the fluid lava. The objective
of the research is to refine and implement the method on modern basalts emplaced
at high and low elevations, thereby calibrating the sensitivity of the
technique. During phase II, the analysis will be applied to ancient low
elevation baslts to measure paleo-atmospheric pressure. This work will provide
the first data on paleo- atmospheric pressure, thus shedding light on planetary
degassing and evolution of the atmosphere. Once sea level pressure is known, the
technique can be used to obtain paleo-elevation of mountain ranges, with
implications in paleogeography and atmospheric circulation. In addition, the
bubble size distribution as a function of stratigraphic position in a flow can
be used as a measure of lava viscosity, and should yeild more accurate results
than previous estimates. In order to accomplish the goals of the project, the
numerical model already developec (Sahagian, 1985; in press) will be refined to
provide greater accuracy and sensitivity of vesicle size distribution to
atmospheric pressure. Modern field samples will be collected to calibrate the
sensitivity of th model and laboratory technique. In Phase II, ancient samples
will be collected to provide the first paleo-atmospheric pressure data.