* 8916928
* Development and Function of the Drosophila Cardia
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/1990,01/31/1994
* Marcelo Jacobs-Lorena, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* Ralph Hecht
* 01/31/1994
* USD 260,000.00

In most insects, the peritrophic matrix is thought to play a major role in food
digestion and absorption. The peritrophic matrix is an acellular sheath that
lines the entire intestine and is secreted by the cardia, an organ located at
the Drosophila foregut/midgut junction. One aim of this proposal is to study the
function of genes that encode peritrophic matrix components. Another aim is to
study organogenesis of the cardia during embryonic development. Genes that are
expressed specifically in the adult cardia were isolated in Dr. Jacobs-Lorena's
laboratory and will be characterized to determine patterns of expression, DNA
sequence, and gene function. To identify genes that play a determinative role in
the genesis of the cardia, he will use a newly developed P-element/beta-
galactosidase vector in a screen for genes that are expressed specifically in
embryonic cardia precursor cells. These studies will be complemented by cell
ablation experiments that will assess the importance of cell-cell interactions
and should define the contribution of different cell types to the formation of
the peritrophic matrix. %%% In insects that transmit human diseases, the
peritrophic matrix interacts directly with parasites and modulates their
transmission. Understanding how the organ that secretes this matrix is formed
and functions will have practical implications as well as adding to our
knowledge of organogenesis.