* 8916117
* Great Barrier Reef Coral and Halimeda Cd/Ca Ratios:         Holocene Paleochemical Records
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/1990,12/31/1991
* Margaret Delaney, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 12/31/1991
* USD 54,555.00

The pattern and timing of coral reef development in the Great Barrier Reef
(Queensland shelf, Australia) during the past 10,000 y of the Holocene may have
been controlled by changing surface water nutrient concentrations and seasonal
upwelling patterns as driven by rising seal level. The bioherms developed by
accumulation of the aragonite plates deposited by the calcareous green algae
Halimeda in the reefless tract behind the outer shelf may also be controlled by
nutrient enrichment events. There are no direct records of paleo- nutrient
levels available with which to test these hypotheses. However, dissolved cadmium
levels in seawater correlate well with those of phosphate, an essential limiting
nutrient. Cadmium is incorporated in coral aragonite in proportion to its
seawater ratio to calcium, the major cation in aragonite, and techniques to
accurately measure Cd/Ca ratios in coral aragonite at the trace levels found
have been developed and applied to study seasonal and annual surface water
variability, primarily in corals from the Galapagos. The utility of Cd/Ca
measurements in coral and Halimeda for determining the nutrient history of the
Great Barrier Reef is not yet known, however, this feasibility study addresses
several objectives to define how cadmium-calcium ratios in Great Barrier Reef
coral and Halimeda act as recorders of oceanographic conditions in that region
during the Holocene. These objectives involve: (1) defining the degree to which
terrestrial influences may affect measured Cd/Ca signals in Great Barrier Reef
corals; (2) adapting and verifying sample handling and analytical protocols for
use with Halimeda aragonite; and (3) documenting the modern and down-core trace
element signals and preservational states in Halimeda aragonite in relationship
to their environment.