* 8916596
* Industry/University Cooperative Research Center for Welding/Sterilization and Sealing of Asceptic Food Packages
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/1989,08/31/1991
* David Dickinson, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* alexander schwarzkopf
* 08/31/1991
* USD 49,972.00

The manufacturing of aseptic food packaging is limited in speed by the two
critical and slow steps of sterilization and sealing which form two bottle.necks
in production lines. The objectives of this research are to increase the rates
of sterilization and sealing, evaluate the effect of sterilization onsealing,
investigate alternative sealing (welding) techniques and study the effects of
these processes on the formation of off flavors in the food. The Center for
Welding Research (CWR), at Ohio State University and the Center for Aseptic
Processing and Packaging Studies (CAPPS) at North Carolina State University are
both Industry/University Cooperative Research Centers and are cost sharing and
collaborating on this joint "Tie" research project. The researchers at CAPPS
will study the use of electron beam irradiation for sterilization and its effect
upon the creation of off flavors. Preliminary work shows irradiation to be
faster and more effective than current methods. The researchers at CWR will
study the use of laser and infrared sealing of aseptic packages. These new
techniques permit faster, more localized, and more controlled heating than
conventional methods. The effects of sterilization on sealing quality will be
evaluated at CWR, while the effect of sealing on off flavor formation will be
studied at CAPPS. The short term benefits of this work are to speed production
and reduce cost of manufacturing of aseptic food packages. Long term benefits
include improved understanding of sealing and sterilization leading to
development of new processes and new specialty materials for aseptic food
production. The Program Manger recommends a grant in the amount of $49,972 for
two years.