* 8916413
* The Physiological Role of Atriopeptin in Fish Osmoregulation
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/1990,12/31/1993
* David Evans, University of Florida
* Continuing grant
* Sharon Emerson
* 12/31/1993
* USD 264,784.00

One of the most active areas of current research in endocrinology is the role
that a cardiac peptide hormone (atriopeptide) plays in the control of mammalian
body fluid volume and blood pressure, because of the obvious interest in the
control of hypertension. Recent studies in the principal investigator's
laboratory, and others, indicates that a similar hormone is produced in both the
atria and ventricles of the hearts of various fish groups, and may play a role
in the chronic volume and salt problems that these aquatic vertebrates face. The
research involves isolation, sequencing, and synthesizing the cardiac
atriopeptin from one species of teleost fish. This will enable development of
antibodies to the peptide to be used in determination of the concentration of
the hormone in the plasma of various fish species via radioimmunoassay, as well
as distribution of the hormone in the heart and brain via immunohistochemistry.
Radioactive hormone will be used to quantify the presence and binding kinetics
of receptors to atriopeptin in various tissues such as the gills, gut, and
kidney. Antibodies to the hormone will also be utilized to bind to, and thereby
inactivate, atriopeptin in the plasma, to investigate the role of the hormone in
volume and salt regulation. It is also planned to use cardiac tissue culture to
determine the role of various agents (other hormones and salt or volume changes)
in stimulation of the secretion of atriopeptin. The studies are intended to
provide information on the evolution of the structure and function of this newly
described cardiac peptide hormone.