* 8916614
* Cytoplasmic Rearrangements in Early Amphibian Development
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/1990,06/30/1993
* Michael Danilchik, Wesleyan University
* Continuing Grant
* Ralph Hecht
* 06/30/1993
* USD 255,000.00

The unfertilized frog egg is radially symmetric abut its primary, animal-
vegetal axis, but events after fertilization lead to completely different
developmental fates for various cytoplasmic regions. The earliest steps in this
regional specialization probably involve relocalization of components already
present in the egg. The aims of this project are to define the major cellular
mechanisms whereby such determinants might be localized in early Xenopus laevis
embryogenesis and evaluate the developmental importance of those localizations.
Two extensive rearrangements of the deep cytoplasm during early embryogenesis
will be examined. The first of these movements occurs during the first cell
cycle, and appears to result from the directed translocation of the vegetal yolk
mass- a complicated shift of ventral egg cytoplasm toward the prospective dorsal
side. the second movement is an extensive ingression of subcortical cytoplasm
along cleavage furrows during each early cell division. These rearrangements
will be followed in eggs in which yolk platelets in specific regions have been
fluorescently labelled, to produce a 3-dimensional picture of egg cytoplasmic
movements. The importance of these rearrangements for specification of the
embryonic body axis will be evaluated by comparing them in normal and
experimental embryos, the latter treated in a variety of ways to disrupt normal
cytoplasmic rearrangements. %%% How a radially symmetric egg develops into an
adult with a dorsal/ventral and anterior/posterior axis is a fundamental
question of developmental biology. These axes are set up very early in
development. This study is to examine some of those very early events that lead
to axis formation.