* 8916412
* Physiological Mechanisms of Calcium Regulation Using the    Molting Cycle of a Freshwater Crayfish as a Model System
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/1990,02/28/1995
* Michele Wheatly, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Sharon Emerson
* 02/28/1995
* USD 230,000.00

Calcium plays important physiological roles in living organisms. It is a major
component of biominerals. Extracellular levels are involved in excitation
secretion coupling and intracellular levels have recently been implicated as
messengers in coordinating cellular responses. This proposal intends to use the
molting cycle of the freshwater crayfish as a model system in which to study
mechanisms of Ca2+ regulation. Crustaceans are ideal for this since they
alternately undergo Ca2+ uptake (skeletal deposition) and Ca2+ output (skeletal
resorption). The associated mechanisms are highly refined in freshwater (ion
limited) species. The study will be completed at 7 experimental levels which are
(1) whole animal Ca2+ (and associated electrolyte--Na+, Cl-, HCO-3, H+) and
water distribution among body tissues; (2) branchial fluxes; (3) renal
postfiltrational processing; (4) the electrochemical basis of extracellular
regulation; (5) skeletal and soft tissue regulation; (6) epithelial transport
modeled on an isolated cuticular hypodermis and (7) subcellular distribution of
transport enzymes Ca2+ and Na+/K+ ATPases and carbonic anhydrase. Each of these
parameters will be studied in crayfish undergoing natural molts in artificial
tap water (controls) at 21 C. Completion of the project should significantly
advance our general understanding of the mechanisms and control of bidirectional
epithelial Ca2+ transport with specific reference to crustacean molting.