* 8916097
* U.S.-Japan Cooperative Research:  Laser-Surface Interactionsat High Excitation Density
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1990,03/31/1993
* Richard Haglund, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Turczak
* 03/31/1993
* USD 12,700.00

This award will support a two-year cooperative research project in physics
between Dr. Richard F. Haglund, Jr., Department of Physics and Astronomy,
Vanderbilt University, and Dr. Noriaki Itoh, Department of Physics, Nagoya
University, Japan. They will study laser-induced desorption (laser sputtering)
in semiconductors and insulators, and especially the effect of high electronic
excitation density on such desorption. The high density results from the
intensity of the laser light and the strong absorption of it that takes place in
the irradiated material, leading to a comparatively large concentration of
excited valence-band electrons. The scientists hope to obtain a clearer picture
of the ways in which the electronic energy delivered by laser photons to
dielectric and semiconductor surfaces is absorbed, transformed, and ultimately
dissipated through defect generation, bond-breaking, and desorption. The program
is designed to take advantage of unique facilities, experience, and interests in
the two laboratories: the initial studies will be carried out with visible and
ultraviolet lasers on well-characterized compound-semiconductor surfaces in
Japan; at Vanderbilt, alkali halides and alkaline-earth fluorides will be
studied using both time-resolved optical desorption and photoelectron
spectroscopies. Use of a free-electron laser due to become operational at
Vanderbilt in 1990 is also planned in these experiments. The interaction of
laser light with various materials has been a subject of great interest almost
from the invention of the laser, for both technological and scientific reasons.
The development of substrates and coatings for lasers inevitably involved such
studies, for example. At the present time the operative physical mechanisms in
many technological applications of laser-surface interactions, such as laser-
assisted thin-film deposition and laser microlithography, are not well
characterized. It is the aim of this collaborative research project to
contribute to a fundamental understanding of these interactions.