* 8916407
* RUI: The Primary Structure of Organic Matrix from CaCO3     Biomineral and some Mechanisms of Matrix/Crystal            Interactions
* BIO,MCB
* 04/15/1990,09/30/1992
* C. Steven Sikes, University of South Alabama
* Continuing Grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 09/30/1992
* USD 140,000.00

The acid matrix proteins from CaCO3 biominerals paradoxically may inhibit
crystallization on one hand, but may promote it on the other. Apparently the
soluble matrix proteins in solution can bind to crystals or crystal nuclei to
prevent their growth while the same proteins, immobilized on a substrate, can
induce nucleation or direct crystal growth. The proposed studies are directed at
evaluating several hypotheses for the purpose of calcifying some mechanisms of
matrix/crystal interactions. The hypotheses are: 1) the primary structures of
matrix proteins play a major role in determining their activity; 2) crystals
have different classes of binding sites for matrix molecules and peptides, many
corresponding to crystal growth sites, but others not related to crystal growth
at all; 3) the polyanionic regions of matrix molecules and peptide analogs of
matrix bind to and block development of crystal growth sites, and the
hydrophobic regions extend from the crystal surface, disrupting movement of
lattice ions there; 4) immobilized-matrix nucleators of crystallization function
best at a particular molecular size and composition of polyanionic region - the
presence of a hydrophobic domain may suppress nucleation activity; and 5) the
functional property of matrix molecules as regulators of crystallization is
their binding to crystal surfaces: soluble calcium binding per se by matrix is
not necessarily relevant to mechanisms of matrix- crystal interaction. These
hypotheses will be evaluated via several approaches, including automated Edman
degradations and fast-atom bombardment mass spectrometry for sequence analysis,
automated solid -phase peptide synthesis, atomic force microscopy for imaging
crystal surfaces, as well as a variety of crystallization assays. Evaluation of
the hypotheses is required for clarification of the mechanisms of matrix/crystal
interactions and will lead to a better understanding of biomineralization in
general.