* 8916301
* Response of the Cyanobacterium Anacystis Nidulans to        Nutrient Deprivation
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/1990,07/31/1994
* Arthur Grossman, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 07/31/1994
* USD 255,000.00

A number of cyanobacteria have been shown to respond to conditions of
macronutrient deprivation (phosphorus, sulfur and nitrogen) by degrading the
light harvesting phycobilisome complex, eliminating most of the photosynthetic
membranes and synthesizing proteins involved in nutrient acquisition and
assimilation. If nutrients are withheld for long periods of time the organism
can maintain viability by entering a quiescent or dormant phase. A detailed
molecular examination of the responses of the unicellular cyanobacterium
Anacystis nidulans, strain R2, to sulfur deprivation has been initiated. Many
genes that are activated when sulfur is eliminated from the growth medium have
been isolated and at least partially sequenced. Some of these genes encode
proteins involved in sulfate uptake (polypeptides of the four components sulfate
transport system) while others may be important for growth on sulfur-containing
compounds such as thiosulfate or glutathione. To help elucidate biochemical or
genetic changes that accompany the acclimation of Anacystis to sulfur stress,
proteins that accumulate and genes that are activated when sulfur is eliminated
from the growth medium are being characterized. Molecules involved in sensing
the sulfur status of the environment and elements required for gene regulation
will be established. Most organisms have the capacity to modulate specific
physiological processes to accomodate changes in their environment. This
research addresses the manner in which external information is perceived by
cells and the events involved in eliciting alterations in the physiological
state through changes in gene expression. Attention will be focused on the
response of a cyanobacterium to sulfur deprivation. The results of this work
will provide an increased understanding of the structural and functional
components required by the cells to withstand nutrient limiting conditions, the
interrelationship between photosynthetic carbon fixation and the sulfur status
of the cell, and the mechanism by which photosynthetic organisms sense and
respond to their environment.