* 8916491
* U.S.-Japan Joint Seminar: The El Nino-Southern Oscillation  Phenomenon/September 1990/Seattle, WA
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/1990,10/31/1991
* John Wallace, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Turczak
* 10/31/1991
* USD 13,326.00

This award will support the participation of ten U.S. scientists in a U.S.-Japan
joint seminar concerning the El Nino-Southern Oscillation (ENSO) Phenomenon, a
combined atmospheric and oceanic phenomenon which occurs in the tropical Pacific
region. ENSO has major societal impacts through its effects upon fisheries in
the region, upon monsoon rainfall over many countries, and through its influence
upon the year-to-year variability of temperature and precipitation over
temperate latitudes of the Pacific basin, including areas of the U.S. and Japan.
The phenomena associated with ENSO are also of great interest from the
standpoint of long-range prediction of mid-latitude climate. Progress in
observing, understanding, and predicting these phenomena has been particularly
rapid in recent years in the United States and Japan, and it is thus an
appropriate time for scientists from those countries to hold a seminar to
discuss recent progress and future directions in observation, theory, and
modeling. The meeting will be held in Seattle, Washington, September 10-14,
1990, under the auspices of the U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science Program. The co-
organizers of the seminar are Professors Edward Sarachik and John M. Wallace of
the Joint Institute for the Study of the Atmosphere and Ocean, University of
Washington; and Professor Taroh Matsuno of the Geophysical Institute, University
of Tokyo, Japan. An earlier workshop on ENSO, convened in Tokyo in 1987, led to
considerable sharing of research results between U.S. and Japanese scientists
working in this field, as well as to later collaborative projects and research
visits. This present seminar is expected to be even more effective in providing
an opportunity for information exchange and in stimulating interactions between
two research communities actively studying the ENSO Phenomenon.