* 8916979
* Analyses of the Blackpatch Locus in Drosophila
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/1990,06/30/1992
* Jack Girton, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Platt
* 06/30/1992
* USD 89,042.00

The investigators have discovered a new locus in Drosophila named Blackpatch,
Bpt, whose mutation disrupts development of the adult brain and eye. Individuals
expressing a Bpt mutation have a variety of defects in adult brain and eye
development, including: degenerating black spots in the eye, partial or complete
absence of the adult brain, and adult paralysis and premature death. However,
Bpt mutations only produce these effects in individuals expressing a facet
mutant phenotype (facet is an adult phenotype of certain mutant alleles at the
Notch locus). In non-facet individuals, Bpt mutations produce no detectable
phenotypic effects. These preliminary results suggest Bpt functions in the
development of the adult nervous system and that it interacts with, or acts on,
Notch. The role of Notch in embryonic nervous development has been well
documented, making it important that its role in adult development also be
defined. A key part of such a definition will be identifying the role of genes
like Bpt that interact with Notch during specific stages of development. The
goals of the experiments are: to define the phenotype effects of Bpt mutations,
to analyze the genetics and developmental genetics of the Bpt, to investigate
the interaction of Bpt mutations with other mutations that affect eye and/or
nerve development, and to generate genetic material for the isolation and
cloning of the Bpt locus.