* 8916431
* Single Crystal 40Ar/39Ar Age Calibration of the Non-Marine Fossil-Bearing Late Cretaceous-Tertiary of Western North America
* NONE,NONE
* 02/15/1990,07/31/1992
* Garniss Curtis, Institute of Human Origins
* Continuing grant
* John A. Maccini
* 07/31/1992
* USD 104,999.00

Two years of funding supports an ongoing interdisciplinary program to calibrate
North American non-marine fossil-bearing sedimentary rocks and associated
magnetostratigraphies through extensive application of high precision SCLF
(Single Crystal Laser Fusion) 40Ar/39Ar and conventional 40K-40Ar dating. PIs
will collect,k prepare and date volcanic rocks associated with
magnetostratigraphies developed or currently being developed on non-marine
strata of Lancian-Puercan (Cretaceous-Tertiary), Clarkforkian (L. Paleocene-E.
Eocene), and Chadronian through Hemjingfordian (L. Eocene-Oligocene-E. Miocene)
ages. The results obtained over the past year and the projected results of this
study will provide precise and accurate calibration points for the numerical age
calibration of North American fossil faunas, floras and associated
lmagnetostratigraphies. The high resolution ages will serve as a basis for 1)
the calibration North American Land Mammal "Ages" and their subdivisions, 2) the
correlation of NALMAs to standard European stage/ages, 3) the calibration of the
MPTS (Magnetic Polarity Time Scale), 4) an independent chronology for
determining rates of morphologic evolution in fossil vertebrates and plants and
5) the interpretation of the temporal histories of sedimentary basins of western
North America, including sedimentation, subsidence and uplift rates.