* 8916467
* Molecular Evolution of Phosphate
* GEO,EAR
* 01/15/1990,06/30/1993
* Gustaf Arrhenius, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 06/30/1993
* USD 231,561.00

The question of the prebiotic source of pyrophosphate will be pursued along two
lines. One is the possibility of continuous formation in nature by condensation
under high temperature acidic hydrothermal conditions and subsequent
concentration in reactive minerals. The other involves the action of
condensation agents, such as cyanide derivatives in an environment where such
agents may be concentrated together with orthophosphate ion. Since the source
components of RNA; cyanide, phosphate and carbonate (as a precursor of
aldehydes) are all anionic, minerals with anion exchange capacity are our prime
choice for study as potential concentrators and hosts for these components, and
as catalysts for their further reaction. Possible and likely paths for prebiotic
phosphorylation of sugar precursor molecules require condensed phosphates as
driving agents, and, as substrates, the simplest possible achiral ester forming
hydroxyl compounds, such as condensation products of formaldehyde, the latter
known to form by photochemical and plasma processes. Also in this branch of the
investigation, the selective concentrating power and the catalytic aid of anion
sorbing transition metal hydroxide minerals will be explore. The third part of
the study connects to current research on non-enzymatic oligomerization of RNA
by exploring the concentration, ordering, and catalytic reaction of evolved
nucleotides such as AMP and nucleotide phosphates (ADP, ATP) in the anion
exchanging pyroaurite minerals. This project is a part of a larger program, that
aims at demonstrating environmentally plausible processes leading from simple
organic and inorganic molecules in highly dilute aqueous solution via selective
concentration, ordering and reaction on mineral substrates, to the formation of
molecular complexes of prebiotic interest. The present proposal is concerned
with the now unknown processes of original formation, concentration and
esterification of condensed phosphate (diphosphate, pyrophosphate).