* 8916048
* REU:  Geologic Evolution of the Robertson River Suite:      Implications for the Timing, Petrogenesis, and Thermal      History of the Late Proterozoic Rifting of Laurentia
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/1990,12/31/1991
* Richard Tollo, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 12/31/1991
* USD 39,669.00

The Robertson River Suite (RRS, a.k.a. Robertson River Formation) encompasses a
series of metaluminous to peralkaline granitoids and felsites exposed within the
core of the Blue Ridge anticlinorium (BRA) in northern and central Virginia.
Broad- scale reconnaissance mapping by previous workers has established that the
RRS is intrusive into Grenville age (1.0-1.1 G.a.) gneisses and is intruded by
numerous greenstone dikes, some of which may have served as feeders to the
Catoctin metavolcanics of the BRA cover sequence. The age of the RRS is thus
only broadly constrained by field evidence as younger than Grenvillian
metamorphism and older than at least most of the late Precambrian Catoctin
Formation. Previous attempts using radiometric techniques to determine a more
exact timing for emplacement of the suite have produced mutually contradictory
data spanning the range 730 to 570 M.a. Much of the reason for these
inconsistent data lies in the fact that these studies have either 1) assumed the
formation to be homogeneous, and thus accurately characterized by multiple
samples collected from throughout the outcrop belt, or 2) acknowledged the
apparent heterogeneity of the suite and nevertheless attempted to extrapolate
data from one location to the entire body. Neither approach is appropriate,
however, in light of new evidence from more detailed field, petrologic, and
geochemical studies recently completed in the northern portion of the suite by
this research group. These data demonstrate that the RRS encompasses a series of
distinct plutons that records an obviously complex petrogenetic history spanning
a time interval which may have been considerable. This study proposes to build
on this work by 1) completing 1:24,000-scale mapping of the southern portion of
the suite, 2) using petrologic and geochemical data to define the nature of the
constituent plutons, and 3) obtaining precise and accurate isotopic data bearing
on the timing and duration of RRS emplacement. Furthermore, the petrochemical
and isotopic data to be obtained in this study will be applied to refine models
for the petrogenetic evolution of this compositionally distinctive suite and the
isotopic characteristics of probable source regions. In summary, the results of
this stud will 1) provide a firm foundation for appropriate petrogenetic models
concerning emplacement of this anorogenic suite, 2) place important constraints
on the maximum age of prelapetan rifting, 3) establish a database on which to
evaluate the relationship of this plutonism to the voluminous felsic lavas
included within the Catoctin Formation and felsic intrusives of similar (?) age
and composition occurring elsewhere in the central Appalachians, 4) define
specific isotopic characteristics of the source areas of magma generation, and
5) lead to the development of geologically reasonable models concerning the
petrogenetic evolution of such compositionally unique anorogenic suites.