* 8916077
* The Mechanism of Glucose-Induced Inactivation of Maltose    Permease in Saccharomyces
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/1990,07/31/1993
* Corinne Michels, CUNY Queens College
* Standard Grant
* Robert Uffen
* 07/31/1993
* USD 170,000.00

Maltose fermentation in Saccharomyces is initiated by its active transport into
the cell by maltose permease. The level of activity of maltose permease is under
dual regulation. Firstly, transcription of the gene encoding maltose permease is
maltose-induced and glucose-repressed. Secondly, maltose permease is glucose-
inactivated, that is, the ability to transport maltose is rapidly lost following
the addition of glucose to an induced culture. This research will determine the
mechanism of glucose-induced inactivation of maltose permease. The MAL61 gene
which encodes maltose permease at the MAL6 locus has been sequenced. Antibody to
maltose permease will be isolated and used to follow the fate of the maltose
permease protein during glucose-induced inactivation. Antibody will be raised to
fusion products or to peptides. The kinetics of maltose transport and of
glucose-induced inactivation of maltose permease will be determined in
genetically defined strains. The possibility that maltose permease is modified,
selectively removed from the plasma membrane or proteolytically degraded during
the inactivation process will be explored. Also, glucose inactivation resistant
mutations in MAL61 using in vitro mutagenesis techniques will be isolated. In
the regulation of cellular growth and metabolism, cells are often responding to
changes in the extra-cellular environment and this response is mediated by
integral membrane proteins. Glucose-induced inactivation of maltose permease is
an example of such a regulatory system. The cell is responding to changes in the
extra-cellular levels of glucose but the "glucose receptor" remains undefined
and the intracellular response is poorly understood. This research will provide
insight into these processes. It will also provide an opportunity to study
protein turnover and subcellular localization as mechanisms of regulation. These
regulatory mechanisms are important and poorly understood processes involved in
memory, aging and differentiation.