* 8916273
* Reconstruction of Prehistoric Diet Based on Stable Isotope Ratios of Bone and Organic Residues from Pot Sherds
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1989,06/30/1992
* Michael DeNiro, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing grant
* name not available
* 06/30/1992
* USD 98,713.00

This research project permits Dr. DeNiro and his colleagues to continue their
investigation into the extent to which diet can be reconstructed through
analysis of skeletal remains. Research by Dr. DeNiro and others has shown the
feasibility of this approach. For example, ratios of C12/C13 vary in different
species of plants, and evidence indicated that such variation is reflected in
the carbon ratio of skeletal material. In addition to carbon, nitrogen, sulfur
and strontium may also provide dietary clues. Dr. DeNiro and his colleagues will
study the distribution of isotopes among different food types and see how,
through controlled diet, this is reflected in bone composition. Since bones
recovered by archaeologists have usually lain in the ground for long periods of
time and undergone some diagenesis, (post mortem alteration), Dr. DeNiro will
also study the effects of such processes on bone isotope ratios. He will also
study the bone and organic residues on pot sherds to reconstruct aspects of
prehistoric diet in coastal and highland Peru, the Bahamas, California and East
Africa. Reconstruction of prehistoric diet is important to anthropologists
because it permits them to understand how different groups subsisted and
utilized their environment. It also permits them to examine the relationships
among diet, population growth and disease.