* 8916094
* Carotenoid Pigments in Microzooplankton:  Characterization  and Relation to Biomass
* GEO,OCE
* 11/01/1989,04/30/1992
* Evelyn Lessard, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 04/30/1992
* USD 41,416.00

Over the past decade it has become clear that microzooplankton are important
contributors to pelagic food chain processes. Estimating microzooplanktonic
biomass is one major difficulty that can possibly be resolved by use of pigment
analogs. The carotenoid pigments are easily isolated from microzooplankton by
high performance liquid chromatography. Using a wide variety of cultured animals
and various culture conditions, the study will address the correlation between
tissue carotenoid content and microzooplankton biomass and identify principal
sources of variance in the relationship. The study will not only evaluate the
usefulness of these pigments as biomass estimators, but will indicate new areas
of investigation of pigment biochemistry in pelagic ecology. Fast and in situ
measures of food chain interactions are part of the foundation for future long
term, untended observations of biological processes in the sea. New techniques
with field applicability are necessary for the advancement of biological
oceanography, and this study will assess a new method and its sources of error
in detail. %%% Close examination of the food chain dynamics of the sea in recent
years has shown that much predatory activity and transfer of material involves
small organisms not captured by ordinary plankton nets. The organisms are
numerous and small making it difficult to establish their quantitative
significance in a fast, repeatable way. Since they contain carotenoid pigments
which can be extracted and analyzed quickly, the pigment content may be a useful
indicator of animal biomass. This possibility will be tested on a variety of
organisms grown in the laboratory and collected from the sea.