* 8916378
* Investigation of High Pressure Faulting Associated with the Olivine Spinel Transition
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/1990,01/31/1992
* Christopher Scholz, Columbia University Lamont Doherty Earth Observatory
* Continuing grant
* Michael A. Mayhew
* 01/31/1992
* USD 82,713.00

The underlying failure mechanism responsible for deep-focus earthquakes has
remained unknown since their discovery almost 70 years ago. High pressure
faulting was discovered in specimens of Mg2GeO4 olivine deformed in the spinel
stability field under conditions where the kinetics of the transformation become
just possible on the time-scale of the experiment. Very fine-grained spinel is
found in the fault zones. The PIs pose four major questions: (i) Are
microanticracks unstable? (ii) What is the process by which mode -I anticrack
link-up leading to through- going faults? (iii) Which transformation mechanism
operates at the tips of anticracks? (iv) Does the anticrack mechanism operate in
the x - B transformation? They will answer question (i) by instrumenting the
high pressure apparatus and determining quantitatively the abundance, magnitude,
time-dependence and wave form of acoustic emissions before and during failure.
Questions (ii) and (iii) will be pursued by electron channeling scanning
electron microscopy and transmission electron microscopy to determine the size,
shape, orientation and spatial distribution of microanticracks and the grain-
size and crystallographic orientation of spinel crystals within them with
respect to the host olivine crystals. Question (iv) will be investigated by
conducting deformation experiments on Mn2Geo4 olivine within the B stability
field in HWG's unique 5GPa deformation apparatus.