* 8916353
* Reproductive Strategies of South Polar Skuas:  The role of  food in chick survival and sibling aggression
* O/D,OPP
* 06/15/1990,11/30/1992
* Gary Miller, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 11/30/1992
* USD 125,551.00

Until the development of the ideas of inclusive fitness and parent- offspring
conflict among avian populations, infanticide has been viewed inimical to the
theory of natural selection. Several hypotheses about the circumstances by which
siblicide, cannibalism, and adoption of foreign chicks should occur have been
suggested recently and studies on the reproductive strategies of birds commonly
consider the trade-offs facing parents that are trying to raise chicks. The
purpose of the proposed research will be to test hypotheses concerning the role
of food availability and parental feeding as a cause of sibling aggression
leading to siblicide and nestling starvation in the South Polar Skua, Catharacta
maccormicki, on Ross Island, Antarctica. The South Polar Skua represents one of
the few examples where sibling aggression is mediated by hunger. The Food Amount
Hypothesis predicts less aggression between chicks in provisioned nest (food
supplement), resulting in fewer cases of siblicide, higher growth rates, and
increased reproductive success. The causes and timing of egg and chick mortality
will also be determined and how skuas adjust their reproductive strategies from
one year to the next. The proposed research will be devoted to developing a
quantitative description (mechanism) of siblicide or the importance of siblicide
to the reproductive success of the South Polar Skua.