* 8916690
* Stratigraphic and Structural Evolution of the Northwestern  Himalayan Foreland Basin, 12MaBP to Present
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/1990,07/31/1992
* Douglas Burbank, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 07/31/1992
* USD 100,000.00

During our present NSF-supported research, we have documented a very large
fluvial system (probably the ancestral Indus River) that flowed ESE across the
Potwar Plateau of northern Pakistan from 12 Ma to at least 6 Ma. Isochronous
strata from this time interval thicken and coarsen dramatically toward the
northwest and suggest that the Indus previously entered the Northwest Himalayan
foreland across the Kohat Plateau. Whether the Indus flowed toward the ESE from
here during the late Miocene or whether this was actually the apex of a large
mega-fan (as has been postulated) is presently unknown. Similarly, whether or
not the large-scale lithofacies changes seen in the Siwalik molasse of the
Potwar Plateau represent responses to switching of the primary course of the
Indus rather than major tectonic events in the Himalayan hinterland is also
unresolved. Answers to these questions are critical keys to understanding the
long-term evolution of this major depositional system in an active foreland. In
the absence of additional time control and of more extensive stratigraphic data
from the Kohat Plateau, however, these problems cannot be resolved. We propose
to develop seven new magnetic stratigraphies in judiciously selected location.
On this supplementary chronologic database and that derived from Khan's (1983)
previous studies, we will integrate sedimentologic observations that will enable
us to reconstruct the fluvial system of the southern Kohat Plateau and Trans-
Indus region in order to resolve these problems. In addition, by extending the
same isochronous surfaces that we have studied in the Potwar region, we will be
able to synthesize these two complimentary data sets and examine virtually the
entire western segment of the Indo-Gangetic foreland across northern Pakistan
for the past 12 Ma within the most precise and geographically extensive time
framework available for a terrestrial sedimentary basin.