* 8916358
* Regulation and Mechanisms of Initiation of DNA Replication  in Yeast
* BIO,MCB
* 01/15/1990,06/30/1993
* Shlomo Eisenberg, University of Connecticut Health Center
* Continuing Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 06/30/1993
* USD 308,000.00

Replication of eucaryotic genomic DNA in a normal cell is cell cycle regulated.
Chromosomes are replicated only once in the S- phase. This important regulation
system is not understood. To understand this process it will be necessary to
elucidate the mechanism of initiation of DNA replication at a single replicon.
Thus our long term goals are: (i) to understand the biochemical processes that
govern the initiation of DNA replication at a eucaryotic chromosomal origin;
(ii) to understand how initiation of DNA replication at this origin is regulated
on the biochemical and genetic level. To achieve these goals, it will be
necessary to identify, isolate and characterize both the proteins and genes
involved in initiation. Recently we defined a new origin of replication, ARS121,
which we found to be comprised of at least two major domains important for the
origin function (61). Our working hypothesis is that one of these domains is a
replication regulatory domain (RRD) whereas the other is a replication essential
domain (RED). We found that RRD is a target for binding of OBFl, which was
identified, isolated and partially characterized in our laboratory (60,61).
Based on our studies, we propose that RRD has a role in determining if and when
RED wll be activated for initiation of DNA replication. We propose that this
regulation is accomplished by the DNA binding proteins that recognize
specifically DNA elements present in RRD. In this context, our short range
specific aims are: I, to isolate, and overexpress the gene encoding OBF1; from
yeast genomic libraries in ll; II to characterize the biochemical properties of
OBF1; III to isolate and characterize additional origin-binding proteins; IV, to
isolate and overexpress the genes encoding these proteins from yeast genomic
libraries in ll; V, to test our basic hypothesis described above a direct
examination of the activation of ARS121 in vivo; VI, to isolate and characterize
new origins of replication. This project should provide new insights into the
regulation of initiation of replication at a eucaryotic origin of replication
and will provide the tools necessary for reconstructing in the future a protein-
DNA complex at the origin for the studies of the mechanism of initiation of DNA
replication in vitro.