* 8916898
* Identification of the Mouse Sperm Protein Responsible for   Sperm-Egg Recognition
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/1990,04/01/1990
* Jeffrey Bleil, Medical Biology Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Klein
* 04/01/1990
* USD 0.00

The primary interest of Dr. Bleil's laboratory is analysis of mammalian
fertilization at the molecular level, combining techniques of biochemistry and
molecular genetics. Studies proposed here are designed to determine which of two
identified mouse sperm proteins functions as the ZP3 recognition protein: i.e.,
the sperm protein responsible for primary binding of mouse sperm to the zone
pellucida. In preliminary studies, a mouse sperm "56K doublet" protein having
properties expected of the ZP3 recognition protein has been identified on the
basis of affinity chromatography and crosslinking studies. This protein will be
further characterized biochemically. It has been proposed by others that a sperm
galactose-binding protein related to asialoglycoprotein receptor functions as
the mouse sperm protein which recognizes ZP3. Studies described here are
designed to determine whether this rat protein is related to the mouse sperm
56kD protein and, independently, whether an asialoglycoprotein receptor-related
protein of mouse sperm has properties expected for the ZP3 recognition protein.
The long term objectives of the proposed study are 1) to identify and
characterize mammalian sperm proteins (fertilization proteins") which mediate
interaction between sperm and egg at the level of the zona pellucida and 2) to
determine, at the molecular level, how sperm "fertilization proteins" interact
with their counterparts in the zone pellucida. %%% This work proposes to
identify those molecules on sperm that are responsible for recognition of
receptors on the egg surface that enable fertilization to take place. %%%