* 8916509
* Regulation of Calcium Transport in Barley Aleurone Cells
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/1990,06/30/1994
* Russell Jones, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Maryanna P. Henkart
* 06/30/1994
* USD 402,791.00

The goals of the proposed research are to achieve an understanding of calcium
homeostasis in the barley aleurone cell. Prior work from this laboratory on the
synthesis of the calcium- containing metalloenzyme, alpha-amylase, has
established that the cytoplasmic calcium concentration is maintained within
narrow limits while a constant flux of calcum occurs through the cytoplasm.
Experiments are proposed to determine the source of the calcium that assures
cytoplasmic calcium homeostasis. Patch clamp techniques will be used to identify
the channels in the plasm membrane and tonoplast of the aleurone cell that
regulate the flux of ions into the cytoplasm. The experimental approach relies
on the ability to isolate functional protoplasts from the aleurone layer and to
use these protoplasts as a source of intact vacuoles. The activties of channels
in the plasma membrane of aleurone protoplasts and in vacuoles isolated from
protoplasts have already been measured in this laboratory; thus, this approach
should succeed. During seed germination metabolites stored in the vacuoles of
storage organs such as aleurone layers are mobilized for use by the growing
plant embryo. Although these stored reserves are crucial, little is known about
how these materials are mobilized. It is thought that giberellic acid is
involved, but the mechanism by which it acts is not known. This laboratory has
shown that mobilization of calcium is of central importance to the giberellic
acid-induced synthesis of alpha-amylase, an enzyme important in mobilizing
storage products in the aleurone cell. This project is directed toward
understanding how calcium is regulated in barley aleurone cells. The results
should elucidate an important step in the regulation of metabolite mobilization
during seed germination.