* 8916172
* Aerosol Investigations by Thermal Deconvolution and by      Quartz Mass Water Uptake
* GEO,AGS
* 04/15/1990,03/31/1993
* Glenn Shaw, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Jarvis L. Moyers
* 03/31/1993
* USD 162,900.00

The application of two new experimental methods (TDEX and QMEX) to answer
questions relating to hygroscopicity, composition and the state of mixing for
atmospheric aerosols will be investigated. The thermal deconvolution experiment
(TDEX) is designed to provide a measure of the two dimensional probability of
occurrence surface over the plane having coordinates "aerosol size" and "aerosol
volatility." In this way one can gain insight into the molecular composition of
aerosol samples broken down by size class; it is also possible with TDEX to
derive information on the state of mixing of aerosols and to infer the presence
of surfactant films on aerosol cores. The Quartz Mass Water Uptake Experiment
(QMEX) yields information on the hygroscopicity of aerosols in different size
classifications. Here, aerosols are size-sorted by impaction onto vibrating
quartz crystals (Quartz Crystal Microbalance). By determining the alteration in
resonant frequency as a function of relative humidity, one can measure Hnels
exponential mass increase coefficient. These size-specific hygrograms represent
important information on the physical chemistry of the aerosols and have
application in cloud physics and atmospheric radiative transfer. The project
will attempt to answer questions about the physical chemistry of aerosols in air
mass types specifically chosen to provide examples of natural aerosol processes
in the free atmosphere. Of particular interest are aerosol debris that has been
cycled through nonprecipitating marine clouds, well-aged (e.g. 10-20d)
industrial aerosols imported as Arctic haze to Alaska, smoke from wildfires in
the Siberian a Canadian taiga, and aerosols in air masses enriched in terpenes.