* 8916600
* Regional Stratigraphy and Sedimentology of Phosphatic Event Beds and Associated Strata in the San Gregorio Formation    (Upper Oligocene-Lower Miocene), Baja California Sur, Mexico
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/1990,03/31/1993
* Robert Garrison, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 03/31/1993
* USD 75,000.00

PI's will integrate stratigraphic, sedimentologic and petrologic approaches in
an investigation of the phosphate-rich San Gregorio Formation (Upper Oligocene-
Lower Miocene), a widespread and economically-important unit in Baja California
Sur, Mexico. Working collaboratively with Mexican investigators, we aim to
clarify the roles of paleogeography and event deposition in the origin of
phosphorites and associated strata. Initial field observations indicate that the
San Gregorio Formation is event stratified. Our findings suggest that
transportation of many phosphatic sediments was genetically- linked to explosive
volcanic episodes; furthermore, deposition of phosphatic event strata was
exclusively associated with short- duration intervals of infaunal bioturbation.
Phosphatic grain types vary widely, but are consistently unimodal within
individual beds; we wish to understand the systematic stratigraphic and regional
variability in phosphatic grain type and to decipher what these variations
signify about the evolution of source areas for allochthonous phosphorites.
Petrologic studies of phosphatic grains, including the employment of backscatter
SEM on polished thin sections, will permit correlations between observed trends
in phosphatic grain type and regional sedimentary paleogeography within the San
Gregorio Formation and will further document the association of microbes and
other biota in the origin of phosphatic grains.