* 8916006
* Social Organization of Foraging by Honey Bees
* NONE,NONE
* 05/15/1990,04/30/1993
* Thomas Seeley, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Fred Stollnitz
* 04/30/1993
* USD 88,664.00

This research project will strengthen our understanding of how the members of a
honey-bee colony work together to efficiently gather their food. The flowers
that provide the nectar and pollen generally occur in patches, and the different
flower patches vary in their profitability to the bees depending on such factors
as distance from the hive, abundance of nectar or pollen, sugar concentration of
the nectar, and so forth. If the colony is to gather its food efficiently, it
must solve the problem of allocating its foragers among the different flower
patches in accordance with their different degrees of profitability. Dr.
Seeley's prior work has shown that the colony's decision- making is highly
decentralized. Indeed, it seems that it is distributed among all of the foragers
in the colony rather than in some supervisory subset of the colony. The present
investigations will elucidate several still-unknown aspects of this group
decision-making process, such as exactly how the recruitment to different food
sources is regulated in relation to the profitability of each food source. This
research will also examine more deeply how a colony adjusts its choosiness among
nectar sources in relation to its nutritional status. Dr. Seeley will
investigate how a colony keeps the ratio of forager bees and food-storer bees in
balance so that the difficulty of finding a food-storer bee serves as a reliable
indicator of the colony's nutritional status. The general significance of this
research has several dimensions. First, for basic biology, it provides a unique
view of the high level of functional organization that has evolved in animal
societies, and it reveals some of the elegant devices produced by natural
selection that enable these societies to function as coherent units. Second, it
shows how natural selection has built animal groups capable of performing
distributed information- processing to solve problems. Hence it is demonstrating
that animal societies, not just the nervous systems of organisms, offer lessons
in how to build intelligence. And third, it has practical implications in that
it greatly strengthens our understanding of how honey-bee colonies in
agricultural settings choose to accept or reject a given crop as a food source
and hence function well or poorly in pollination.