* 8916143
* LTER: Experimental Isolation of Direct and Indirect         Mechanisms in the Trophic Cascade from Fish to Phytoplankton
* BIO,DEB
* 02/15/1990,01/31/1994
* Michael Vanni, Miami University
* Continuing Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 01/31/1994
* USD 252,482.00

Predators can have strong impacts on ecological communities, but causality is
often difficult to infer because of the myriad direct and indirect species
interactions between predators and prey. One of the most widely demonstrated
predator effects is the "trophic cascade" in lake ecosystems. Planktivorous fish
can reduce the abundance and size of zooplankton, and this results in an
increase in phytoplankton abundance. This cascade usually consists of several
direct and indirect species interactions, although the importance of specific
mechanisms in causing the phytoplankton response is not clear. Possible
mechanisms include: 1) reduction of zooplankton grazing rates, 2) increase in
release of nutrients by zooplankton, and 3) release of nutrients by fish.
Preliminary experiments and calculations suggest that the latter mechanism may
be more important than previously believed. This research proposes to
experimentally address these mechanisms using a series of nested, hierarchical
experiments to be conducted in lakes which are sites of whole- lake predator
manipulations. By complementing whole-lake perturbations with mechanistic
experiments, a clearer understanding of aquatic food webs will emerge. Resultant
information will contribute to limnological theory and will be directly
applicable to the knowledge base useful in lake management.