* 8916946
* Time-Domain Electron Spin Resonance Studies of Spin-        Labelled Synthetic Peptides
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/1990,03/31/1994
* Glenn Millhauser, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Arthur Kowalsky
* 03/31/1994
* USD 231,000.00

The structure and dynamics of complex biopolymers in solution are subjects of
considerable debate. Some researchers believe that proteins exhibit large
structural fluctuations and that these fluctuations influence both the protein's
structure and its reactivity whereas others suggest that a static picture of
protein structure is more relevant for the prediction of biological function.
Still others suggest that spin glass theories provide the correct potential
energy description with the potential energy surface exhibiting ultrametric
properties (i.e., a hierarchy of energy minima within energy minima) whereas
others believe the ultrametricity is not the correct description. This project
will study biophysical systems in an attempt to resolve these questions. It has
recently been shown that synthetic peptides provide excellent models for the
structure, dynamics and folding of proteins. In time-domain or pulsed electron
spin resonance (ESR), now emerging as a leading technology for studying dynamics
and relaxation process in biological systems, the temporal range which can be
studied covers the majority of protein internal motions. In this project, time
domain ESR studies will be carried out on a series of spin-labelled peptides. A
theory for spin relaxation has been developed for alpha-helical peptides which
predicts that the spin-spin decay will follow a power law profile when the
peptide is in the region of the alpha-helix-random coil transition. Conformation
of this prediction will be a major step toward resolving the origin of power law
relaxation processes in proteins.