* 8916620
* Molecular Genetics of Differentiation in Drosophila
* NONE,NONE
* 02/01/1990,01/31/1995
* Kenneth Burtis, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 01/31/1995
* USD 278,750.00

Sex determination in Drosophila is controlled by a regulatory hierarchy that has
been well characterized at both the genetic and molecular levels. However, as
with other regulatory gene networks that participate in the control of
Drosophila development, very little is known about either the identify of the
genes actually involved in the terminal steps of differentiation (sometimes
referred to as the "downstream genes") or about how these terminal genes are
controlled by the regulatory genes immediately above them in the hierarchy. The
objectives of the work set forth in this proposal are to identify as many as
possible of the downstream genes responsible for the differentiation of sexually
dimorphic adult tissues in Drosophila, and to investigate the molecular
mechanisms by which doublesex, the bottom regulatory gene in the somatic sex
determination hierarchy, controls the expression of these downstream genes. We
will approach these objectives in two ways; by isolating genes specifically
expressed in the male and female genital discs, using sensitive novel cDNA
subtractive hybridization protocols, and by studying the interaction of the
doublesex proteins with yolk protein genes as a model system for the control of
downstream gene expression; thus yielding new insights into molecular mechanisms
controlling differentiation. It has been known since the 1920s that the
determination of sex in the fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster is controlled by
the ratio of the number of X chromosomes to the number of sets of autosomes in
an individual. When this ratio is 0.5 (as in an XY individual), the individual
is male; when the ratio is 1.0 (as in an XX individual) the individual is
female. It has not been until the last decade that the genetic pathway and some
of the molecular details of this sex determination mechanism have been worked
out. It is now clear that the process of choice whether to develop as a male or
as a female is under the control of a small number of genes which interact with
one another in a complex fashion. The author of this proposal has made previous
contributions to our understanding of these interactions. As yet we know very
little about how the choice of sexual pathway is implemented. This is a proposal
to investigate this unexplored area.