* 8916134
* Continued Investigation of the Extraoridnary Katabatic Windsat Terra Nova Bay
* O/D,OPP
* 06/01/1990,01/31/1993
* David Bromwich, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* Bernhard Lettau
* 01/31/1993
* USD 132,072.00

This project is a continuation of a successful investigation into the antarctic
surface and boundary layer wind field, with specific emphasis on the extremely
strong down-slope katabatic winds in the vicinity of Terra Nova Bay. The outward
flowing surface air is an integral part of the meridional circulation, together
with inflow and convergence aloft, and generally sinking motion over the
continent. The pattern of katabatic winds over the sloping ice sheet is highly
irregular, with air converging into several narrow coastal regions to produce
locally what are recognized as the strongest and most persistent surface winds
in the world. Known examples are at Cape Denison and Port Martin in Adelie Land
(facing Australia), and in Terra Nova Bay on the western coast of the Ross Sea.
Specific tasks to be undertaken as part of this project are to complete the
kinematic, dynamic, and climatological analysis of specific katabatic events, to
integrate high resolution satellite imagery into specific case studies, and to
carry out extensive numerical modeling at various spatial scales. An existing
array of automatic weather stations has provided the primary data set for this
study; it is being extended by the satellite imagery which will be used to
investigate the offshore propagation of the katabatic air stream. The modeling
effort is being extended to continent-wide simulations using a grid spacing of
40 kilometers in order to explore the climatic impacts of the coastal confluence
zone dynamics.