* 8916013
* Research Oriented Workshops on Condensed Matter Physics     at ICCMP-Brasilia, Brazil, September, 1990
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/1990,01/31/1992
* Gerald Mahan, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 01/31/1992
* USD 15,000.00

This award supports an international workshop on condensed matter physics to be
held in Brasilia, the capital of Brazil, during September 1990. The U.S.
organizer is Gerald D. Mahan of the University of Tennessee at Knoxville. His
counterpart is Alvaro Ferraz at the International Center for Condensed Matter
Physics (ICCMP) located at the University of Brasilia. This is one of a series
of workshops on current topics held regularly in Brasilia. These include theory
of solids, statistical physics, electron transport, computational methods and
spectroscopy of solids and surfaces. The workshop will be held in the new
building of ICCMP which houses a library, computer, auditorium and seminar rooms
as well as offices. There is a large physics collection including important
international journals. Brazilian physicists are now acquiring large computers.
For this reason it is timely to hold the workshop on numerical methods. This
will cover calculations of band structure, molecular dynamics and Monte Carlo
methods. Following this one there will be a final workshop in December on
spectrograpphic methods for solids and surfaces. These workshops draw attendance
from throughout South America offering maximum opportunity for interaction with
each other and with U.S. scientists.