* 8916669
* Industry/University Cooperative Research Center for         Ultra-High Speed Integrated Circuits and Systems (ICAS)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/1989,08/31/1996
* Walter Ku, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* alexander schwarzkopf
* 08/31/1996
* USD 1,887,046.00

The area of Application and/or Algorithm-Specific Integrated Circuits (ASIC),
or semi-custom chips, is currently the fastest growing segment of the
semiconductor industry in the world. However, the U.S. lead is fast eroding and
may have already been surpassed by foreign competition. One method of addressing
this problem is the establishment of an Industry/University Cooperative Research
Center (I/UCRC) on Ultra-High Speed Integrated Circuits and Systems (ICAS) whose
focus is the design, implementation, and performance evaluation of ASIC for
communications and signal processing systems. A planning grant, NSF CDR-8820908,
has shown that such a center is both feasible and viable. This award initiates
an I/UCRC on Ultra High Speed ICAS at the University of California, San Diego
(UCSD) in collaboration with San Diego State University (SDSU). The initial
research will provide a unified and coordinated effort in (1) advancing the
state-of-the-art in submicron microelectronics, (2) generating novel algorithms
and architectures to exploit ultra- fast submicron technology, (3) designing and
analyzing advanced communications and signal processing systems based upon ultra
high-speed implementation, and (4) developing innovative computer-aided design
(CAD) tools and concepts for next- generation dedicated ASIC chips for
communications and digital signal processing. Six companies and four federal
laboratories will each provide $50,000 per year to support this research.
Extensive facilities in materials growth and characterization, device
fabrication and computer aided design (CAD) are located at UCSD which is also
providing a newly completed engineering building (125,000 square feet) with
class 100 clean rooms, an electron beam lithographic system, a double crystal
x-ray diffractameter, an Electron Spectroscopy for Chemical Analysis (ESCA)
apparatus and a scanning and transmission electron microscope (STEM). The ICAS
Center will also make extensive use of the 21-seat Daisy Engineering Workstation
facility at SDSU as well as their communications and signal processing
laboratory. In addition, the San Diego Computer Center (SDSC), located on the
campus of UCSD, will provide access to their CRAY X-MP/48 super computer as well
as interactive graphics and visualization facilities. The faculty at both
academic institutions is highly qualified to conduct the research using the
available facilities. The Program Manager recommends that UCSD (in collaboration
with SDSU) be awarded $100,000 a year for a five year continuing grant. An
additional $100,000 is provided for the first year's membership of the Naval
Research Laboratory (Washington, DC) and of the Naval Ocean Systems Center (San
Diego, CA). The latter facility is also providing $25,000 to augment the
research in signal processing already ongoing. This award has been coordinated
with the Division of Electrical and Communications Systems. The total amount is
$225,000 for one year. Near the end of each 12-month period, the Program Manager
and/or the Director of the Division of Cross-Disciplinary Research will review
the progress of the Center on a number of renewal criteria, including the
following: (1) extent to which university-industry interaction and collaboration
is developing; (2) extent to which the support base for the center is expanding;
(3) extent to which a robust research program is developing; and (4) San Diego
State University is required to recruit company memberships to maintain its
collaboration status. If review is satisfactory, the Program Manager will
recommend support of the next period of this continuing grant.