* 8916473
* Evaluation of the role of basaltic volcanism at the         Cretaceous/Tertiary Boundary in Scandinavia
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/1990,02/28/1993
* W Elliott, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 02/28/1993
* USD 55,680.00

The Cretaceous/Tertiary (K/T) boundary controversy has matured to the point
where it is important to document the mosaic of environmental and geologic
processes that encompassed the earth 66 m.y. ago., especially in the classic
continental sections in western North America and in the classic marine sections
in Scandinavia. PI's will test the contention that basaltic volcanism was a
dominant progenitor of the Mg-smectite clay mineral in the (K/T) boundary clay
unit in Scandinavia, and (2) will assess the role of basaltic volcanism in
producing Ir anomalies. We have reported a significant new evidence that the K/T
boundary clay unit at Stevns Klint (the Fish Clay), which is dominantly composed
of an unusual Mg-smectite clay, is formed by alteration of basaltic pyroclastic
ash as opposed to being formed from impact derived glass or ejecta. A basaltic
pyroclastic origin is supported by our finding of large subhedral labradorite
grains in layer III of the Fish Clay. Our initial findings also suggest that
basaltic volcanism took place before, during and after the deposition of shocked
quartz in the Fish Clay. Mineralogic, clay mineralogic, noble metal and rare
earth element chemical analyses of the Mg-smectites compared to similar analyses
of Paleocene basaltic tuffs and bentonites of the North Sea region and of the
Skane basalts of southern Sweden of uncertain age provide an excellent
opportunity for evaluating the role of basaltic volcanism at the K/T boundary in
Scandinavia. The geographically confined Skane basalts which heretofore have
provided an unrealistically wide range of dates (150 m.y - 80 m.y) will be
redated, paying close attention to avoiding xenolithic contamination.