* 8916356
* Molecular Biology of Nitrogenase Genes in Trichodesmium, A  Marine Nonheterocystous Cyanobacterium
* GEO,OCE
* 07/15/1990,06/30/1992
* Jonathan Zehr, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 06/30/1992
* USD 126,603.00

Trichodesmium is a species of photosynthetic bacteria , a cyanobacterium, which
forms large concentrations in the surface waters of the open ocean. It posesses
the ability to fix atmospheric nitrogen unlike most of the other phytoplankton
which depend upon the dissolved forms of nitrogen in seawater , eg. nitrate, for
uptake into the cell for subsequent growth. At times, this species forms dense
blooms which may be extremely important in transient rates of new production in
the ocean. Since the discovery of nitrogen fixation in association with
Trichodesmium, many studies have attempted to characterize the nitrogen fixation
activity and physiology of the species. However, the mechanisms of nitrogen
fixation are still not understood. The enzyme nitrogenase which catalyzes the
reduction of dinitrogen to ammonium is rapidly inactivated by oxygen. Therefore
these organisms which live in the high oxygen zone of the surface waters must
somehow protect their nitrogenase from the oxygen that they themselves generate
during photosynthesis. Dr. Zehr focuses his work on two major questions: 1) how
does Trichodesmium fix nitrogen and evolve oxygen simultaneously, and 2) does
Trichodesmium posess a unique or alternative nitrogenase system that allows it
to synthesize active nitrogenase in waters depleted of micronutrients such as
molybdenum. The work identifies unique characteristics of the nitrogenase genes
in the species using molecular techniques to construct a genomic library to
characterize the organization of the gene. Probes and antibodies are to be
prepared to study the expression of the genes in natural populations and
cultures.