* 8916366
* T4 Phage dNTP Synthetase:  A Multienzyme Complex for        Deoxyribonucleotide Synthesis
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/1990,06/30/1993
* Christopher Mathews, Oregon State University
* Continuing grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 06/30/1993
* USD 314,280.00

This research involves a multienzyme complex, formed in T4 phage- infected
Escherichia coli, which carries out the synthesis of deoxyribonucleoside
tripgisohates (dNTPs). This T4 dNTP synthesis complex will be investigated by
both biochemical and genetic means, with the goals of learning how it functions
and how it integrates dNTP synthesis with DNA replication. First, through
analysis of complexes isolated from T4-infected cells and through partial
reconstitution of the complex from purified proteins, we hope to define the
protein composition, stoichiometry, and protein-protein interactions within the
complex. Second, through assays for multi-step reaction pathways catalayzed by
the purified complex, and through study of the allosteric properties of its
constituent enzymes, we hope to learn how regulation of individual enzymes
contributes toward control of the complex, and in turn helps to explain how dNTP
synthesis is controlled in vitro. Third, through enzyme kinetic analysis,
studies with bifunctional protein crosslinkers, and investigations of dNTP pool
dynamics and DNA synthesis in vitro, we hope to learn whether the dNTP
synthetase complex is physically or functionally linked to the DNA replication
apparatus in vivo. Fourth, through reversion analysis at defined loci in the T4
rII cistrons, we will investigate mechanisms of mutagenesis induced by DNA
precursor pool imbalances, with some of the data possibly generating insight
into the nature of the microenvironment at DNA replication sites.