* 8916325
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:  Structure of the Mt. Stuart Batho- lith and Its Wall Rocks:  Implications for Tilted Plutons   and Cretaceous Orogenesis in the North Cascades
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/1990,02/28/1993
* Robert Miller, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Thomas O. Wright
* 02/28/1993
* USD 69,966.00

Two fundamentally different models have been proposed for profound mid-
Cretaceous orogenesis in northwestern Washington and southwestern Washington and
southwestern British Columbia. In one, the northwest Cascade thrust system
formed during the collision of Wrangellia with North America, and resulted in
west- directed thrusting and burial of the Cascades crystalline core. In the
other, orogenesis was the result of transpression and the crystalline core was
part of a large dextral shear zone. Contro- versy also exists regarding whether
paleomagnetic data from plutons indicate that the intruded terranes are far
travelled or if instead the plutons have been tilted up to 35o. This project
will examine the Mt. Stuart batholith and surrounding wall rocks which occupy a
key position relative to the northwest Cascades thrust system and the
Crystalline core. The work will involve mapping, kinematic analysis and radio-
metric dating. Results are aimed at determining the amount of tilting in the
region and how pluton emplacement and regional deformation change with depth.
Resolution between outstanding models will have considerable implications for
northwest tectonics.