* 8916403
* The Molecular Basis of Bacterial Resistance to the Defensin Peptide Antibiotics
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1990,02/28/1994
* Eduardo Groisman, Washington University
* Continuing grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 02/28/1994
* USD 253,650.00

This project investigates the mechanism of bacterial resistance to defensin
peptide antibiotics. The experimental approach includes biochemical studies on
the interaction of defensins with phoP and phoP Salmonella. PhoP is a genetic
regulatory locus that controls the expression of genes encoding factors that
protect Salmonella from the bactericidal action of cationic proteins or peptides
derived from neutrophils or macrophages. The defensins are cationic peptides
that have antibacterial action. Transport studies with isotopically-labelled
chloride are to be conducted with intact cells, membrane vesicle preparations
and liposomes in order to ascertain what functional changes accompany the loss
of phoP function in the presence and absence of defensins. PhoP-regulated
constituents determining sensitivity to defensins are being characterized with
the aid of transport assays to determine sensitivity to defensins as a prelude
to characterizing and purifying these proteins. The project further involves the
production and investigation of mutants that affect senitivity to defensins.
Mammals are often able to fight off invading pathogens through the production of
natural antibiotic agents, and some amphibians and insects also seem able to do
this. Certain bacteria have evolved strategies to survive the antibiotic effects
of these natural microbicidal agents, but how they do this is not currently
known. Dr. Groisman's research provides fundamental information that is
essential for understanding how bacteria are affected, or not affected, by
antibiotics. This type of basic knowledge provides a foundation that may provide
a basis for the development of improved antibiotics. This is an important goal
because bacteria of the genus Salmonella currently cause a variety of disease
conditions in animals and humans that are estimated to cost the U.S. national
economy about fifty million dollars annually.