* 8917730
* The Large-Scale and Long-Term Dynamics of Subduction
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/1989,12/31/1990
* Mark Richards, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Michael A. Mayhew
* 12/31/1990
* USD 40,724.00

The research addresses the relationship between observations of mantle
heterogeneity and the history of subduction for about the last 200 Myr. This
work requires coordinated efforts in two fields, namely, theoretical geodynamics
and global tectonics. Subducted slabs constitute the largest known density
constrasts in the mantle. The largest-scale seismic velocity and geoid anomalies
are not correlated with present-day plate tectonics, but are qualitatively
similar to older (100-200 Myr B.P.) configurations of subduction. This suggests
that the large-scale pattern of mantle convection is dominated by the long-term
patterns of subduction. The project will test this hypothesis quantitatively for
various convection models. Previous mapping of Pacific Basin convergency zones
(0-180 Myr B.P.) will be expanded to include other important paleosubduction
zones in the Indian Ocean Basin and elsewhere. Subducted plate ages, rates, and
locations will be converted into a corresponding map for the injection of
thermal buoyancy into the upper mantle. The trajectories of slabs due to mantle
flow will be calculated using a well-developed analytical method for low in
spherical shells. Both chemically layered and viscosity layered convection
models driven subducted buoyancy forces will be explored. These dynamical models
for the fate of old subduted slabs will be rigorously correlated with
observations bearing on density contrasts in the mantle, particularly the new
observations of seismic heterogeneity, the gravity field, and plate velocities.
By integrating knowledge of plate tectonic history with present- day geophysical
observations and convection theory, this work will provide entirely new
constraints on the large-scale nature of mantle convection.