* 8917949
* Research on Identification of Mental System Architecture
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1989,08/31/1991
* James Townsend, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Jasmine Young
* 08/31/1991
* USD 55,432.00

A fruitful approach to the study of human behavior is the use of the
relationships between the environment, the perceptual information flow, and the
consequent behavior to infer psychological structure and function, the
architecture of the mental system. From this approach, psychological functions
such as perception, motivation, cognition, decision making, learning, memory,
and problem solving are seen as embedded in abstract models of the internal
psychological states. An important approach to the modeling of these
psychological functions is to do so with closed-form mathematical models (which
may, of course, need to be studied at times using computer simulations). At
least as important as the individual models of individual processes is the
mathematical exploration of the qualitative and quantitative behavior of mental
systems which exhibit particular properties. Townsend's laboratory has been,
with the aid of prior NSF support, a main source of such mathematical results.
This project is designed to investigate the behavior of mental systems which
have the following properties: (1) information flows only forward, with no
feedback loops; (2) flow is continuous, with partial information being
transmitted throughout the system on a continuous basis, rather than each
subprocess being completed before it sends the results on down the line; and (3)
the outputs of each process are stochastic, i.e. involve elements of randomness.
In addition, results will be extended to systems that meet condition (1) and
(3), but not (2). Experimental work will be directed toward discovery of
qualitative properties involving reaction time and accuracy that will make it
possible to identify the system architecture. Other experiments will involve
exploration of theoretical results obtained recently. Finally, a mathematical
model will be constructed for a recent experimental paradigm that acquires
continuous measures of response tendencies. This research, though basic, impacts
in an indirect way on education and on the design of machines with which people
must interact.