* 8917502
* Low Light Auto-Radiometer for Deep Sea Irradiance Measurements
* NONE,NONE
* 04/15/1990,09/30/1991
* Edith Widder, Harbor Branch Oceanographic Institution, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* H. Lawrence Clark
* 09/30/1991
* USD 72,625.00

The Harbor Branch Oceanographic Institution will undertake a project to develop
a sensitive radiometer for in situ measurements of irradiance in the water
column. Optical measurements at sea are becoming increasingly important to ocean
science field investigations and adequate optical instrumentation is often
lacking. The low light auto- radiometer (LoLAR) will employ a photomultiplier
tube which allows greater sensitivity than silicon-photodiode based technology
permits on currently used instruments. The new instrument will increase the
sensitivity of light level detection and measurement by a factor of five. At-sea
use of photomultiplier tube instrumentation requires development of several
special design features, including autocalibration, temperature dependency
corrections, light collection, and data acquisition. In situ irradiance
measurements have been primarily restricted to the near surface waters of the
ocean because of limited instrumentation sensitivity. Several types of ocean
science research investigations would benefit from increased sensitivity by
being able to make light measurements deeper in the water column. The types of
research that would benefit from this new instrument include hydrologic optics
that relate to physical properties affecting light penetration in the ocean as a
function of depth; photophysiology of populations, concerning the distribution
of organisms and their orientation as related to different light fields; and
bioluminescence research. The general purpose instrument will be usable on
submersibles, remotely operated vehicles, moorings, nets, and profiling systems.