* 8917319
* United States-China Scientific Cooperative Project:  A      Petrotectonic Study of Precambrian Blueschist and Eclogite  Belts in Central China
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/1990,12/31/1992
* Juhn Liou, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas O. Wright
* 12/31/1992
* USD 143,503.00

This proposal described a United States - Peoples Republic of China
multidisciplinary cooperative project in earth science. The study involves three
investigators from Stanford, two from Japan and 8 from China. We wish to
continue to conduct coordinated field-petrological-geochronological-tectonic
investigations of Precambrian blueschist and eclogite belts in central China in
order to constrain the genesis of these intracratonal blueschist belts. Recent
reports of many pre- Mesozoic-- even Precambrian -- blueschist belts in the PRC
provide an excellent opportunity to test various hypotheses for blueschist
facies metamorphism by establishing the tectonic and age relations of these
occurrences. Chinese colleagues have identified 4 probable Precambrian
occurrences including a discontinuous, coherent blueschist belt more than 2000
km long in central China and suggested its origin is related to deep fault
systems. Eclogites are abundant and some are associated with blueschists: other
lie within Archean gneiss terranes and contain relict coesite -- a high pressure
polymorph of SiO2. Except for reconnaissance surveys, little is known about the
phase petrology and mineral parageneses of Chinese blueschists and eclogites;
available radiometric dating from Precambrian blueschist and eclogite
metamorphism is ambiguous. The proposed U.S. China project will remedy these
problems; it will involve systematic field observation, microprobe analyses of
coexisting minerals + P-T-ometry, bulk XRF analyses of rocks and K-Ar, U-Pb, Nd-
Sm and Ar39/Ar40 age determinations. Primary objectives are: (1) to map the
distribution and structural setting of blueschist facies rocks and eclogites;
(2) to determine mineralogical and chemical compositions of the metamorphic
rocks; (3) to compare and contrast various types of eclogites; (4) to delineate
mineral paragenesis and P-T-time paths for blueschist and eclogite metamorphism;
(5) to establish the ages of blueschist and eclogite metamorphism through
radiometric dating; and (6) to elucidate the genetic relationship between
recognized metamorphic, igneous and tectonic features. The program should
contribute to a much improved understanding of the genesis of intracratonal
blueschists and eclogites and the complex geologic- tectonic assembly of central
China. Our previous cooperative exchanges with Chinese geologists have been
highly productive. Accelerated progress is anticipated because of the detailed
groundwork and many preliminary petrological and field studies that have already
been completed.