* 8917123
* A Pb and Nd Isotope Study of the Footwall Rocks of the      Noranda and Matagami Cu-Zn Sulfide, Deposits, Quebec
* NONE,NONE
* 02/01/1990,07/31/1992
* William White, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* John L. Snyder
* 07/31/1992
* USD 105,000.00

We propose a Pb and Nd isotope study of the footwall rocks of the Noranda and
Matagami volcanogenic massive sulfide deposits, which are located in the
southern and northern parts, respectively of the Abitibi greenstone belt of the
Archean Superior Province. These two areas, formed at 2705 Ga and 2725 Ga
respectively, represent the extremes in both lithology and initial Pb isotope
rations of the Abitibi belt. The Matagami deposits are underlain by a cogenetic
tholeiitic suite of basalts, subordinate rhyolites, and a large mafic intrusion.
The Noranda deposits are underlain by basalts-andesites and rhyolites of calc-
alkaline and (subordinate) tholeiitic affinities and a large calc-alkaline
subvolcanic intrusion. The Noranda ore has the most, and Matagami ores the least
radiogenic Pb-isotopic ratios in the Abitibi belt. Approximately 5-8 samples
from each of the key lithologies in each area (at total of 100 analyses) will be
analyzed for Nd and Pb isotope ratios and parent-daughter ratios, enabling us to
calculate initial ratios. About 20 samples will be analyzed for major elements,
rare earths, and Hf, Zr, Nb, Ta, and Y. Through assessment and comparison of
initial isotope ratios and trace element geochemistry, the study will address
the following direct problems: the relationship of the footwall rocks to the
subvolcanic intrusive, the relationship between the felsic and mafic volcanic
rocks in the footwall sequence, the relationship of the footwall lithologies to
the ores including the source of metals in these ores, and the origin of the
magmas forming the footwall lithologies. The actual scientific objectives of the
study are of broader scope and include seeking answers to the following
questions. Why are Superior Province volcanogenic massive sulfides so
consistently associated felsic footwall volcanics? What is the role of the
subvolcanic intrusive in the genesis of these ores? What is the significance of
Pb isotope ratios in Archean VMS ores generally? Is the Pb in these ores
representative of the mantle, of the crust, or of a mixture of the two? What was
the tectonic environment in which these rocks formed? Were the magmas forming
the footwall volcanics purely mantle-derived or do they contain a component of
older crust? How are the isotopic evolution of mantle Nd and Pb related?