* 8917824
* The Molecular Mechanisms Governing the Catalysis of         6-Phosphofructo-2-kinase
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/1990,07/31/1994
* Simon Pilkis, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 07/31/1994
* USD 200,000.00

The liver bifunctional enzyme, 6-phosphofructo-2-kinase fructose-
2,6-bisphosphatase has been isolated and characterized by a number of
biophysical and biochemical methods. The PI has determined its protein and cDNA
sequence and has shown that the enzyme is composed of two independent domains: a
NH2-terminal kinase domain and a COOH-terminal bisphosphatase domain. The latter
is structurally and functionally homologous to the phosphoglycerate mutase/acid
phosphatase family. Recent structural analysis of the 2-kinase domain has
revealed a structural homology with 6-phosphofructo-1-kinases. It is planned to
use structural information and biochemical approaches as well as methods of site
specific mutagenesis to extend knowledge of the mechanisms involved in 6PF-2-K
catalysis. Four questions will be studied: 1) Based on structural information to
employ site directed mutagenesis at the site of the hypothesized nucleotide
binding fold of 6-phosphofructo-2-kinase in order to confirm its role in ATP
binding. 2) To determine the role of several; cysteinyl residues which have been
implicated from protein modification experiments as being important in the
2-kinase reaction. 3) To determine the anomeric specificity of the 6-PF-2-K
reaction. 4) Based on comparison of the topological structure of 6PF- 1-K and
that predicted for 6PF-2-K to alter residues responsible for Fru 6-P binding.
The effects of substitutions will be studied by measuring aspects of enzyme
activity, Fru 6-P and ATP affinity, spectral properties, and protein structure.