* 8917050
* Molecular Analysis of Chlamydomonas Mating-Type Locus
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/1990,02/28/1994
* Ursula Goodenough, Washington University
* Continuing grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 02/28/1994
* USD 298,400.00

The mating-type (mt) locus of Chlamydomonas reinhardtii is a key regulatory unit
which appears to govern life-cycle transitions in this simple eukaryote. It
consists of both regulatory and structural genes maintained as a unit by
recombinational suppression. Possibly it shares functional homologies with loci
that govern embryological transitions in the metazoa and/or higher plants. The
long-term objective of this research is to understand how mt works. As a first
step, it is critical that the locus be defined at a molecular level. A cloned
cDNA has been isolated which exhibits tight genetic linkage to the mating-type
locus and is uniquely expressed within 10 min after gametes undergo cell fusion
to form zygotes. Genomic clones homologous to this probe have been identified,
and a "chromosome walk" has identified-300 kb of cloned DNA to either side of
the gene. Three lines of experimentation are proposed. The first entails
generation of deletions in diploid strains that cover known recessive mutations
linked to mt; such deletions will provide physical landmarks in the walk and may
also identify the loci of particular genes. The second entails an attempt to
overcome the recombinational suppression in the region by sporulating diploids
homozygous at mt; any recombinants between the mt-linked markers will again
provide physical landmarks and provide a long-sought genetic map of the region.
Finally, the recent cloning of homologous selectable genes and their successful
use in Chlamydomonas transformation (reported by 3 independent labs) will permit
us to attempt co-transformation of the mt-linked mutations using sectors of the
existing walk and, if necessary, extensions of the walk. Putative transformants
will be verified by genetic and molecular analysis. Clones certifiably
transformed for interesting genes related to mating-type functions will be
further analyzed: the relevant sector of the transforming DNA will be identified
and sequenced to look for sequence motifs suggestive of DNA binding proteins,
kinases, nucleases, and so on. The presence/absence/modification of each gene in
the chromosome of the opposite mt can also be ascertained. In future years, the
activities of these genes in gamete differentiation and zygote development can
be assessed in detail. This study of basic reproduction in the model organism,
Chlamydomonas, will provide information about genetic recombination and
regulation. Chlamydomonas is of particular interest to plant biologists because
it carries out photosynthesis. Understanding of fundamental processes in this
organism can frequently be transferred and applied to higher plants.