* 8917616
* RUI:  Effects of Dehydration During Growth on Avian Kidney  Development
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/1990,10/31/1993
* David Goldstein, Wright State University
* Continuing Grant
* Barbara K. Zain
* 10/31/1993
* USD 168,200.00

Dehydration is a stressor that may be encountered by many organisms during
their lifetimes, including the period of body growth and organ development.
Dehydration induces changes in hormone levels, including prominently increases
in levels of anti-diuretic hormone, and the restricted water inhibits general
body growth. Together, these factors may influence the growth and the
development of many organ systems. The research will focus particularly on the
effects of dehydration during growth on development of the kidney, a principle
target organ for anti-diuretic hormone. The PI will study this problem in
bobwhite quail, a species in which the chicks must forage for themselves
beginning shortly after hatching, and in which therefore there is a very real
possibility of dehydration during the early life stages. Preliminary data
suggest that the region of the kidney (the renal medulla) primarily concerned
with water conservation during dehydration hypertrophies when the birds are
chronically water restricted. Associated with this is an enhanced ability to
concentrate the urine, which should contribute to enhanced water conservation.
The proposed research will further explore the functional consequences of
chronic dehydration, and in particular will examine the basis for the enhanced
concentrating ability. Does this reflect changes in the rate of urine formation,
changes in hormone levels, or changes in the cellular response to the hormone?
How do morphological changes induced by dehydration correlate with changes in
function? Are these changes reversible, or do stresses imposed during youth have
consequences that continue into adulthood? These studies will help to define the
physiological responses of animals to dehydration. They will also examine the
relation between structure and function in the avian kidney, about which much
remains unknown or speculative. More generally, these studies will examine the
flexibility of an important homeostatic system, and will address the general
issue of the importance of environmental stresses on developmental pathways.
This approach should identify constraints in design and function of the avian
kidney. This relates both to the ability of individuals to acclimate to changing
environments, as well as to the ability of species to invade and adapt to
different habitats.