* 8917880
* ABR:  Physiological Ecology of Cyanobacterial Microbial     Consortia During Development and Proliferation of Nuisance  Blooms
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/1990,04/30/1993
* Hans Paerl, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* James R. Gosz
* 04/30/1993
* USD 121,051.00

Cyanobacterial (blue-green algal) nuisance blooms frequently proliferate and
persist for extensive (weeks to months) periods in eutrophic waters. Bloom
populations characteristically form close associations with diverse
microorganisms, including heterotrophic bacteria and protozoans, during various
stages of bloom development and proliferation. Traditionally, such associations
have been considered to represent degrees of microbial antagonism. However,
current work has shown that mutually-beneficial impacts may in fact predominate.
Maximum cyanobacterial photosynthetic growth and N2 fixation rates often
accompany extensive bacterial and protozoan colonization of the cyanobacterial
phycosphere. Specific cyanobacterial-microbial associations may well function as
consortia, facilitating: 1) exchange of metabolites; 2) regeneration of
nutrients; 3) localized removal of inhibitory (to N2 fixation and
photosynthesis) O2 buildups; and 4) detoxification of potentially-inhibitory
chelators and waste products generated within the cyanobacterial phycosphere.
This new study will elucidate consortial interactions and their potential
positive impacts on: 1) cyanobacterial CO2 fixation, N2 fixation and growth
rates; 2) cyanobacterial bloom potentials; and 3) the ability of host
cyanobacteria to maintain blooms under nutrient limited conditions. Recent
microtechnological (microsensing, immunochemical, microautoradiographic)
advances and applications have greatly facilitated and expanded our ability to
address and characterize these interactions. Findings will be of value to
managers and biologists seeking effective mitigative steps for arresting bloom
potentials, including potential use of bacterial and protozoan
predators/consumers as "biological control" agents.