* 8917200
* Quaternary Climatic Record from the Antarctic Peninsula     Region, Antarctica
* O/D,OPP
* 01/15/1990,06/30/1993
* David Elliot, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing grant
* Bernhard Lettau
* 06/30/1993
* USD 141,720.00

This is a two-year study to infer the environmental history of the antarctic
peninsula region from an examination of sediment cores from the Amundsen and
Bellingshausen Seas. Earlier analyses of benthic foraminifera distribution,
sediment distribution, and water column profiles strongly suggested that the
observed patterns are greatly influenced by oceanographic, climatic, and glacial
conditions. Data on the present-day distribution of these patterns will provide
new information on the microhabitat and geochemical associations between surface
sediments and benthic foraminifera. The faunal-environmental associations
observed in the modern setting will be used to formulate an interactive model
using foraminiferal biofacies as indicators of oceanographic response to
changing climatic conditions. This model will be used to infer paleoceanographic
and paleoclimatic conditions in downcore sediments by observing both large-scale
foraminiferal assemblage changes, and small-scale (possibly seasonal)
laminations. Benthic invertebrates reflect the links between the atmosphere,
hydrosphere, and cryosphere, and have been used extensively to investigate
paleoenvironmental problems. The sensitivity of benthic foraminifera to both
chemical and physical conditions of bottom waters has been extensively
demonstrated in the literature, and the group's well documented geological
longevity has made it a valuable tool for the paleoclimatic analysis of core
material.