* 8917556
* Overcompensation in Response to Mammalian Herbivory: Measure of True Fitness, Alternative Selection Pressures, Compara- tive Responses, and the Genetics of Overcompensation
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/1990,08/31/1993
* Ken Paige, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Lindsay Fox
* 08/31/1993
* USD 170,405.00

Over the past decade, there has been a heated debate surrounding the potential
beneficial effects of herbivores on plants. Up to now, the problem of resolving
the question as to whether herbivory could ever be good for plants has been that
convincing data have not been published. However, recent experimental and
observational studies showed that when mule deer and elk browsed the monocarpic
biennial, scarlet gillia, Ipomopsis aggregata, relative fitness in terms of seed
production and subsequent seedling survival averaged 2.4 times that of the
uneaten contols. In light of these results, over compensation cannot be easily
dismissed, although more information is needed on potential beneficial effects
of herbivores on plants. It is necessary to understand the interactions between
plants and their herbivores at many levels in much greater detail. The goals of
this project are: 1. To examine the long-term fitness effects of herbivory; 2.
To examine the effects of secondary herbivory on plant growth and reproduction;
3. To determine if there are selection pressures other than herbivory
potentially involved in producing the observed response patterns (e.g., fire and
frost damage); 4. To initiate molecular genetic studies in an effort to
understand some of the potential genetic mechanisms involved in
overcompensation; and 5. To begin comparative studies on two additional diverse
sites to see how common overcompensation by scarlet gilia is and to begin to
understand something of the evolution of such a response. The results of these
studies have the potential for making important contributions to both basic and
applied fields of ecology, evolutionary biology and agriculture.