* 8917851
* Research Training for Minority Students in the Ocean        Sciences (Geological Sciences)
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/1989,03/31/1994
* Felix Okojie, Jackson State University
* Standard Grant
* William E. McHenry
* 03/31/1994
* USD 414,134.00

Jackson State University (JSU) is one of the few historically minority
institutions in the Nation that presently has Environmental and Marine Sciences
programs. JSU is committed to the development of these programs as part of the
overall long-term plan of the University, which is to provide the Nation with
highly trained minority men and women in every sphere of education but
particularly in the natural sciences. The JSU Marine and Environmental Sciences
programs have made significant contributions in preparing minorities for the
ocean sciences workforce and graduate programs. This project will enable these
programs to continue their mission. The main objective of this project is to
prepare and motivate minority undergraduates to pursue advanced degrees and/or
professional careers in the ocean sciences. The project will involve the
following: (1) provide early research experience with dedicated mentors and role
models to high ability undergraduate students during the academic year at JSU,
(2) provide academic enrichment activities in order to enhance the interest of
the students in the ocean sciences, (3) provide opportunities to minority
students to participate in off-campus research during the summer months, (4)
produce graduates in chemistry, marine and environmental sciences who will be
qualified to pursue postgraduate studies in these fields. In addition to the
regular curricula, and specific courses in the ocean sciences, students will be
required to take courses in Independent Study and Introduction to Research,
which will parallel their career objectives. These courses will consist of
supervised research projects and will include formalized training in technical
writing and literature survey as well as laboratory experimentation. Students
will be required to submit a report at the conclusion of their projects. All
students will make at least one oral presentation of their research at one of
the seminars which will be held during their tenure in the program. Students
will travel to at least one conference or meeting related to their research
experiences and will be encouraged to read papers where possible and
appropriate. Participating faculty will be expected to accompany students to
conferences and professional meetings.