* 8917322
* Origins of Molybdenum, Nickel, Gold and Platinum-Group      Metals in Cambrian Black Shales of Southern China
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/1990,01/31/1993
* Raymond Coveney, University of Missouri-Kansas City
* Continuing Grant
* John L. Snyder
* 01/31/1993
* USD 99,979.00

In southern China an unusual association of metals including molybdenum,
nickel, platinum group metals and gold occurs in Lower Cambrian black shales.
These metals are especially concentrated in thin beds and lenses of massive
sulfides. Fan et al. (1973; 1978) report values for shales and associated
massive sulfides beds exceeding 2% Mo. 2% Ni, 3% Zn, 700 ppb Au, 200-400 ppb Pt,
200-400 ppb Pb and 50 ppb Ir. In several cases metal values are at or near what
would be ore grades in conventional deposits. For example, at one mine near
Zunyi, Guizhou province, molybdenum is now being extracted from a shale-hosted
nodular sulfide bed. This is the only place in the world from which this
strategic metal is recovered from shale. Black shale-hosted Ni- Mo-Pt-Au
deposits can be traced across ten provinces in southern China (Chen et al.,
1982) and may constitute a metal resource of great economic potential. The
mineralization includes metal which normally occur in two distinct associations:
i.e., classic polymetallic hydrothermal deposits (Zn, Au, Mo) and
igneous/pneumatolitic deposits associated with mafic igneous rocks (Ni, Pt, Pd).
Considering the field relations and textural features described by Chen (1988a,
b), there is good possibility that the polymetallic sulfide lenses and beds were
developed as classic volcanogenic submarine exhalites during the Cambrian.
Additional evidence in support of this hypothesis will be sought during the
proposed study. However, taking into account the peculiar geochemical behavior
of molybdenum and certain other ore constituents in alkaline solutions, it is
also possible that the ore metals were introduced in two stages: (1) early
precipitation of precious metal-bearing nodular Fe-Ni sulfide exhalites from
submarine hot springs, followed by (2) late supergene precipitation of
significant amounts of Mo and other metals during modern weathering while the
spectacular "tower" karst topography of southern China was formed (Mobilization
of metals by deep weathering during the Late Precambrian may also be a factor).
Studies of metal distributions, textural relations, fluid inclusions and
isotopes for samples from key locations in Guizhou, Yunnan and Hunan where
sulfide lenses occur in Cambrian shales in the midst of well-developed tower
karst topography, will help to distinguish between these possibilities by
establishing whether or not there were two stages of ore deposition in the
shales of southern China. Analyses of host and country rocks in and near the
modern weathering zone and ancient fractures will be used to assess the probable
impact of supergene mobilization of Mo and other elements from source beds.