* 8917752
* RUI:  Interactions of Natural Enemy Impact and Host Plan    Genotype on Herbivore Survival
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/1990,08/31/1993
* Robert Fritz, Vassar College
* Standard Grant
* James R. Gosz
* 08/31/1993
* USD 202,143.00

A central question in the study of insect herbivore-plant interactions is: What
are the factors responsible for variation in herbivore density and surviorship
among conspecific host plants in a population? Although there are many possible
mechanisms, variation in host plant resistance and in enemy impact are strongly
suggested as important by previous work. Theory and empirical evidence suggests
that interactions between plant resistance and variable enemy impact among
plants may be common and important in plant-herbivore systems. The concept of
three tophic level interactions and the enemy impact hypothesis pose three main
pathways of interactions between plant resistance and enemy impact. The main
goal of this research is to determine the relative importance of these pathways
of interaction between host plant genotype and natural enemy impact in this
system. Answers to these questions are important to the development of theory of
plant-herbivore-natural enemy interactions and to understanding the processes
that influence population and community variation of herbivorous insects among
conspecific plants. The experimental program will determine: 1) the heritability
and correlation of resistances to three herbivores on willow, 2) the presence of
variation in enemy impact among plant genotypes and its correlation with plant
resistance, 3) the relative importance of pathways by which plant genotype or
other herbivore species directly or indirectly affect enemy impact, and 4) the
relative importance of several mechanisms of direct and indirect competitive
interactions between herbivores. Other experiments will examine details of
specific pathways of interaction between plant genotype, other herbivore
species, and natural enemy impact.