* 8917971
* Workshop on:  "Advancing Toward Closure of the Carbon,      Water, and Nutrient Cycles in Temperature Forest            Ecosystems;" June 10-15, 1990; Granby, Colorado
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/1990,03/31/1991
* Merrill Kaufmann, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Crystal Blackshear
* 03/31/1991
* USD 15,000.00

This workshop will assess the adequacy of current knowledge for the development
and validation of closed-system models of carbon, water, and nutrient cycles in
temperate forest ecosystems. Closed system models are those that account for all
of the mass fluxes into and out of a system. For the purposes of this proposal,
ecosystems are considered to be forest stands. The cycles, either alone or in
combination, will be examined. The format of the workshop will be a series of
keynote papers to set the scene and provide up-to-date information. These will
be followed by tightly structured discussion sessions aimed, first , at
assessing the current state of knowledge about ecosystem function in terms of
the processes and mechanisms related to mass fluxes, and, second, at evaluating
the feasibility of developing closed-system models. If it is agreed that models
can and should be developed, participants will be asked to outline their
structure, level (in terms of processes and time steps), and input requirements.
If it is considered that closed-system models are not yet feasible, there will
be an analysis of the reasons and recommendations about the information needed
to construct such models. The product of the meeting will be a series of papers,
to be published in an international journal. These will include the keynote
papers, a review paper derived from the discussion groups, case-study papers
submitted by participants and papers on the closed-system models, based on the
discussions and recommendations of the meeting. The workshop will involve some
of the world experts in the area of forest biogeochemistry. Biogeochemical
models are useful tools for assessing the effects of global climate change on
biological systems. The products of this workshop will be timely and important.