* 8917599
* Anatomy of a Passive Continental Margin:  Deep Structure of Transitional Crust and the Source of the East Coast MagneticAnomaly
* GEO,OCE
* 04/15/1990,03/31/1994
* G. Michael Purdy, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Bilal U. Haq
* 03/31/1994
* USD 182,821.00

Numerous MCS, magnetic and gravity surveys have concentrated on determining
fundamental structural features of the US East Coast continental margin.
Unfortunately, firm constraints on the nature of rifting, tectonic subsidence,
thinning and early volcanism have all been hampered by the difficulty of imaging
the deepest "rift-stage" crust that underlies several margin- parallel basins. A
recent MCS program profiled the Carolina Trough, and 8 OBHs were deployed along
two margin-perpendicular lines. Drs. Holbrook and Purdy have begun processing
these data. The present award will allow them to continue full wavefield imaging
and 2D ray trace modeling that will improve velocity structure and imaging of
the vertical-incidence MCS profiles. In addition, support is provided to prepare
for an additional series of OBH deployments along a similar margin transect
offshore Chesapeake Bay. This is tentatively scheduled for the Spring or Summer
of 1990. Specific goals of both experiments are to determine Moho geometry,
basement depths, and various features of the intervening rift-stage crust.
Examples of the latter include along-strike variations in thickness, width, and
velocity of rift-stage crust, as well as internal structure, reflection
character, and nature of the lateral boundaries with "normal" continental and
oceanic crust.