* 8917691
* Inexact Iterative Methods for Large-Scale Nonlinear Problems(Preliminary Planning)
* EDU,EES
* 03/15/1990,02/28/1991
* Edward Dean, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 02/28/1991
* USD 11,986.00

The goal of this project is to apply the inexact Newton framework to the
solution of large nonlinear problems arising from various disciplines in the
physical sciences. In each case, the basic iterative algorithm will require the
solution of a substantial subproblem at each iteration. Guided by the inexact
Newton theory, each subproblem will be solved only to the accuracy needed to
ensure the rapid convergence of the iterative method. The following problems
will be considered: 1) The large constrained optimization problem arising from
the finite element discretization of Skyrme's model for meson field. 2) The
implementation of a domain decomposition algorithm for elliptic boundary value
problems. 3) An effective method for the solution of the time dependent Navier-
Stokes equation. 4) Newton's method for solving continuous nonlinear boundary
value problems. During the preliminary research activities the P.I. will try to;
a) determine how the accuracy requirements for solving the two linear systems in
Tapia's Lagrange multiplier formula, b) complete the implementation of the
augmented Lagrangian algorithm for the domain decomposition problem in
preparation for the inexact iteration modification, c) will apply a
preconditioned conjugate gradient algorithm to a symmetric positive definite
linear system, and d) will try a simple finite element method for inexact
Newton's method.