* 8917470
* Pre-Middle Jurassic Accretion-Related Metamorphism in the   South-Central Mountains, Northern California
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/1990,12/31/1992
* John Goodge, Southern Methodist University
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas O. Wright
* 12/31/1992
* USD 98,775.00

The purpose of this study is to investigate the occurrence, nature and timing
of pre-Middle Jurassic convergence-related metamorphism in accreted terranes of
the south-central Klamath Mountains of northern California. A number of
elongate, tectonometamorphic accreted terranes comprising the western Paleozoic
and Triassic belt (WPzTr) contain abundant evidence of low-P/T metamorphism
related to combined regional shortening and magmatic heating which occurred
during Middle and Late Jurassic evolution of an really widespread continental-
margin magmatic arc at the western edge of North America. One of the WpzTr
terranes, the Stuart Fork, also contains evidence of an earlier pre-mid-Jurassic
metamorphism related to subduction along a convergent margin, preserved as
distinctive high-P/T blueschist metamorphic assemblages that are partly obscured
within younger plutonic aureoles. Other terranes in the southern WPzTr contain
poorly documented low-grade metamorphic mineral assemblages which are not easily
attributed to particular metamorphic conditions, geothermal gradients or
tectonic environments. The goal of this study is to conduct a detailed
petrologic and thermochronlogic investigation of pre-Middle Jurassic
metamorphism and deformation within these southern WPzTr terranes. Integrated
field, petrologic and geochronologic data will help to constrain the origin,
evolution and tectonic environment of these terranes prior to their assembly in
mid- Jurassic time. These data will also be employed to model their accretion to
the continental margin, and to address and unresolved problem of whether the
early Mesozoic margin of the central Cordillera evolved as a single, diachronous
subduction boundary, or as a system of parallel, perhaps, coeval, subduction
zones. This integrated study will employ standard optical microscopy, detailed
electron microprobe analysis (including back-scattered electron imagining), and
XRD analysis. These methods are particularly well-suited to the study of low-
grade metamorphic rocks. In addition, chronological and thermal- history
constraints will be provided by 40Ar/39Ar age-dating in collaboration with Dr.
Paul R. Renne of Princeton University. We plan to conduct this investigation
over a period of two years, including two summer field seasons.