* 8917310
* Function of Hormones and Circadian Rhythms in the Regulationof Insect Behavior
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/1990,09/30/1993
* James Truman, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Elvira Doman
* 09/30/1993
* USD 315,000.00

A long-term goal of Dr. Truman's program is to understand the role of endocrine
factors in the regulation of behavior. This work has focussed on an insect
peptide hormone, the eclosion hormone (EH). Studies on moths 20 years ago first
indicated the existence of this hormone, and it is now known to be found
throughout the insects. Its sole known function is to trigger the behavioral and
physiological changes that occur at ecydsis, the time at the end of each molt
when the insect sheds to old skin of the former stage. The major target of EH is
the central nervous system, which responds to the hormone with a stereotyped
program of patterned motor activity which is the basis for the ecdysis behavior.
The PI and his colleagues have focussed on two aspects of the ecydsis system: 1)
the factors that control the release of EH and 2) the mode of action of this
peptide on the nervous system. The system has proven to be very favorable in
both regards. The studies in the present proposal are based on a number of
advances over the past few years: the determination of the complete structure of
EH and production of antibodies against it, the isolation and cloning of the
gene that codes for this hormone, and the identification of the neurons that
produce and secrete EH. The latter neurons, termed the ventrolateral (VM) cells
have a unique position in the brain and send their axons the length of the
ventral nervous system to a release site along the hindgut. They appear to be
the only neurosecretory cells that project to this area. Their unique position
as well as the levels of hormone that they release at each episode (about 90%)
make them excellent cells in which to study ultrastructural features of hormone
release and of restocking. Also, these cells are very accessible for
electrophysiological studies and intracellular and extracellular recording
techniques will be used to determine the electrical changes in these cells that
result in EH secretion. During the molts of the immature stages, the decline in
the levels of steroid hormones at the end of each molt is both necessary and
sufficient to cause EH release but then EH, itself, appears to act back to shut-
off its own secretion. In the adult, by contrast, these cells respond not only
to steroid decline but also to the input from a circadian clock.