* 8917117
* Genetic Elements in E. coli with Reverse Transcriptase
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/1990,10/31/1993
* Dongbin Lim, New York University Medical Center
* Continuing grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 10/31/1993
* USD 255,000.00

Recently we have found a genetic element (msDNA element) encoding a reverse
transcriptase (RT) and a branched, covalently linked RNA-DNA compound (msDNA-RNA
compound) in the E. coli B chromosome. This genetic element is not present in E.
coli K12 strains. The msDNA-RNA compound is synthesized by a novel reverse
transcription mechanism using the 2'OH of a specific internal guanine as a
primer. In order to understand the nature of the msDNA element and a possible
role of reverse transcription in the evolution of procaryotes, we plan to
characterize the msDNA element and the process of reverse transcription in E.
coli B by genetic and biochemical methods. We will determine precisely its
location and length, the structure of the msDNA element-chromosome junctions,
and its functional components by comparative studies of the restriction sites
and nucleotide sequences of E. coli B and E. coli K12 chromosomes in the
vicinity of the msDNA element. These experiments should show similarities and
differences between the msDNA element of E. coli B and retroelements in
eucaryotes. We will test the hypothesis that the msDNA element is a
retrotransposon by assaying transpositional activity after putting a selective
marker into the msDNA element. We plan to purify the E. coli B RT and
characterize its template-primer specificity, which would determine whether or
not RT copies cellular RNA. We also plan to develop a simple system to study
mutants in msDNA synthesis and to screen for RT inhibitors by taking advantage
of the antisense nature of msDNA.