* 8917332
* The Pacific Margin of the Antarctic Pennisula:  A Marine    Geophysical Study of the Tectonic Evolution of Andean-Type  Orogens
* O/D,OPP
* 07/01/1990,06/30/1995
* John Mutter, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Scott Borg
* 06/30/1995
* USD 1,614,155.00

This study focuses on several globally important, crust-forming orogenic
processes that have been active during the complex tectonic history of the
Pacific margin of Antarctica. This award supports a comprehensive geophysical
survey (i.e., Multi-Channel Seismic (MCS), gravity, magnetics, sonobuoys and
multi-beam bathymetry) of two parts of the Antarctic Peninsula. It will
illuminate the role of the South Shetland Islands-Bransfield Trough region as a
modern analog of Andean orogenic processes and as a specific step toward
tectonic reconnaissance of the less accessible, and therefore, more poorly known
parts of the West Antarctic margin bordering the Bellingshausen and Amundsen
seas. By integrating the marine data with onshore geologic observations and
kinematic plate motion histories, this investigation should be able to make real
progress toward increased understanding of the following processes: Andean-type
orogenesis; continental lithosphere extension in a convergent continental margin
setting; ridge crest subduction; and interaction of large- offset fracture zones
with convergent margins, including the uplift of subduction complexes. The study
will provide impetus for the U.S. Antarctic Geoscience Initiative by undertaking
the most ambitious Antarctic marine geophysical study carried out to date by any
nation.