* 8917741
* Biochemical and Biophysical Characterization of             Endonuclease III
* BIO,MCB
* 02/15/1990,08/31/1994
* Richard Cunningham, SUNY at Albany
* Continuing Grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 08/31/1994
* USD 255,000.00

The specific aims of this research are to the structure and function of
endonuclease III of Escherichia coli and to identify endonuclease III - like
enzymes in other organism. Three major approaches to study the structure and
function of endonuclease III will be used. Firstly, site directed mutagenesis
will be employed to alert a small number of specific amino acid residues
suggested from previous studies to play a major role in enzyme activity and the
mutant enzymes will be examined using biochemical techniques. Secondly, the
binding of endonuclease III to damaged DNA will be studies using synthetic
oligonucleotides containing a unique damaged base of AP site. Footprinting
experiments and chemical protection experiments will give information about
specific binding of enzyme to DNA, about specific contacts with bases and
phosphate backbone and will allow an estimate of the binding constant of the
enzyme to damaged DNA. Thirdly, endonuclease III will be crystallized and the
three-dimensional structure of the protein will be determined by X-ray
crystallography. If possible, the enzyme will be co-crystallized with one or
more of the synthetic oligonucleotides mentioned above for X-ray analysis.
Antibodies will be used as a means of identifying endonuclease III-like enzymes
in E. coli and other organisms. The cloning, nucleotide sequencing of the genes
for these enzymes and purification of these enzymes will yield useful
information about the conservation of the Fe-S center and residues or domains
that seem to be critical for enzymatic function.