* 8917439
* Magmatic-Hydrothermal Fluid Evolution and Associated        Mineralization at the Questa Molybdenum Deposit, New        Mexico
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/1990,07/31/1991
* Robert Bodnar, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* John L. Snyder
* 07/31/1991
* USD 35,161.00

Research of Climax-type porphyry molybdenum systems during the past ten to
fifteen years has led to identification of a cyclic magmatic-hydrothermal style
of deposit evolution in which a discrete molybdenum ore zone is produced by a
single intrusive. Results from numerous studies suggest there is a close
temporal relationship between magmatism and hydrothermal mineralization, that
metals precipitated from high temperature (500 - 600 C) fluids, and that both
fluids and molybdenum are magmatic in origin. While these studies have defined
the igneous processes responsible for generating these deposits, they have not
addressed the physical and chemical nature of the aqueous fluids which exsolve
from the magma and transport and precipitate the metals. Existing fluid data is
either preliminary in nature, or has addressed only post-metal alteration
assemblages. Knowledge of the physical and chemical characteristics of the
aqueous fluids is necessary if we are to understand metal transport and
precipitation mechanisms and to provide constraints for models now being
formulated to quantitatively describe metal behavior in these systems. The
Questa, New Mexico, molybdenum deposit has been classified as a Climax-type
porphyry deposit based on petrology, ore and alteration mineralogy, and ore
grade. However, preliminary fluid inclusion studies at Questa propose metals
precipitated from lower temperature fluids (350 - 450 C) as a result of mixing
of magmatic and meteoric fluids. A recent, detailed study of alteration
assemblages in a magmatic- hydrothermal breccia (MHBX) ore zone at Questa
determined mineralization is similar to other Climax-type deposits in that it is
related to high-temperature alteration assemblages. Within this zone, altered
andesite fragments are cemented by a mineralized pegmatitic matrix consisting of
quartz, K-feldspar, biotite, molybdenite, and rutile. We propose to investigate
the physical and chemical characteristics of hydrothermal fluids in and adjacent
to the MHBX ore zone at Questa in order to outline the temporal and spatial
evolution of the fluid transporting and precipitating molybdenum mineralization.
This will be accomplished by: 1. a detailed microthermometric analysis to
determine the gross chemistry of the fluids, 2. Raman microprobe analyses of
fluid inclusions to confirm microthermometric analyses and to identify species
not uniquely defined by microthermometry, 3. detailed reflected-and transmitted-
light petrography supplemented by electron microprobe studies to correlate
alteration/mineralization assemblages and fluid inclusion populations, 4.
microthermometric and Raman microprobe analyses on samples previously
characterized with respect to components gained and/or lost during alteration,
and 5. analyses of melt inclusions in order to document the
magmatic/hydrothermal transition. Results will be combined with available fluid
chemistry for other similar molybdenum systems in order to generate a model
describing fluid evolution during transport and precipitation of molybdenum
mineralization.