* 8917725
* Electron Transfer Photochemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 12/15/1989,05/31/1995
* Patrick Mariano, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Richard A. Caldwell
* 05/31/1995
* USD 461,000.00

This grant from the Organic Dynamics Program supports the continuing work of Dr.
Patrick S. Mariano at the University of Maryland. Knowledge gained from this
research will lead to a more sound understanding of chemical reactions that
occur through the intermediacy of charged species generated by the interaction
of organic molecules with light. In addition, the investigator will develop new
photochemical reactions of potential use in the synthesis of organic chemicals.
The experiments that will be carried out by Dr. Mariano are designed to provide
information about the mechanistic course of excited-state single-electron-
transfer processes and about the influence of structural and environmental
factors on the efficiencies of these reactions. Fast kinetic measurements will
be used to determine rates of important solution-phase ion radical processes,
which serve as the driving force for a number of important ground-state and
excited-state single-electron-transfer processes. Exploratory work will be aimed
at discovery of new, synthetically useful single-electron-transfer reactions and
related electrochemical reactions of donor-acceptor systems. Biochemically
relevant photochemical single-electron-transfer reactions will be used to model
those involved in the redox chemistry of flavoproteins.