* 8917241
* Disseration Research:  Bison Density and Bone Bed Structure at Mill Iron, Montana
* SBE,BCS
* 11/01/1989,10/31/1991
* Donald Grayson, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 10/31/1991
* USD 4,347.00

Under the supervision of Dr. Donald K. Grayson, Ms. Lee Ann Kreutzer will
conduct a structural analysis of bison bone and apply the results to faunal
material recovered from the Mill Iron archaeological site located near Ekalaka
in southeastern Montana. Using a recently developed technique, Quantitative
Digital Radiography, Ms. Kreutzer will study a series of bison skeletons housed
at the University of Wyoming and measure bone density of different skeletal
elements collected at multiple sites. This will provide a basis to determine
relative resistance of different bones to destruction in archaeological and
geological settings. She will then analyze bison remains recovered from the Mill
Iron site which dates to approximately 11,000 years ago and has yielded both
abundant faunal remains and stone tools. Ms. Kreutzer hopes to determine the
extent to which the skeletal composition of the assemblage is determined by
either cultural practice or differential preservation. Because skeletal remains
from hunted animals constitutes a major class of archaeological data
archaeologists have focussed a great deal of attention on the analysis of such
materials. In most sites the distribution of skeletal parts is non-random: ie.
not what one would expect given the numbers of different kinds of bones in a
mammalian skeleton. Archaeologists have generally claimed that such departures
from an expected distribution reflect cultural practice and have tried to
interpret assemblages in this light. More recently it has been pointed out that
differential preservation may play a major patterning role and that some bones
are more frequently encountered because they are better able to withstand
destructive forces. Ms. Kreutzer's research will address this issue. This
research is important for several reasons. It should result in information and
analytic techniques of use to archaeologists who study large mammals from many
time periods and parts of the world. It will also contribute to our
understanding of North American prehistory and further the training of a
promising young archaeologist.