* 8917592
* Iterative Solvers on Parallel Architectures for Partial     Differential Equations
* CSE,OAC
* 02/15/1990,07/31/1993
* David Young, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Robert G. Voigt
* 07/31/1993
* USD 398,578.00

The proposed work is concerned with the development, evaluation and testing of
iterative algorithms and programs for solving large sparse systems of linear
algebraic equations that typically arise in the numerical solution of partial
differential equations by finite difference methods or by finite element
methods. The main emphasis is on the efficient use of vector and parallel
computer architectures. The research studies focus on parallel iterative
algorithms designed for several types of computer architectures. General
research studies on certain aspects of iterative algorithms including
convergence rates, determination of iterative algorithms, and the treatment of
nonsymmetric systems will also be made. A novel feature of the work is the
development of hybrid iterative/direct methods designed to combine the best
features of both types of methods. Computational kernels and research-oriented
software will be developed for parallel architectures. The algorithms and
software will be evaluated using a class of test problems and also using linear
systems derived from biomedical problems and other physical applications. An
important aspect of the work is the collaboration with researchers at other
institutions. This will be especially important for the work on hybrid
methods.//