* 8917124
* Integrated Modeling Hydrogeological-Thermal-Consolidation   Processes in Accretionary Complexes--with Emphasis on the   Oregon-Washington-Vancouver Margin
* GEO,OCE
* 01/15/1990,12/31/1992
* Chi-Yuen Wang, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Bilal U. Haq
* 12/31/1992
* USD 106,476.00

Accretionary prisms form at convergent margins where one lithospheric plate is
underthrusting an adjacent lithospheric plate and sediments are being scraped
off the downgoing plate. These offscraped sediments form a large pile
(accretionary prism) in front of the overriding plate with thickness of 10 to 20
kms. This thick wedge of sediments consolidates by dewatering; the details of
this consolidation process are poorly understood but are known to involve heat
and fluid transport within the prism as well as deformation of the sediments and
rock that form the prism. Professor Wang will generate a computer finite element
model of the accretionary prism on the Oregon-Washington margin integrating
hydrogeological, thermal, and consolidation processes. A finite element model
created previously under OCE86-05986 did not integrate hydrogeological and
thermal aspects in that computations for hydrological, thermal, and
deformational processes were performed sequentially for any given time step.
Wang proposes now to fully couple the computations in that all relevant
variables will be solved for simultaneously - closer to the natural process. He
proposes to use the wealth of thermal, seismic, physical properties, and fluid
flow measurements available from the Oregon margin as boundary conditions on his
models.