* 8917066
* Energetics of Reproduction and Foraging in Adelie Penguins
* O/D,OPP
* 06/15/1990,11/30/1993
* Mark Chappell, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 11/30/1993
* USD 217,800.00

Adelie penguins, Pygoscelis adeliae, are the most abundant of the Antarctic
penguins and are important components of the Antarctic marine ecosystem. The
breeding ecology, behavior, and thermal physiology of Adelies have been
extensively studied by a variety of investigators, but many aspects of their
ecological and reproductive energetics have not been described. In previous NSF-
funded research, the effects of temperature and weather (e.g., wind and
sunlight) on the energy costs of thermoregulation in breeding Adelies and their
chicks were determined. The purpose of this research is to measure rates of
energy consumption and changes in body composition in breeding Adelies, and to
simultaneously study their foraging behavior. This will enable us to determine
reproductive effort. The isotopic technique of doubly labeled water (DLW) will
be used to determine both energy flux and body composition, at various times
throughout the breeding season. The behavior, physiology, and energetics of
diving during foraging trips will be studied with computerized time-depth
recorders (TDR). Simultaneous DLW and TDR studies will provide information on
foraging costs and foraging efficiency. Stomach content analysis will reveal
what the birds are eating. Diet information combined with DLW measurements will
allow calculation of rates of food consumption, and, hence, the trophic impact
of breeding Adelies on the surrounding marine ecosystem.