* 8917315
* Facies Generation, Transformation and Destruction by        Repetitive Excavation and Infilling of Burrow Networks
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/1990,01/31/1992
* Harold Wanless, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 01/31/1992
* USD 60,000.00

Excavating burrowers exert an overwhelming influence on many sedimentary
sequences throughout the Phanerozoic. Burrow excavation processes coupled with
subsequent storm infilling of open burrow networks results in (1) obliteration
or transformation of precursor sequences, (2) subsurface generation of
depositional facies and stratification and (3) production of preserved
depositional fabrics and faunal assemblages that are not a direct reflection of
either precursor facies or the surficial depositional conditions, textures and
fabrics. Analysis of affected sedimentary sequences using traditional
stratigraphic, sedimentologic and paleoecologic principles will produce
misleading interpretations of paleoenvironmental conditions and sequnce
evolution. This project will characterize the nature, extent and rate of
modification in affected modern sequences and develop and test criteria for
recognition and reevaluation of affected ancient sedimentary sequences. The
carbonate shelf, lagoonal and mudbank environments of south Florida will serve
as study areas for the modern portion of this research program. Application to
ancient sequences will use limestone lagoonal, shelf, mudbank, and mound
deposits of the Lower Cretaceous of Texas, Pennsylvanian of Kansas and the
Mississippian of New Mexico. Results will affect the environmental
interpretation of ancient rock sequences and the assessment of their hydrocarbon
potential.