* 8917595
* Study of Causticizing Kinetics and Design of Pressurized    Reactor
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/1990,02/28/1993
* Gopal Krishnagopalan, Auburn University
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Burka
* 02/28/1993
* USD 136,507.00

Wood contains mainly cellulose, hemicellulose, lignin and small quantities of
extractives. The primary purpose of chemical pulping is to remove the lignin
which binds the fibers in the wood and liberate the cellulosic fibers. Kraft
pulping is the major chemical pulping process used by the pulp and paper
industry for the liberation of cellulosic fibers from the structural matrix of
wood. The kraft process uses sodium hydroxide and sodium sulfide as effective
chemicals for pulping. The chemicals along with wood chips are charged into a
pressure vessel (digester), and the contents are brought to the reaction
temperature at a preset rate. After the digestion the chips are disintegrated by
being "blown" into a tank and then sent for further processing. The pulp
resulting from digestion and disintegration of the wood chips is washed
thoroughly in a counter current system of washers to produce spent liquor or
"black liquor". This black liquor is sent through a recovery cycle which
involves concentration of black liquor to 60-70% solids by evaporation and
burning of the concentrated black liquor in a furnace. In the furnace the
organic materials are completely burned to generate steam, the sodium-sulfur
compounds are reduced to sodium sulfide, and the remainder of the inorganic
components are converted to sodium carbonate. The inorganic compounds are
withdrawn as smelt from the furnace, dissolved, and then sent to a causticizing
section to regenerate sodium hydroxide by treating with lime. The clarified
liquor from the causticizing section, containing mainly sodium hydroxide, sodium
sulfide and small quantities of unconverted sodium carbonate, is called "white
liquor" and is recycled back as the cooking liquor to the digester. One of the
major reasons for the success of the kraft pulping process is the established,
efficient chemical recovery process whereby more than 95% of the chemicals used
in the cooking process can be recovered. Uniformity of composition of the
regenerated cooking liquor is a key factor in the production of uniform quality
pulp and therefore in the economy of operation of the entire process. The
purpose of this research project is to study the causticizing process and
develop a reliable kinetic model for the system, with the ultimate goal to
improve the chemical recovery operation in the kraft pulping process. A semi-
batch reactor already designed and fabricated, capable of operating at higher
pressures and equipped to monitor the composition of the main reaction products
continuously will be used. A novel in-situ and on-line sampling and analysis
system will be used to measure the feed green liquor concentration. Experimental
equilibrium data will be supplemented by theoretical calculations. A tubular
flow reactor equipped with analyzers to test the green liquor and reaction
products will be designed. Such a reactor will also allow necessary adjustment
for lime addition and result in uniform white liquor feed to the digester which
in turn will allow stable digester operation, improved pulp quality and higher
productivity.