* 8917540
* Mechanisms of Cytoplasmic Localization
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/1990,08/31/1993
* Ralph Quatrano, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Judith A. Verbeke
* 08/31/1993
* USD 250,000.00

Zygotes and young embryos of Fucus provide a model system to study the basic
mechanisms involved in the generation of zygotic/cell asymmetry and partitioning
of localized cytoplasmic components to the resulting daughter cells. These polar
processes are common to many different organisms; from yeasts, amphibians, and
nematodes, to vertebrates, mammals and plants. However, to understand how a cell
establishes a polar axis and directionally transports cytoplasmic material to a
predetermined site defined by the axis, is difficult to study and experimentally
manipulate in most of these organisms. In contrast, eggs of the Fucales are
apolar, there is no apparent spatial patterning in the egg, and "polar
determinants" are not localized in the egg and rotated by such vectors such as
unilateral light. Hence the polar axis arises epigenetically in response to
these gradients, in synchronous cultures of single-celled zygotes, and is
amenable to experimental analysis. The proposed goals are to: 1) characterize
the proteins in the axis stabilizing complex at the site of polar growth, and
prepare polyclonal antibodies to these proteins for use in: a) testing the role
of these gene products in polar axis fixation, and b) screening a cDNA
expression library to isolate and characterize the genes coding for these
critical structural components that are asymmetrically localized, 2) construct
rhizoid and thallus specific cDNA libraries, using both transcriptional and
expression vectors, and identify clones whose; a) transcripts are locally
expressed in either the rhizoid or thallus cell, and b) protein products may
play a role in axis fixation or rhizoid function as a part of the axis
stabilizing complex; 3) determine the role of localized gene products identified
above by; a) antisense RNA techniques, which first requires the development of
transient transformation techniques (e.g. microinjection, electroporation and
microprojectiles) to identify chimeric gene constructs that are expressed in
zygotes, and b) microinjection of antibodies to determine the role of specific
proteins in polar processes. %%% This project attempts to determine the
mechanisms involved in the development of asymmetry in an organism from a
initially radially symmetric egg.