* 8917727
* Computational Studies of Carrier Transport in Semiconductors with Ultrasmall Scales
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/1990,08/31/1993
* Michael Littlejohn, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* George K. Lea
* 08/31/1993
* USD 70,000.00

The objective of this research program is to study the underlying principles of
carrier transport phenomena in semiconductor devices with ultrasmall spatial
and/or temporal scales through the development of new and advanced numerical
techniques. The general areas of research to be investigated are: 1) The
development of a three- dimensional Monte Carlo device simulator. 2) The
development of an algorithm for materials and device simulation which is based
on the concept of occupation probability flux and the transition rate matrix.
The new and advanced methods are expected t be more powerful, detailed and
complete than conventional simulators, and can provide important techniques and
tools to study some of the fundamental questions in carrier transport, such as
anisotropy effects, non-stationary transport and quantum mechanical phenomena.
Once the formulations are complete, each method will be applied to analyze
various transport problems in materials and device structures through which the
advantages of each method can be fully utilized and demonstrated. The knowledge
developed in this work will be of crucial importance to the design optimization
and feasibility study of novel electronic and optoelectronic devices, whose
ever-decreasing dimensions render conventional simulation techniques more
problematic and of declining value.