* 8917650
* Genes for Restriction Endonucleases and Modification Methylases
* NONE,NONE
* 02/15/1990,07/31/1993
* Richard Roberts, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Continuing grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 07/31/1993
* USD 210,000.00

The long term goal of this project is to understand how restriction and
modification enzymes achieve their exquisite specificity in recognizing DNA
sequences. To achieve this goal set a enzymes that are related both structurally
and functionally will be studied. Comparison of the sequences for a large number
of restriction and modification enzymes shows that among restriction enzymes
there are no apparent similarities at the sequence level. Among methylases that
produce N6-methyladenine there is some limited similarity, but among methylases
that produce C5-methylcytosine there is a great deal of similarity. Three of
these cytosine methylases will be studied in great detail. These are the MspI
methylase (CCGG - MeCCGG), the HpaII Methylase (CCGG - CMeCGG) and the HhaI
methylase (GCGC - GMeCGC). An overexpressing clone of the MspI methylase has
been prepared and the methylase already purified to near-homogeneity. The
crystallization of this protein both alone and complexed with DNA will be
attemped. The sequence of the HpaII methylase gene has already been completed
and it shows striking similarities both to the MspI methylase gene and the HhaI
methylase gene. A major goal of the next three year period is to define in
detail the recognition domains of one or all of these methylase genes. This will
be accomplished by attempting a series of domain swap experiments between the
three methylases. These domain swaps will involv both exact swaps at selected
restriction enzyme sites and less well- defined swaps followed by genetic
screening to dtect recombinant methylases. Truncated versions of the proteins
will be prepared and tested if functional domains can be isolated that are able
to bind DNA.