* 8917311
* Gene Flow, Dispersal and Systematic Relationships of        Molluscs Associated with Deep-Sea Hydrothermal Vents
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/1990,06/30/1993
* Robert Vrijenhoek, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 06/30/1993
* USD 300,000.00

The primary objective of these studies is to ascertain mechanisms of organism
dispersal and rates of gene flow between deep-sea hydrothermal vent fields
associated with contiguious and non-contiguous oceanic ridge systems. A second,
but equally important objective of these studies will be to delimit the genetic
boundaries and systematic relationships among the suite of molluscan species
occupying these unusual abyssal environments. As hydrothermal vents share
significant numbers of confamilial, congeneric and perhaps conspecific molluscan
taxa with certain cold-water sulfide/methane seeps, the later environments will
also be investigated as additional sources of larval recruitment to the ridge
hydrothermal systems. Drs. Lutz and Vjrienhoek will sample the molluscan fauna
associated with a number of geographically-separated vent and seep sites in the
eastern Pacific, the Gulf of Mexico and along the mid-Atlantic Ridge. They will
use electrophoretic and molecular techniques to examine three discrete models
("island" "linear stepping-stone", and "reservoir") of population structure,
colonization, and gene flow in deep-sea vent populations. Morphological features
associated with juvenile molluscan shells will be analyzed to infer modes of
larval development of species sampled from the various vent and seep habitats.
Inferences drawn from such analyses should provide a basis for an approximate
rank-ordering of vent/seep molluscan species according to dispersal capability.
This, in turn, when coupled with genetic studies, should permit us a test of the
validity of several recent hypotheses concerning the evolutionary consequences
of different life-history strategies associated with the spectrum of organisms
encountered at deep-sea vents and seeps.