* 8917770
* Late Pliocene and Pleistocene Terrigenous Fluxes to the     Atlantic Ocean and Arabian Sea:  A Rock Magnetic Appoach
* GEO,OCE
* 01/15/1990,06/30/1992
* Jan Bloemendal, University of Rhode Island
* Continuing Grant
* Bilal U. Haq
* 06/30/1992
* USD 181,942.00

Over the last several years techniques have been developed for the measurement
of various magnetic properties of marine sediments. Drs. King and Bloemendal
have pioneered efforts to make these measurements on sediment cores both non-
destructive and especially rapid. Consequently, they have raised the technique
to the level where it can be used like other, more traditional techniques that
determine past climate and oceanographic changes. The PI's will continue their
previous investigations into the links between sediment composition and magnetic
properties. Their goals will be to determine fluxes of terrigenous sediment
during the late Neogene, with special focus on the time of initiation of N.
Hemisphere glaciation at about 2.5 Ma. Soft sediments from IPOD/ODP cores and
piston cores in the tropical eastern Atlantic, central North Atlantic, and the
Arabian Sea will be measured, and with this variety of eolian, riverine and
glacially derived terrigenoeus sediments they will: 1) explore the relationship
between magnetic properties and the flux and grain-size of terrigenoeus
sediments in these contrasting environments; 2) use these records to reconstruct
the history of terrigeonous flux and climate in these three areas; and 3)
perform laboratory experiments in conjunction with studies of selected core
samples to determine the effects of reduction diagenesis and what magnetic
criteria identify this process in soft sediments.