* 8917767
* RUI:  Sulfide Tolerance and Detoxification in Urechis Caupo
* BIO,IOS
* 02/15/1990,07/31/1993
* Alissa Arp, San Francisco State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sharon Emerson
* 07/31/1993
* USD 205,000.00

Urechis caupo, a worm-like animal, occurs in dense populations in three
northern Californian mudflat environments which often show high levels of toxic
hydrogen sulfide and low levels of oxygen. The intent of the proposed research
is to characterize the environment of these animals and to use this information
to design laboratory experiments investigating the biochemical basis for the
adaptations that allow these animals to flourish in a seemingly inhospitable
habitat. Sulfide and oxygen levels will be measured in the animal's environment
and tolerance to high sulfide and low oxygen will be determined in the
laboratory. Possible avenues of sulfide entry into the animal's body will be
explored by examining skin and respiratory organ permeability to sulfide. The
chemical fate of internal sulfide will be followed, characterized, and the
ultimate endproduct of sulfide detoxification determined. In this way the path
of toxic sulfide will be followed from entry into the animal as a poisonous
compound to removal as a benign wasteproduct. The physiological mechanisms
employed by this animal are potentially important in the elucidation of the
adaptive strategies that allow large populations of invertebrates to flourish in
sulfide-laden environments. Additionally, this research involves a new
detoxification function for hemoglobin, a well studied and critically important
transport protein.