* 8917157
* Cosmic Background Isotrophy Measurements from the South Pole
* O/D,OPP
* 01/01/1990,06/30/1992
* Mark Dragovan, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* John T. Lynch
* 06/30/1992
* USD 333,326.00

This cosmology project will measure the isotropy of cosmic microwave background
radiation (CMBR) that was emitted early in the formation of the universe. The
measurements will be made at wavelengths both longer (approximately 3
millimeters) and shorter (less that 1 millimeter) than the peak in the CMBR
spectrum. Because these radio waves are strongly absorbed by the atmosphere,
especially water vapor, South Pole Station, which is the second driest inhabited
place on Earth is the best place to make these measurements (the Soviet
Antarctic Station Vostok is slightly colder and drier). In addition, the
circumpolar motion of the celestial sky means that any spot in the sky can be
watched through a constant thickness of atmosphere for any length of time, which
is also a great advantage. To date all measurements of the CMBR have shown the
radiation to be isotropic, that is, it comes from all directions with equal
intensity. It is clear that this cannot be true at very small variations in
intensity nor at all angular scales, any more than the likelihood that the sky
would be uniformly bright in visible light. The amount of variation, and angular
scale of those variations are sensitive tests of the theories of the creation
and early history of the universe. This project is a search for these expected
variations.