* 8917878
* Research Careers for Minority Scholars:  A Minority Scholar Program in Engineering at Iowa State University             (Engineering)
* EDU,EES
* 01/01/1990,06/30/1998
* Paul Morgan, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* William A. Sibley
* 06/30/1998
* USD 824,236.00

The College of Engineering at Iowa State University (ISU) will undertake a
comprehensive approach to attract more highly qualified minority engineering
students through implementation of two well coordinated programs: the Minority
Scholars Program and the Visiting Minority Scholars Program. The College will
coordinate efforts of research professors, minority recruitment officers,
mentors, industrial and research institutions, and other organizations in order
to achieve the goal of generating, among outstanding minority students, long-
term interest in and dedication to research. It is anticipated that this
research involvement will significantly enhance opportunities for involved
minority students to continue their education through advanced degree programs
(M.S. and Ph.D.). The Minority Scholar Program will greatly enhance the current
minority programs at ISU. In addition, the programs leverage the already strong
commitment of ISU to minority education. Specifically, well established minority
recruitment and retention programs will be fully utilized. However, the
supported effort will focus on needs of truly outstanding minority students.
These efforts include development of undergraduate research programs, strong
partnerships with two national laboratories, and establishment of a Minority
Scholar Program at ISU that focuses on the personal, social, and professional
development of the Minority Scholars.