* 8917016
* Significance of Bacterial Exoenzymes in Organic Matter      Cycling in the Antarctic Ocean
* O/D,OPP
* 04/01/1990,03/31/1993
* Farooq Azam, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 03/31/1993
* USD 105,000.00

Coupling of carbon from primary producers to bacteria can significantly
influence the patterns of vertical flux of organic matter in the ocean. Because
bacteria must hydrolyze particles before uptake, bacterial exohydrolases must
assume a central role in carbon flux from particulate organic matter into the
microbial loop. The expression of bacterial exohydrolase is regulated by
substrate concentration and therefore may cease in waters depleted of particles
and polymers. In high latitude waters there is no phytoplankton production
during the protracted polar night. The hypothesis to be tested is that during
the Antarctica winter, the production of bacteria exohydrolase ceases.
Therefore, particles and polymers produced during the early spring bloom cannot
be utilized by bacteria. Exohydrolases are expressed when organic matter
accumulates to a critical level; consequently, the coupling between particulate
organic matter and bacteria becomes strong. Field and laboratory manipulations
will examine environmental cues which regulate exohydrolase activities. This
knowledge should contribute to the understanding of biological production
mechanisms and variability in the pathways of organic matter cycling in the
Southern Ocean.