* 8917968
* Underground Space Technology, Indo-U.S. Workshop, New Delhi,India, March 1991, Award in U.S. and Indian Currencies
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1990,05/31/1992
* Raymond Sterling, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 05/31/1992
* USD 25,516.00

Description: This project supports participation by seven U.S. scientists in an
Indo-U.S. workshop on underground space technology to be held in New Delhi,
India in March 1991. The Indian counterpart is Dr. B. Singh, Director, Central
Mining Research Station in Dhanbad, India. The three-and-half days workshop will
cover the following areas: planning and design of underground space for various
purposes; methods of construction including rapid tunnelling; underground
excavation and much transportation; monitoring of behavior during construction
and thereafter, ventilation, drainage, lighting and worker's safety; site
evaluation and geotechnical design, and prediction of geomining conditions and
excavation problems. In addition to evolving technology for the Indian
conditions, the workshop will identify areas where U.S.-Indian collaboration
would be useful. Scope: This field is in an area of increasing importance due to
the increazsed need for maximum utilization of space and in economy in heating
and cooling in addtion to the other conditions requiring underground
construction such as tunnels, mines, and safety shelters. The topic is timely
for India and for the U.S. It is likely that the exchange of information by U.S.
and Indian scientists will benefit both sides from the experiences gained
heretofore, and that avenues for cooperation on areas that need research will be
identified. Workshop report will be published and distributed to the U.S.
community and in India.