* 8917995
* Annual Cycles and Long-range Transports of Non-methane      Hydrocarbons, CO, Rn-222 and Kr-85 in the Mid and Upper     Troposphere
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/1990,09/30/1992
* Mark Kritz, SUNY at Albany
* Continuing Grant
* Jarvis L. Moyers
* 09/30/1992
* USD 181,800.00

A central problem in interpreting atmospheric chemistry has been finding a
rational means of evaluating the relative roles of chemistry and transport, so
that the budgets, reaction times, fluxes, etc. of primary interest could be
identified and quantified. One approach to this problem has been to use
measurements of the atmospheric concentrations of natural and manmade
radionuclides as a way of evaluating transport. The atmospheric concentrations
of radionuclides such as Radon-222 and Krypton-85 are essentially insensitive to
chemical effects, while at the same time are affected by transport in the same
way as are many of the chemically reactive species found in the atmosphere. Thus
the simultaneous measurement of both radioactive and reactive chemical species
has proved to be an effective approach in atmospheric chemistry field
experiments. The objectives of this research project is to: 1) build and flight
test an airborne radon pumped whole air sampler, and build the laboratory
transfer/analysis system for use in conjunction with the whole air sampler; and
2) build an airborne aerosol sampling system designed to collect samples for
Pb-210 analysis. Both samplers will be designed to facilitate their eventual
integration aboard medium sized research aircraft such as the NCAR Electra. This
equipment will be available and for use in organized multi-investigator
atmospheric chemistry experiments such as the Pacific Stratus/Sulfur
Investigation (PSI), the Pacific Dust Experiment (PACDEX) or the
Atmosphere/Ocean Chemistry Experiment (AEROCE).