* 8917424
* Non-erythroid Spectrin:  Localization and Function
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/1990,02/28/1994
* Jennifer Black, Roswell Park Cancer Institute, Division of Health Research, Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 02/28/1994
* USD 253,853.00

The long term objective of this proposal is the elucidation of the function(s)
of non-erythroid spectrin. There is increasing evidence that challenges the
prevailing view that non-erythroid spectrin acts only as a major structural
component in a submembranous network similar to that found in red blood cells.
In several cell types, spectrin is distributed in a non-random manner, often at
some distance from the plasma membrane. Moreover, its subcellular distribution
can be modulated by certain stimuli. Based on the extensive literature on non-
erythroid spectrin, basic concepts regarding its function are now beginning to
emerge. Spectrin has been implicated in various membrane- related events
including membrane trafficking membrane receptor/micro- filament interactions
and establishment/maintenance of membrane domains. In this study, a combination
of immunological, biochemical and morphological techniques will be used to
examine the function of spectrin in three cell types, the lymphocyte, the neuron
and the enterocyte. Spectrin organization and dynamics will be studied in
relation to cell-specific functional and developmental processes (i.e.
lymphocyte activation, axonal transport, synaptic transmission and enterocyte
maturation/development). Ultrastructural immunolocalization procedures developed
in this laboratory will be used for detailed analysis of the spectrin skeleton
(spectrin and associated proteins) during particular cellular events. Observed
localization patterns will be interpreted in relation to emerging concepts of
spectrin function. Since the localization of a protein is intimately related to
its function, this approach should provide valuable insight regarding the
cellular role(s) of this protein. In future studies, putative functions of non-
erythroid spectrin will be tested by introduction of anti-spectrin antibodies
into living cells. It is anticipated that these studies will provide important
and substantive information concerning the possible functions of spectrin.