* 8917935
* Functional Associations Between Cribellum Features,         Cribellar Silk Properties, and Web Architecture in the      Spider Family Uloboridae
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/1990,09/30/1994
* Brent Opell, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 09/30/1994
* USD 106,493.00

Spiders of the Family Uloboridae include the most primitive orb-weaving groups,
as well as species that spin reduced triangular aerial webs and irregular webs.
The silk that constitute these prey-capture webs are composites of threads
produced by an oval plate of spigots (the cribellum) on the spider's abdomen.
Variations in the morphology of the cribellum produces changes in the strength
and stickiness of the silk. Dr. Brent Opell proposes to study the associations
between various kinds of cribellar morphology, silk characteristics, web
architecture, and predatory behavior in eight species of uloborid spiders. These
species represent both reduced- and normal-web spinners from different
evolutionary branches of the family. The proposed research will establish the
degree to which form constrains function and behavior in a complex mechanical
system. Further, the study may uncover underlying generalities concerning the
historical development of the form-function associations (for instance, can a
single cribellar change give rise to only certain web and behavior types, or can
a single web type accommodate changes in behavior but not silk?). The proposed
research addresses questions that are fundamental to all of evolutionary
biology. This study will give new insight into the relative importance of
current adaptive needs and historical constraint in the evolution of new
features. The results of this study will be of interest to a wide range of
functional, systematic, and evolutionary biologists.