* 8917548
* Workshop: Trace Gas Emissions from Plants; January 21-24,   1990; Pacific Grove, California
* BIO,IOS
* 01/15/1990,12/31/1990
* Thomas Sharkey, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Bruce L. Umminger
* 12/31/1990
* USD 12,500.00

Many gases are exchanged between the atmosphere and the biosphere. Carbon
dioxide, water vapor, and oxygen are directly involved in photosynthesis, the
most quantitatively important process in the biosphere. The exchange of the
gases involved with photosynthesis have been studied in detail and much is known
about the biochemistry and biophysics of these exchanges. In addition to these
major gases many trace gases are exchanged between the atmosphere and the
biosphere. Some of these trace gases, such as methane, affect the radiative
properties of the atmosphere and can contribute substantially to the predicted
warming of the atmosphere, the greenhouse effect. Other hydrocarbons such as
isoprene and monoterpenes affect atmospheric chemistry and lead to the
production of ozone and carbon monoxide through photochemistry. Sulfur and
nitrogen gases play important roles in ecosystem acidification and nutrient
cycling and may also influence climate through the formation of cloud
condensation nuclei. Very little work is currently being done by the plant
physiology community on these trace gas emissions from plants. A three day
workshop is therefore proposed to assemble the existing information, and
determine what research is required to understand trace gas emissions from
plants. This information will be assembled and published to stimulate and help
guide research in this area.