* 8917386
* A Lower to Middle Jurassic Terrestrial Vertebrate Assemblageand its Implications for the Post-Triassic Radiation of     Tetrapods
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/1990,05/31/1993
* O. Hermes, University of Rhode Island
* Continuing Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 05/31/1993
* USD 119,152.00

PI will study the implications of an exceptional Lower or Middle Jurassic
vertebrate assemblage for the diversification of terrestrial tetrapods following
the mass extinction(s) at the end of the Triassic. The vertebrate assemblage,
from the La Boca Formation, Huizachal Canyon, Tamaulipas, Mexico, affords a
unique test of whether rapid adaptive radiation, commonly inferred to follow
mass extinctions, occurred in post-Triassic global vertebrate faunas.
Preliminary work indicates that: a)based upon vertebrate biostratigraphy, the
age of the assemblage (which includes new taxa) is ambiguously Lower or Middle
Jurassic; and b)the assemblage accumulated under unique depositional conditions,
in a structurally complex setting that hinders simple lithostratigraphic
correlations. To integrate the Huizachal assemblage into a reconstruction of
post-Triassic tetrapod diversification, PI will a)study the systematic
paleontology of the assemblage, including a phylogenetic characterization;
b)establish a lithostratigraphy for Huizachal Canyon involving the
reconstruction of sedimentary environments; and c)constrain the age of the
Huizachal assemblage by means other than vertebrate biostratigraphy. Having
accomplished these prerequisites, they will integrate results into
phylogenetically-based compilations of post-Triassic terrestrial diversity, to
test the idea that the early Jurassic was characterized by a rapid radiation of
terrestrial vertebrates.