* 8917116
* RUI:  Fluvial Terraces:  A Tool for Integrating Geomorphic  Processes, Climatic and Tectonic Events, and Landscape      Development
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/1990,07/31/1992
* Dorothy Merritts, Franklin and Marshall College
* Continuing Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 07/31/1992
* USD 100,661.00

This is a geomorphic investigation of fluvial processes in an area in which
tectonic activity varies between river basins, and climate varies with time
among the basins. Tectonic controls will dominate terrace formation in high
uplift rate regions, and climatic controls will gain increasing importance as
uplift rate declines. We propose to test this hypothesis on the basis of
differences and similarities in the terrace sequences of three moderate size
rivers developed in argillaceous sandstone in coastal northern California.
Present climatic controls on amount and intensity of precipitation and
temperature are very similar for each drainage basin, although these parameters
have varied with late Cenozoic climatic perturbations that ultimately drove the
rise and fall of eustatic sea level. Base-level processes related to relative
rise of the land mass vary by an order of magnitude from the southernmost to the
northernmost rivers. Fieldwork in each watershed will consist of continuous
surveying and mapping of the longitudinal profiles of erosional terraces,
depositional terraces, and the modern channel and floodplain. Seismic refraction
studies will quantify depth of fill where not observable. The chronology of
terrace formation will be constrained by radiometric dating of organic material
from alluvial sediments either resting upon erosional terraces, or within
deposits that comprise depositional terraces. This work will allow
quantification of the nature and rates of propagation of channel incision and
valley in-filling in response to changing climate and long-term tectonism.
Comparison of the results for the three rivers, and thus separation of tectonic
and climatic controls, should allow: 1) better understanding of the nature of
fluvial response to change, 2) interpreting the environmental significance of
strath versus fill terraces, and of preserved flights of terraces in general,
and 3) integrating an understanding of geomorphic processes with models of
landscape evolution.