* 8917038
* Denitrification and the Fate of Nitrogen Inputs to a Riparian Forest Receiving Agricultural Runoff
* NONE,NONE
* 04/15/1990,09/30/1994
* David Correll, Chesapeake Research Consortium Inc
* Continuing grant
* Richard F. Dame
* 09/30/1994
* USD 599,741.00

Dr. Correll, with Co-principal investigators Weller and Jordan, will measure in
situ the gaseous nitrogen losses from a riparian forest that intercepts nitrogen
for agricultural runoff. They will quantify the annual losses of gaseous N from
the forest, investigate the environmental controls of denitrification, and
assess the relative amounts of nitrogen lost as molecular nitrogen (N2) and
nitrous oxide (N2O). The gaseous loss measurements will be combined with
measurements of nitrogen transport in runoff and precipitation to yield a
complete nitrogen input/output budget for the forest. They will also measure key
parameters of the trees and soil top determine if a gradient of nitrogen
availability exists within the forest and to evaluate the effects of the
exogenous nitrogen storage and cycling and plant growth within the forest. They
will construct a simulation model to summarize the resulting understanding of
nitrogen transport and processing by the riparian forest. The results will
address several issues of practical and scientific importance: the ability of
riparian forests to buffer downstream systems from over enrichment from
agricultural discharges; the release of N2O (which is involved in the
"greenhouse" effect and stratospheric ozone depletion) from coupled cropland-
forest systems; and the effects of chronic fertilization on deciduous forest
systems. The study will also develop improved methods for field measurements of
gas emissions from ecosystems, and produce basic information needed to manage
nitrogen discharges from cropland-forest systems. Dr. Correll and his colleagues
are leaders in the field of terrestrial-aquatic nutrient exchanges and riparian
zone dynamics. Their research is developed from a strong conceptual foundation
and utilizes new and innovative techniques to measure large scale gas emissions
to the atmosphere. Their research is linked to other ongoing projects to allow
extensive collaboration and exchange of information. Support for this research
from the Smithsonian Institution and the Chesapeake Research Consortium is
outstanding.