* 8917325
* Specificity &amp; Regulatory Properties of trp Repressor
* BIO,MCB
* 02/15/1990,07/31/1993
* Jannette Carey, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 07/31/1993
* USD 180,000.00

This is a proposal to study the molecular basis for the specific recognition of
nucleic acids by proteins, and the factors involved their regulatory
interactions, both in vivo and in vitro. The work will focus on the structurally
well- characterized trp repressor of E. coli, and will be concentrated in five
areas. 1. A thorough study of operator DNA structure/function relations will be
made including their role in the recognition process. An oligonucleotide
representing the operator will be synthesized, along with a control DNA of
identical composition but unrelated sequence. The average solution conformation
of these DNAs will be defer mined using circular dichroism (CD). The
thermodynamics of the helix-coil transition for these DNAs will be determined
using CD, and the results will be compared to those obtained in the presence of
the repressor. 2..Development of new reliable, quantitative assays for the
binding reactions of trp repressor will be undertaken. First, it will be
ascertained whether protein binding causes a change in the CD spectrum of the
DNA; this assay is likely to be suitable only for nonspecific binding. In an
effort to assay specific binding, fluorescent probes will be attached to the DNA
at sites where they may be quenched by the bound protein without interfering
greatly with its binding. 3. The affinity and specificity of trp repressor for
binding to DNA will be determined under the exact conditions that have been used
for crystallization of the complex. The results should establish whether these
conditions are compatible with operator-specific binding, and would thus resolve
a major controversy engendered by the crystal structure. 4. A complete analysis
of the biochemical and thermodynamic characteristics of the in vitro binding
reactions of the repressor will be made. Salt concentration and temperature
dependence for binding to specific and nonspecific DNA and to tryptophan will be
measured, and related to what is known about the structure of the protein. We
will be used to establish whether an order-disorder transition explains the
large CP for DNA binding found in the temperature studies. 5. In vivo and in
vitro experiments will be carried out to determine the detailed molecular
mechanism of transcriptional control by trp repressor. The question of whether
the effect of repressor on RNA polymerase is the same at the three known sites
of regulation, and which step in the polymerase mechanisms is affected at each
site will be investigated. The affinities of the three operators in vivo will be
compared, ant it will be determined if repressor and polymerase communicate to
modulate each other's interactions with the DNA.