* 8917185
* A Study of Metamorphic Fluids and Processes through         Integrated use of Petrology and Fluid Inclusions
* NONE,NONE
* 01/15/1990,04/30/1992
* Sakiko Olsen, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* John L. Snyder
* 04/30/1992
* USD 79,238.00

There is no doubt that fluids are present in some form during metamorphism of
most rocks. It is difficult, however, to obtain the information on metamorphic
fluids from a rock because little of the fluids is left in the rock except as
volatile components in some minerals. Neither is it possible to sample the fluid
during metamorphism except in very limited cases of low-grade metamorphism
(=geothermal field). Theoretical calculations using mineral compositions in the
rock can give a fluid composition with which the minerals now present in the
rock must have been in equilibrium with. However, the amounts of some components
in the fluid such as Cl and N cannot easily be obtained by calculations. In
addition, there probably were several generations of fluid that have passed
through the rock for which the compositions cannot be calculated: only the fluid
in equilibrium with the present mineral assemblages can be calculated. The
results from such petrological calculations will be compared to the fluid
present in small cavities in the minerals in the rock (=fluid inclusions). These
fluid inclusions are thought to have trapped fluids that were present in the
rock at different times during its metamorphic history. Two small areas, in
Texas and south-central Maine, will be studied. The results should tell us
whether the fluid inclusions can be used as the samples of unmodified
metamorphic fluids in these and other areas. The results should also increase
understanding of the nature of the fluid phase and its role during metamorphism
and contribute toward a better understanding of metamorphic processes in
general.