* 8918153
* Field Museum Spring Systematics Symposium; Chicago, IllinoisMay 1990
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/1990,09/30/1991
* Matthew Nitecki, Field Museum of Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 09/30/1991
* USD 10,486.00

The understanding and meaning of ethical judgements are of greatest importance
to all citizens. Questions of particular interest to the scientific community,
however are whether there is a relation between ethics and evolution and whether
a system of evolutionary ethics is a legitimate subject of analysis. These
questions, initiated by Herber Spencer's work in the 1870's, have been answered
in the past either in the positive, or vehemently opposed. Evolutionary ethics
blossomed as Social Darwinism in the later part of the nineteenth and the
beginnings of the twentieth centuries. Now, probably strengthened by
sociobiology and the associated controversies, there is a renewed interest in,
and a reexamination of, the possibilities of evolutionary ethics. Presently a
rigorous (and emotional) rethinking of evolutionary ethics cuts across political
and feminist positions. On the one hand there exists an evolutionary,
conservative political view based on evolutionary biology which lends itself to
support the conservative views of sociobiology, and on the other hand
sociologists and even communists have claimed an evolutionary moral ground. The
symposium will analyze the position taken on evolutionary ethics, point out the
difficulties with all interpretations, and argue for and against the legitimacy
of ethical analysis of evolutionary ethics.