* 8918793
* Dissertation Research:  Prehispanic Maya Community          Organization and Settlement Hierarchy in the Chichen Itza   Area
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/1990,06/30/1991
* Alan Kolata, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 06/30/1991
* USD 11,995.00

Under the direction of Dr. Alan Kolata, Ms. Patricia Anderson will conduct
archaeological research to collect data for her doctoral dissertation. Ms.
Anderson will carry out both survey and excavation at the Mayan site of Yula
which dates from the classic/post-classic period and is located near the major
ceremonial center of Chichen Itza in the Yucatan peninsula of Mexico. Because of
extensive work which has been done at Chichen Itza, it should be possible to
place Yula into a broader regional context. With a team of assistants, Ms.
Anderson will clear site overgrowth and then construct a site map. Site
boundaries will be determined and microenvironmental and hydrological resources
noted. Buildings and other cultural remains will be plotted and non-ceramic
objects collected. Test excavations will then be placed in rich midden areas to
retrieve pottery and other material remains. On this basis it should be possible
to determine the size of the community and the range of activities conducted
there. Although much archaeological research has been conducted in the Yucatan
peninsula, the focus has been almost exclusively on "elite sites" with
impressive temples and public buildings. What makes this project important is
its examination of a small non- elite settlement. This should aid in producing a
more balanced picture of Mayan society. It should also increase archaeological
understanding of how communities of different sizes interacted and the over-
arching political and economic system which linked them. This research is
important for several reasons. First, it will assist in the training of an
extremely promising young scientist. Secondly, it will provide new insight into
how complex societies develop. The information on economic interactions between
larger and smaller agrarian based entities and how these change over time may
help us to understand processes of development in the Third World.