* 8918027
* Genetics and Physiological Chemistry of Growth and          Adaptation
* BIO,DEB
* 01/15/1990,12/31/1993
* Axel Meyer, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 12/31/1993
* USD 309,325.00

Virtually every animal and plant species exhibits genetic variation for a
variety of enzymes involved in the control of metabolism. Although a few cases
have been studied in detail, we have a very poor understanding of the biological
significance of this variation. Over the past two years, studies on a variety of
plant and animal species have demonstrated that the level of individual genetic
variation, estimated for a series of enzyme synthesizing loci, is positively
correlated with energy balance. The higher the level of individual genetic
variation (i.e., heterozygosity), the lower the cost of metabolism, measured as
heat production or mass-specific rates of oxygen consumption. The proposed
research will attempt to establish a causal link between genetic variation of
metabolic enzymes and this phenotypic variation in energy balance. The key to
this problem seems to lie in how genotype influences the rate of enzyme
synthesis and degradation and the energy cost associated with each. The proposed
research will use enzyme specific antibodies and a variety of radioisotopes to
estimate the metabolic costs of synthesis and degradation for a series of
specific enzymes and how these costs are mitigated by genotype at the enzyme
synthesizing loci. The results will be of significance in a variety of areas
ranging from evolutionary biology to animal and plant breeding.