* 8918273
* The Controls of Sulfur Storage in Lake Sediments by         Interactions among the Carbon, Iron, Oxygen and Sulfur      Cycles
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/1990,04/30/1994
* Brian Fry, Marine Biological Laboratory
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 04/30/1994
* USD 899,726.00

Lakes in many areas of the world now receive considerable inputs of sulfate
from acid deposition. Giblin, Peterson, and Fry previously focused on the
biogeochemical changes that occur in lakes due to increased sulfate loading.
Their work revealed that some of the existing paradigms on how the sulfur cycle
in lakes functions may need to be modified. The investigators now have evidence
from both laboratory incubations and sediment profiles that carbon limits
sulfate reduction in some lakes. in this proposal the investigators focus on
several questions that are a direct outgrowth of their previous work. These are:
1) How widespread is carbon limitation of sulfur storage in lake sediments? 2)
How does eutrophication influence the amounts and forms of sulfur stored in lake
sediments? 3) Does iron availability effect sulfur storage in sediments in many
lakes? The investigators propose a multifaceted experimental approach that
includes the measurement of sediment element profiles from a variety of lakes,
metabolic studies at the whole lake level, and the experimental manipulation of
variables in field and laboratory settings. This balanced approach should allow
robust conclusions about responses of the C,N,Fe, and P cycles to changes in
sulfate loading, and how these responses are altered by eutrophication. This
research is being conducted by a highly qualified team from an outstanding
institution. The results of this work will provide important knowledge for
understanding the responses of lakes to eutrophication and acid precipitation.