* 8918824
* The Archaeology of Tehuantepec
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/1990,01/31/1993
* Robert Zeitlin, Brandeis University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 01/31/1993
* USD 16,596.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Robert Zeitlin and a student
assistant will conduct archaeological research at the site of Laguna Zope,
located on the west coast of Mexico about 200 km from the valley of Oaxaca.
Extensive work in Oaxaca has demonstrated the rise, subsequent expansion, and
final decline of a powerful Zapotec civilization, and Dr. Zeitlin's research in
a adjacent area will provide insight into the extent and nature of Zapotec
expansion. Laguna Zope consists of a large site with dense, stratified cultural
deposits which originally covered approximately 85 hectares. These result from
hundreds of years of continuous occupation. A road which runs through the site
truncates these deposits, and Dr. Zeitlin, working from the cut face, will
excavate into these strata in a mound area, indicative of high status
occupation. The ceramics and other materials collected will permit examination
of Zapotec interaction. Faunal and floral materials will allow reconstruction of
subsistence techniques. Kingdoms and empires appear to have arisen independently
in many areas of both the Old and New World. Archaeologists wish to understand
the processes which lead to the growth of such complex societies and which can
eventually incorporate millions of individuals. In particular, it is unclear how
outlying regions are brought under the domination of the core area and several
mechanisms, from direct conquest to the fostering of economic dependence, have
been proposed. Laguna Zope, because of its peripheral position and rich readily
accessible cultural deposits, provides an excellent situation to address this
question. This research is important for several reasons. It will contribute to
our understanding of how complex societies, including our own, arise. Because
development is rapidly destroying the site, these data would otherwise soon be
lost. Finally, the project will assist in the training a graduate student.