* 8918104
* Functions of Acoustic Signal Interactions
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/1990,07/31/1991
* Michael Greenfield, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* Fred Stollnitz
* 07/31/1991
* USD 7,316.00

In many species of animals, temporal relationships occur between the female-
attracting signals of adjacent males if population densities exceed critical
levels. When signaling involves the use of sound, these relationships appear as
various formats of synchrony and alternation. Dr. Greenfield's research will
examine the adaptive functions of signal interactions in several different
singing insects that, among them, exhibit a range of synchronous and alternating
formats. Observations and experiments will elucidate which of four hypotheses
best accounts for the various formats of signal interactions. The hypotheses are
that (1) interactions enhance "species recognition"; i.e., neighboring males
time their songs so as not to obscure species-specific sounds that females must
hear before moving toward any one male; (2) interactions reduce attacks by
natural enemies that find their prey by listening to the prey's female-
attracting sounds; (3) interactions represent a means by which groups of
sexually advertising males compete with one another to attract females to the
group's vicinity; (4) interactions represent a by-product of sexual selection,
wherein individual males time their sound signals so that they can most strongly
attract females and, at the same time, obfuscate the sounds of neighboring
males. The results of this research project may reveal subtle aspects of sexual
selection that would remain undetected in studies focusing on how females choose
among isolated males or in studies that do not measure and control temporal
signal interactions. Because some acoustic insects are agricultural pests,
information on the roles of signal interactions in female attraction may be
pertinent to effective control and monitoring strategies for certain pest
species.