* 8918755
* Anatomy and Adaptations of Early Eocene Mammals from Wyoming
* NONE,NONE
* 03/15/1990,02/28/1994
* Kenneth Rose, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing grant
* Sharon Emerson
* 02/28/1994
* USD 163,826.00

The Bighorn Basin of Wyoming has a richly fossiliferous sedimentary sequence of
Eocene age. It has yielded an extraordinarily dense record of vertebrate
fossils, most of which are teeth, jaws, or more rarely, skulls. This has left
open the question of how the these mammals functioned ecologically (locomotion
being the primary question). The Eocene was a time interval in which the modern
families of vertebrates were becoming differentiated, so a better understanding
of their locomotion would be particularly valuable. Dr. Kenneth Rose has devoted
years of effort to making detailed fossil collections that document these
evolutionary events. He proposes to continue his efforts to collect new post-
cranial remains, and to use these and existing collections in an analysis of
function and behavior. Dr. Rose will use the most current approaches to studying
the shapes and functions of fossil bone, including microcomputer- based image
analysis as well as statistical comparisons with living mammals. The proposed
research will attract an audience beyond vertebrate paleontologists interested
in the Eocene. Mammalogists and functional morphologists will gain new insight
into the early functional repertoire of mammalian families, and evolutionary
biologists will take interest in the process by which new functional complexes
arise in radiating families.