* 8918526
* Collaborative Research:  Ecosystem Dynamics in Hawaii:  An  Experimental Analysis Along Gradients of State Factors
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/1990,02/28/1997
* Ruth Stemmermann, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas M. Frost
* 02/28/1997
* USD 671,075.00

Drs. Vitousek and Mueller-Dombois will conduct an integrated observational and
experimental study of the regulation of ecosystem-level biogeochemistry along
independent gradients of soil age, temperature, moisture, and biota in the
Hawaiian Islands. Biological, geological, and climatic features combine to make
the Hawaiian Islands a unique system in which many aspects of ecosystem theory
can be tested experimentally. The broad range of dominant native species and the
striking impact of invasions by exotic species offer the opportunity to
determine unambiguously the ecosystem level consequences of population and
physiological-level processes. This research is designed to determine how
ecosystem dynamics are regulated during soil development and as a function of
climate. Both the interactions of physiological processes with ecosystem
functions and the operation of population and community processes (biological
invasions, stand-level die-back) that alter ecosystem dynamics are incorporated.
A modified version of the CENTURY model will be evaluated and improved using
observations and experiments, and the resulting derivative models will be used
in the design of further field experiments and as tools for integration and
extrapolation. The results of this effort will contribute to issues of tropical
biodiversity and global change. University support from Stanford and the
University of Hawaii is outstanding. Drs. Vitousek and Mueller- Dombois are
creative and productive researchers in the area of tropical ecosystem research.