* 8918107
* Fundamental Investigation of Molybdenum Nitride and Carbide Catalysts: Minority Research Initiation Award
* ENG,CBET
* 01/15/1990,12/31/1993
* Levi Thompson, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Farley Fisher
* 12/31/1993
* USD 298,000.00

This proposal aims to determine the effects of phasic composition, surface
structure, and stoichiometry on the catalytic properties of molybdenum nitrides
and carbides. A series of thin films with well-defined structures anad
stoichiometries are synthesized, evaluated for catalytic activity, and
characterized. Thin films are prepared with ion-beam-assisted deposition (IBAD),
a technique that permits growth of compound materials with control over
structure and stoichiometry. Hydrodenitrogenation of pyridine, dehydrogenation
of cyclohexane, and hydrogenolysis of cyclohexane are used to test for ability
to activate C-N, C-H, or C-C bonds, respectively. Primary characterization is
done with Auger spectroscopy, temperature-programmed desorption, and
temperature-programmed reaction. Other techniques employed include X-ray
diffraction, Rutherford back-scattering, and electron microscopy. The objective
of this effort is to develop relationships between the structural, electronic,
and catalytic properties of early transition-metal nitrides and carbides,
starting with molybdenum. These have potential for a variety of commercial
processes including petroleum refining, pollution abatement, and conversion of
gaseous resources into liquid fuels; in many cases, they are prospective
substitutes for rare and expensive platinum-group metals. The results of this
work may also be applicable in tribology and electrochemistry.