* 8918748
* Root Inputs in Podzol Soils:  Effects on Nutrient           Cycling and Connections between Soil Horizons
* BIO,DEB
* 04/15/1990,09/30/1993
* Robert Parmelee, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 09/30/1993
* USD 486,173.00

Ehrenfeld and Parmelee have shown in greenhouse microcosm studies that live
roots stimulate a rhizosphere effect proportional to the amount of root input in
the nutrient-poor mineral soil of the pitch pine forests in the New Jersey
Pinelands but have no such effect in the organic forest floor. Because this
finding has important implications for nutrient cycling in forest ecosystems,
field experimentation is required. The investigators propose to test their
results in a field experiment in which decomposition, N mineralization rate,
fungal and microfaunal abundance and soil leachate chemistry are followed for 2
years in plots of each soil horizon, into which varying quantities of live and
dead roots are introduced. In undisturbed forests, the organic and mineral soil
horizons are contiguous, however, and pathways of nutrient connection must
exist. Connections between horizons include fungal growth and translocation,
leachate, and root growth, and these may influence nutrient cycling rates in an
adjacent horizon. Amounts of nutrient transferred from one horizon to the other
may be modified by roots and by faunal grazing. Therefore, Ehrenfeld and
Parmelee proposed to conduct additional field and microcosm studies to identify
which pathways are most important in linking horizons, which response variables
are sensitive to the presence of connections, and how the connections are
affected by root inputs. They will use microcosms with reconstructed soil
profiles to investigate how connections originating in organic horizon influence
nutrient cycling rates in mineral soil. They will use biocides and removal of
leachate to determine relative importance of fungi and leachate as connections,
and to determine how soil fauna affect the magnitude of these connections. The
same response variables as in the field experiment will be measured. In the
field they will quantify rate of fungal growth between horizons and flux of N
(15N) between horizons through fungi. They will also determine the influence of
fauna on the nutrient quality of leachate. The institutional support for this
research is excellent. The investigators are highly qualified productive
research scientists.