* 8918613
* Characterization of Synaptonemal Complexes and RecombinationNodules From Lilium longiflorum
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/1990,02/28/1994
* Stephen Stack, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 02/28/1994
* USD 258,498.00

Correlative evidence suggests that synaptonemal complexes (SCs) and
recombination nodules (RNs) are involved in chromosome synapsis and genetic
recombination. However, little is known about the constituents of SCs and RNS
that might help elucidate their precise funtion(s). It is proposed to isolate
SCs and RNs from the plant species Lilium longiflorum and to characterize the
proteins from isolated SCs/RNs by gel electrophoresis. Isolated SCs/RNs will
also be injected into mice to elicit antibodies. Hybridomas will be made and
screened against isolated SCs/RNs by immunofluorescence. The monoclonal
antibodies identified will then be used (1) to identify SC/RN proteins in
Western blots, (2) to examine developmental and tissue-specific expression of
the SC/RN proteins, (3) to determine the cross-reactivity of the antibodies to
other plant and animal SCs and RNs, and (4) to determine the relationship
between nodules observed during four of the substages of meiotic prophase I
(leptotene, zygotene, pachytene, and diplotene). These antibodies later can be
used for affinity chromatography and/or immunoprecipitation to isolate SC/RN
proteins in large quantities to determine their functions and to identify the
genes coding for them. This work has the potential to lead to a real break-
through in our understanding of the function(s) of SCs and RNs.