* 8918558
* Phylogeny and Evolutionary History of Three Clades of       Neotropical Snakes
* BIO,DEB
* 10/15/1990,03/31/1993
* John Cadle, Academy of Natural Sciences Philadelphia
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 03/31/1993
* USD 50,000.00

Two central themes pervade many questions relating to the origin of patterns in
biological diversity: (1) How do patterns of diversity in adaptation (for
example, feeding specializations) evolve within evolutionary lineages? and (2)
How are patterns in the geographic distributions of organisms generated through
the interaction of biological and geological (for example, continental drift
processes? Hypotheses of evolutionary relationships (phylogeny) among members of
a lineage are the foundation upon which answers to such questions are based. The
proposed research will establish a detailed phylogeny for three lineages of
Central and South American snakes selected for their morphological and
ecological diversity. These will be used to address questions concerning
patterns of evolution of that diversity and will provide a historical framework
for interpreting their distributions. The lineages to be studied include the
only snakes to have colonized the Galapagos Islands, which have been considered
a classic "natural experiment " for the study of evolutionary processes. Field
work associated with the project will proved ecological information on the
included species, specimens for morphological studies, and tissues for
subsequent biochemical analyses. Relationships among snakes will be evaluated
using morphological characters and biochemical characters of proteins (enzymes)
and nucleic acids (DNA). The phylogenies developed for these lineages will be
directly applicable to questions concerning the evolutionary biology of these
snakes. More generally, however, there will be significance in addressing
questions concerning evolutionary processes that generate diversity in
morphology, and historical hypotheses concerning the distributional history
(biogeography) of the Central and South American fauna.