* 8918678
* Fact-finding Evaluation and the Ordering of Speaking Turns  in Legal Settings
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/1991,01/31/1994
* Robert Hayden, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Shelton White
* 01/31/1994
* USD 68,651.00

In recent years, sociolegal scholars have turned increasingly to the analysis of
the language of disputing in order to better understand how law and legal
processes work. Some have concentrated on the cultural logic of legal arguments,
some have focused on the structure of narrative, and others have been concerned
with the formal attributes of speaking styles. The one element stressed in
discourse in legal settings is that the structure of the discussion varies with
the function of the discussion and, in particular, that fact-finding and
evaluation look very different in legal proceedings. This project will look at
the relationship between the ordering of speech and fact-finding and evaluation
in a cross-cultural study of law in India. It is argued that fact-finding and
evaluation are distinct functions, and discussions associated with each have a
distinct order. Specifically, the project examines whether speaking-in-turn in
legal settings is associated with fact-finding and overlapping speech is
associated with evaluation. To test the hypothesis that the ordering of
discussion varies by goals, council dispute resolution decisions in two Indian
castes will be analyzed and compared. The two castes are of similar cultural
background but their councils vary in the degree of fact-finding involved in
proceedings. One council focuses on evaluation and the facts are rarely in
dispute; the other council is more likely to contain participants unfamiliar
with the facts of the dispute. Standard methods of discourse analysis involving
audio recording of arguments will be used along with observations, interviews,
and analysis of contextual and secondary data. This study should add to our
understanding of how the ordering of speech relates to disputing and dispute
resolution. The India context permits controlled comparison of the relationship
between "formality" and "informality" and dispute processing. In addition, this
research will make valuable contributions to the anthropology of law, discourse
analysis, and understanding of the social forms and cultural patterns in
India.//