* 8918247
* Phylogeny of Lomatium (Apiaceae): Infrageneric Systematics  for Studies of Speciation and Endemism
* NONE,NONE
* 02/15/1990,10/31/1993
* Pamela Soltis, Washington State University
* Continuing grant
* James E. Rodman
* 10/31/1993
* USD 191,588.00

The awe with which most biologists view the organismal diversity of nature has
contributed to several generations of study, yet biologists still do not
understand in detail the evolutionary processes that generate this biological
diversity. Theoretical models of speciation and diversification have been
proposed, but few of these theories have been tested rigorously with empirical
data from specific groups of plants and animals. The lack of experimental
studies of speciation reflects in part an inability to recognize actively
speciating groups, that is, those groups currently undergoing the processes of
divergence and reproductive isolation. However, recent advances in the field of
molecular biology and in phylogenetic data analysis have made possible the
identification of such actively speciating groups. Dr. Pamela Soltis of
Washington State University proposes to use these new methodologies (restriction
site analysis of chloroplast DNA and cladistic methods of phylogenetic analysis)
to reconstruct the evolutionary history of the 70-80 species of Lomatium, a
genus of plants from western North America. Lomatium was chosen for study
because it appears to be an actively speciating genus, with a large number of
morphologically discrete species occupying very restricted geographic ranges.
Furthermore, several models of speciation seem to fit general observations on
Lomatium: geographical divergence, hybrid speciation, and polyploidy (chromosome
doubling). The proposed research will provide a robust hypothesis of
evolutionary relationships among all the species in the genus and will allow the
identification of smaller subgroups of species appropriate for future
experimental analyses of speciational processes and the biology of endemic
(narrowly distributed) species.