* 8918448
* LTREB - Interannual Variability, Food-Web Interactions,     and Climatic Forcing:  A Program for Long-Term Research     at Castle Lake, California
* NONE,NONE
* 02/15/1990,01/31/1995
* Charles Goldman, University of California-Davis
* Continuing grant
* None
* 01/31/1995
* USD 256,126.00

For nearly thirty years, research has proceeded at Castle Lake, California.
Throughout this period, a strict protocol of monitoring of physical and chemical
conditions and plankton dynamics has been maintained, producing an extensive
long-germ data set that has recently been analyzing using statistical techniques
of time-series and multivariate analysis. These studies have led to major
insights into the processes which contribute to ecological variability in this
system. Variability in system behavior in Castle Lake has been successfully
decomposed into components which arise from external processes, such as unusual
climatic conditions like El Nino, and those associated with internal, predatory
interactions (effects induced by coupled predatory interactions from fish to
zooplankton to phytoplankton). In this proposal, a long-term approach which will
allow a better understanding and the distinguishing of the ways in which these
processes occur and interact in Castle Lake is outlined. This proposal is
centered around a cycle of whole-lake manipulations of predatory interactions,
involving alteration of the stocking regime of the dominant planktivore in the
lake, rainbow trout. Coupled with this manipulation and monitoring of Castle
Lake, a second lake (Cliff Lake) to serve as a "reference" system during the
initial years of the project will be monitored and manipulated in a reciprocal
fashion in future years. The cycle of manipulations is to be completed within
the 5 years of this award, after which it is planned to repeat the cycle of
manipulations to test the repeatability of system responses to food web
manipulation in years of contrasting climatic conditions. The second component
of the program is designed to improve the understanding of how strong climatic
signals enter the Castle Lake system during the crucial spring period of ice-
melt, hydraulic loading, and establishment of thermal stratification. In each
year of the study, an intensive series of measures of physical, chemical, and
biological conditions beginning with the break-up of the ice cover will be
conducted. By contrasting the physical and chemical conditions during spring in
years which differ in climatic severity, greater insights into the mechanisms by
which climatic variation contributes so strongly to interannual variability in
this system should be obtained.