* 8918466
* Compatibility, Speciation, and Comparative Morphology in    the Heterobasidiomycetes
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/1990,08/31/1994
* Kenneth Wells, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 08/31/1994
* USD 120,000.00

Dr. Kenneth Wells of the University of California at Davis is studying fungi of
the group Heterobasidiomycetes, primarily wood-decaying fungi found in temperate
regions of North America and western Europe. The fruiting bodies, or
basidiocarps, have traditionally been used as the sole basis for the
classification of these species, especially microscopic characters of the sexual
reproductive structures. Dr. Wells and others have shown over the past ten years
that basidiocarp morphology does not accurately reflect genetic differences
between species. Gene differences at several loci, termed mating-type loci and
sterility/fertility loci, are more important in determining whether strains can
cross and form viable progeny. Interbreeding groups in turn form discrete
species, usually with distinct habitat preferences. Not all interbreeding
populations are sharply defined, however. Isolates from some populations are
only partially interfertile with other populations. Careful laboratory studies
of the genetic controls of such partial fertility will help determine how
genetic and environmental factors interact to limit sexual reproduction in these
fungi. Comparative morphological data generated by microscopy, results of
pairing tests, and isozyme analyses of proteins are being used to examine
species of Exidia, Tremella, Exidiopsis, and Auricularia and to begin to assess
the amount of genetic variability in natural populations of these saprophytes.