* 8918951
* Intracortical Connections Underlying Cortical Function
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/1990,09/30/1993
* Charles Gilbert, Rockefeller University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Platt
* 09/30/1993
* USD 334,000.00

Visual information is carried by the optic nerves to a major center called the
lateral geniculate nucleus (LGN), which in turn projects to two major areas of
the cortex of the brain, called Areas 17 and 18. When a single cell in the
visual pathway responds to a visual stimulus, that stimulus is said to be in the
cell's "receptive field." Past discoveries have shown that some cells in the
visual cortex only respond to stimuli in particular locations and having
particular properties (such as orientation of a line, or movement in a certain
direction), which may be quite complex. Cortical cells were discovered to be
organized in a columnar fashion, where cells within a column share sensitivity
to a preferred visual stimulus. This study will examine the cortical connections
in Area 17 that extend horizontally, among the columns. Cellular dye labels,
autoradiography, and the new methods of optical recording will be used to
visualize the anatomy of the connections. Physiological recordings in a newly
developed preparation of an isolated slice of cortex will reveal how these
horizontal connections function at the synaptic level. Together these studies
will clarify how visual information over a wide region of the animal's visual
world are integrated in the visual cortex. The results of this novel approach
will be very important for visual science, and may have impact on other areas of
neuroscience and information processing studies.