* 8918616
* Forest Dynamics in Heterogenous Environments: Empirical     Studies of Spatially Explicit Models
* BIO,DEB
* 02/15/1990,07/31/1993
* Stephen Pacala, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 07/31/1993
* USD 269,383.00

This study will develop, calibrate and test a model of forest dynamics that
encompasses a broad range of spatial and temporal scales. The research will
consist of an integrated program of computer and mathematical modeling, together
with empirical studies of nine forest tree species that are components of the
transition oak-northern hardwoods forests. The empirical studies will provide
the data necessary to calibrate explicitly spatial models of forest communities
that include: (1) competition for light, water and mineral nutrients, (2)
dispersal, (3) disturbance and (4) soil and topographic heterogeneity. During
the study, models that apply to the landscape level and yet retain fine-scale
resolution important to single individuals will be developed. The models will be
designed so that they may be tailored to forecast the consequences of energy-
related and other anthropogenic perturbations such as acid rain, elevated to
CO2, and ultraviolet radiation, and global warming. The principal objective of
the work is, generally, to understand the factors controlling forest community
dynamics and structure, and, specifically, to identify the ecological processes
responsible for observed spatial and temporal patterns across a broad range of
scales and determine how these processes become represented in scale-dependent
pattern.