* 8918366
* Phylogenetic Relationships in Schiedea and Alsinidendron    (Caryophyllaceae) and the Evolution of Dioecy
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/1990,02/28/1993
* Ann Sakai, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 02/28/1993
* USD 130,000.00

Dioecy, the occurrence of separate female (pistillate) and male (staminate)
plants in a species, has evolved in about 15% of the world's flowering plants.
Schiedea and Alsinidendron of the carnation family (Caryophyllaceae) provide an
excellent opportunity to study the evolution of dioecy on the Hawaiian Islands.
Eight of the 22 species of Schiedea show varying stages in the evolution of
dioecy (collectively these breeding systems are termed diclinous). The
apparently high frequency of dicliny on remote oceanic islands has been used to
support several contrasting hypotheses about the evolution of dioecy.
Distributional data alone are difficult to decide the matter, without knowing
whether dicliny has evolved in situ on the islands and whether it has evolved
multiple times there. Drs. Weller and Sakai of the University of California at
Irvine will study evolutionary relationships in these two genera using
morphological, chromosomal, and molecular data. The use of DNA analyses to
reconstruct phylogenetic relationships will provide an independent assessment
uncomplicated by convergent evolution of floral morphology that may be
associated with breeding systems. A phylogeny of Schiedea and Alsinidendron will
increase understanding of the basic evolutionary forces associated with adaptive
radiation in these diverse genera and help in interpreting novel features found
in the group, including specialized floral nectaries, vines, and fleshy fruiting
structures. Information on the evolution of dicliny is also of general interest
because of the potential importance of these breeding systems in crop species. A
number of species of Schiedea and Alsinidendron are believed extinct in Hawaii,
and the information obtained in this research will be useful for interpreting
relationships among breeding systems, rarity, and the likelihood of extinction
in plants.