* 8918672
* Role of 106 kDa Ca2+ Release Channel Protein in SR
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/1990,08/31/1993
* Guy Salama, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 08/31/1993
* USD 310,092.00

In skeletal muscle sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR) a 106 kDa calcium release
channel protein has been identified and purified through its "critical" free
sulfhydryl by covalently linking it to biotin via a disulfide bond and using
biotin-avidin chromatography. Upon incorporation in planar bilayers, this
protein exhibited the properties of a calcium channel similar to those reported
for the 400 kDa "feet" proteins. Immunological analysis using polyclonal
antibodies against the 106 kDa and monoclonals against calcium- magnesium ATPase
showed that the 106 kDa is distinct from SR calcium pumps and is neither a
subunit nor a proteolytic fragment of the 400 kDa. The 106 kDa channels have
been successfully purified by a) linear sucrose gradients, b) biotin avidin-, c)
ryanodine, and d) immuno-affinity chromatography. The goals of the project are
1) To incorporate the purified 106 kDa calcium release channel protein into
planar bilayers to characterize in detail the single channel ionic conductances,
sub-states, selectivities and its modulation by agents that alter SR calcium
release. The results will be compared with those reported for the 400 kDa "feet"
protein. 2) To raise monoclonal antibodies against the 106 kDa channel and test
them for possible modulation of calcium release in SR vesicles. 3) To localize
this channel in junctional SR and rabbit psoas fibers by immuno-cytochemistry.
4) To re-examine the purification of the 400 kDa protein by linear sucrose
gradients since the 106 kDa protein often co- migrates with the 400 kDa, and to
use immuno-affinity columns to separate the 106 from the 400 kDa proteins. 5)
Ryanodine- affinity columns have been made by 2 methods. Both columns bind
selectively to the 106 kDa channel, implying that this channel has important
physiological significance. The affinity and stoichiometry of tritiated
ryanodine binding to 106 kDa will be measured and compared with binding data
with junctional SR and the purified 400 kDa protein. 6) To determine the
relationship and possible interaction of the 106 kDa channel with other SR
proteins (i.e., the 400 kDa "feet" proteins) by covalently cross- linking the
106 kDa with neighboring junctional SR proteins using bi-functional cross-lining
reagents of various spacer arm lengths. Recent progress in the understanding of
excitation-contraction coupling has led to the general acceptance of the idea
that the channel through which calcium is released from the sarcoplasmic
reticulum is a 400 kDa protein which corresponds to structural "feet" seen in
the electron microscope. Dr. Salama has accumulated substantial evidence,
however, that a second, much smaller (106 kDa) protein may be the calcium
release channel. The proposed experiments will characterize the smaller protein
and elucidate its relationship to the "feet" protein. The results of this
research should clarify the identity of the protein molecules responsible for
calcium release from the sarcoplasmic reticulum in excitation-contraction
coupling in striated muscle. ***//