* 8918871
* Life History Adaptation in Fishes: Male Mating Strategies   in Species with Paternal Care
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/1990,10/31/1994
* Robert Sargent, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 10/31/1994
* USD 129,000.00

Evolutionary biologists assume that natural selection molds an organism's
phenotype (i.e. morphology, physiology, development, behavior) in such a way
that maximizes its survival and reproduction. However, physiological constraints
result in a tradeoff between survival and reproduction. This conceptual
framework has provided many insights into understanding behaviors associated
with survival, such as feeding and predator avoidance, versus behaviors
associated with reproduction, such mating and parental care. The proposed
research examines physiological tradeoffs between survival and reproduction in
fishes, and explores the implications these tradeoffs have for behavior. The PI
will examine parental care, adoption, and cannibalism as a suite of reproductive
tactics favored by natural selection. The approach is to model the phenomenon
mathematically, and to test the model's predictions experimentally. The basic
benefit of this research will be new insights into the evolution of morphology,
physiology, and behavior. The applied benefits of the research are to fisheries
biology and aquaculture, which depend on basic knowledge of life history
evolution, toxicology, which uses the same species (the fathead minnow,
Pimephales promelas) in bioassays.