* 8918909
* Workshop on Semigroups of Positive Operators;  Curacao,     Netherlands Antilles, June 17-29
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/1990,04/30/1991
* Jorge Martinez, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 04/30/1991
* USD 4,800.00

This award will help to support a conference on semigroups of positive
operators to take place in Curacao, Netherland Antilles from June 17 to the 29,
1990. The meeting, sponsored by the Caribbean Mathematics Foundation (CMF), will
be jointly organized by Prof. Jorge Martinez of the University of Florida and
Prof. Waldemar Marcha of the University of the Netherlands Antilles. The purpose
of the meeting is for mathematicians from the Caribbean and Latin America to
meet experts from the U.S., Europe, and Australia to form contacts for future
research. The meeting will be structured to promote the kinds of contacts that
will lessen the isolation of developing country mathematicians from mainstream
research. The conference will be preceded by a one-week mini-course given by
three world class researchers who will furnish an introduction to the theory of
positive operators on ordered Banach spaces. Funding from this award will help
to provide stipends for 16 participants to attend this mini-course. The CMF is
encouraging as many of the mini-course participants to stay the second week for
the conference, which will bring together some of the world's leading experts
from the structure theory of ordered Banach spaces, the semigroup theory of
positive operators, and their application. By providing an environment where
developing country mathematicians can meet and exchange information with world
class researchers, this award fulfills the objectives of the Science in
Developing Countries Program.