* 8918042
* Null Models in Molecular Phylogenetic Systematics
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/1990,02/28/1994
* James Archie, California State University-Long Beach Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 02/28/1994
* USD 135,950.00

Dr. Archie will examine patterns of evolution of DNA sequences in a broad array
of organisms. Through the use of information in DNA sequence databases, the
emphasis of the research will be on the evaluation of levels of accumulated
random substitutions within DNA sequences and an examination of how these
substitutions affect our ability to analyze sequence data. It has been generally
acknowledged that DNA sequences contain a large amount of information on the
evolutionary history of living organisms that can be used to make inferences
about relationships among species. However, it is recognized that these
sequences contain a large amount of random information because of the nature of
the origin of change at sites in the sequences and because each site can take
only four different forms. In previous research, biologists have assumed that
there is substantial residual information in the sequences, a by- product of the
evolutionary history of the organisms, that could be decoded using modern
methods of analysis through the incorporation of computers. However, the methods
for the analysis of these data break down and produce less certain results as
the level of randomness increases. Levels of randomness are expected to vary
between different regions of the DNA within the nucleus as well as in nucleotide
sequences outside of the nucleus and are expected to increase as the amount of
time since divergence between the species being analyzed increases. Since many
species and species groups being compared have diverged over millions, tens of
millions, or even hundreds of millions of years, in many comparisons of
sequences biologists expect substantial amounts of random information about the
evolutionary history to be present in the sequence data. The research program
will analyze levels of random sequence information for a variety of different
groups of organisms and for different areas in the genome. It will rely on
sequence information that is present in DNA and protein sequence databases for
information. These databases are growing rapidly in size because of recent
technological advances in molecular biology. The sensitivity of a variety of
numerical techniques for analyzing sequence data due to the accumulation of
random information will be examined. Several new analytical techniques have been
developed over the last 2-3 years and have generated a substantial amount of
interest. However, neither these nor the older techniques have been examined
from the perspective to be used in this research. The results from the study
will help to indicate which sequences and parts of sequences will be useful for
inferring relationships among species and species groups by identifying regions
of the genome that tend to accumulate evolutionary useful and random changes at
different rates. The results will also help indicate the lengths of sequences
that must be examined in order to make reasonable inferences about evolutionary
relationships.