* 8918689
* Polar Experiment Network for Geophysical Upper-atmosphere   Investigations (PENGUIn)
* O/D,OPP
* 01/01/1990,12/31/1996
* Theodore Rosenberg, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* John T. Lynch
* 12/31/1996
* USD 2,007,050.00

This project will provide the basic instrumentation and science analysis for the
Automatic Geophysical Observatories (AGOs) that are a new major research
facility that has been developed by the United States Antarctic Research Program
(USARP). The AGOs are very like satellites, in that they provide power, data
collecting capability and a comfortable environment for year long periods for
instruments that are designed to operate autonomously at remote sites in
Antarctica. The development of AGO has been a priority of the US space physics
community for more than fifteen years. Experiments other than those described in
this abstract will also be housed in the AGO system. This project is a
collaborative effort of the University of Maryland, University of New Hampshire,
Stanford University, Augsburg College, New York City Technical College, AT&amp;T
Bell Laboratories, Lockheed Space and Missile Corporation and four Japanese
institutions, Tohoku University, Tokai University, Kyoto University and the
(Japanese) National Institute of Polar Research. The instruments to be deployed
in the AGOs are search coil and fluxgate magnetometers, a two wavelength
monochromatic intensified all sky auroral imager using charged coupled device
(CCD) technology, a newly developed imaging riometer and extremely low frequency
and very low frequency (ELF/VLF) radio receivers. The instrumentation closely
resembles that deployed at several manned antarctic stations, including McMurdo
and South Pole, as well as similar instruments in the Arctic. It is also
complementary to instruments on many orbiting and planned spacecraft. Eventually
six AGOs will be deployed by USARP. The science will address a number of
outstanding questions about the high latitude polar ionosphere that are a major
focus of global initiatives, especially STEP (Solar Terrestrial Energy Program)
and ISTP (International Solar Terrestrial Program). The concept is to coordinate
ground based measurements, aircraft, rocket and balloon measurements, theory and
modeling with the data to be acquired by 13 new spacecraft missions to be
launched by NASA, ISAS, ESA and IKI before 1995 and to incorporate, as well,
data taken from several satellites that are presently in orbit, should they
still be providing data in the 1990.95 period. STEP is an international umbrella
that covers the U.S. initiatives CEDAR, GEM, ISTP and Max '91. The main goal of
STEP will be to advance the quantitative understanding of the coupling
mechanisms that are responsible for the transfer of energy and mass from one
region of the solar.terrestrial system to another. Specific AGO studies will
include ionospheric signatures of magnetic cusp processes, improving
understanding of the global convection pattern and magnetosphere.atmosphere
electrodynamic coupling.