* 8918985
* Mechanisms of Catalytic Copper-Dioxygen Reactions           U.S.-Egypt Cooperative Research; Science in Developing      Countries
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/1990,06/30/1992
* Geoffrey Davies, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Edward Murdy
* 06/30/1992
* USD 20,000.00

ABSTRACT NARRATIVE Description: This proposal proposes the continued support of
the collaboration of the research groups of Dr. Geoffrey Davies of Northeastern
University and Drs. Mohamed A. El- Sayed and Ahmed El-Toukhy of the University
of Alexandria, Alexandria Egypt. These research groups have discovered and
developed a new field of polymetallic transmetalation chemistry. Transmetalation
is the replacement of metallic elements in a target material with other metallic
elements received from chemical reagents. Research to date has been substantial
resulting in nine published research papers with eight additional papers
submitted for publication or in the advanced stage of preparation. This original
research has revealed six new areas of importance that are considered worthy of
further research and exploration. The new research is expected to have a large
impact on chemical, materials and catalytic science. Further, it will provide
numerous learning opportunities for students in modern inorganic and physical
chemistry. Scope: The proposed research is programmed for two years with the
principal investigators working in their counterpart's laboratories. The two
Egyptian scientists will spend a total of 12 months at Northeastern University.
Dr. Davies will work at Alexandria University for three months. This work
division will advantage both researh groups in exposing one and another to the
research facilities of each university, while giving the graduate students of
each chemistry department opportunities to become acquainted with the scientific
thinking, techniques and problem solving approaches employed by successful
scientists from the cooperating foreign university. The six areas of proposed
new research are: o Crystallization and Electrochemical Studies o Mechanisms of
Phenolic Oxidative Coupling o Catalytic Effects of Transmetalation o
Transmetalation Rate Laws and Mechanisms o Low Temperature Dimeric
Copper(I)-Dioxygen Systems o Oxidation of Polynuclear Copper(I)-Dioxygen
Complexes with Quinones This proposal meets the objectives of the Science in
Developing Countries Program of advancing the international exchange of
scientific knowledge and does contribute to the enhancement of science in a
developing country.