* 8918222
* Automatic Generation of Legal Expert Systems
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/1991,10/01/1994
* Layman Allen, Zagreb University
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 10/01/1994
* USD 0.00

The objective of this three-year U.S.-Yugoslav cooperative research project on
legal expert systems between Konstantin Momirovic and R. Stipanovic of Zagreb
University and Layman E. Allen, University of Michigan is to develop a computer
expert system for privacy protection. Of particular interest is the development
of system on preventive detention law and personal data protection. The models
will be derived from the legal systems of the U.S., Yugoslavia and the six OECD
countries. The main contributions of the proposed research will be to provide a
comparative structure for cross-cultural analysis of legal rules and to continue
to test the usefulness of the software in different contexts. It will also be a
test of the feasibility of developing software which can assist individuals with
the application of laws to specific problems. The Yugoslav and American
investigators are an excellent match of expertise on computer science, common
and non common law. This project was approved by the U.S.-Yugoslav Joint Board
on Cooperation in Science and Technology and is supported through a joint fund
consisting of matching contributions from the U.S. and Yugoslav governments. The
U.S. contribution is provided annually by the Department of State. No NSF funds
are involved. The award, except for funds for U.S. scientist travel, is made to
the Yugoslav institution.