* 8918580
* REU: Microbial Ecology of Anaerobic Cellulose Decomposition
* NONE,NONE
* 03/15/1990,02/28/1994
* Susan Leschine, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 02/28/1994
* USD 215,000.00

The goal of the proposed research is to advance understanding of the microbial
ecology of anaerobic cellulose degradation in soils and sediments. At present,
little is known of the complex microbial processes responsible for the
conversion in the absence of oxygen, of cellulose, the most abundantly- produced
organic material in terrestrial environments, to CO2 and CH4. An important
objective of the project is to develop methods to identify, enumerate, and
estimate the activity of groups of anaerobic cellulolytic bacteria in soils and
sediments. Rapid RNA sequencing methodology will be used to sequence 16S
ribosomal RNAs of isolated strains of cellulose-fermenting bacteria. Sequences
will be aligned to identify those that are shared by members of groups of
bacteria. Oligodeoxynucleotides complementary to these unique sequences will be
used as probes to detect the presence and activity of specific groups of
cellulolytic bacteria in controlled experiments and in environmental samples. A
second objective of the project is to use these probes to investigate the
activity of cellulolytic bacteria in poorly-drained forest soil at a proposed
study site in Central Massachusetts. A final objective concerns the ability of
cellulose-fermenting bacteria to fix N2. Several strains of bacteria from soils
and sediments have recently been shown to use cellulose as an energy source for
the fixation of N2. Strains of cellulose-fermenting bacteria isolated as part of
the proposed project, as well as additional presently known strains, will be
examined for the presence of nitrogenase activity in order to determine the
prevalence of the ability to fix N2 among cellulose-fermenting bacteria, thus
setting the groundwork for establishing an important link between carbon and
nitrogen cycles in natural environments. Such processes are likely to be common
in many natural systems, where they may be indications of important biological
processes.