* 8918608
* REU/Collaborative Research:  Boundary Layer Hydromechanics  and the Ecology of Larval Black Flies (Diptera: Simuliidae)
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/1990,02/28/1995
* David Hart, Academy of Natural Sciences Philadelphia
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 02/28/1995
* USD 139,931.00

The objective of this collaborative research is to test predictive models
regarding the effects of boundary layer flow on the ecology of larval black
flies, important stream insects. Specifically, the project will determine the
direct effects of drag, average velocity, local flow disturbances and background
turbulence on larval behavior, growth and distribution, as well as the indirect
effects of flow on competition and predator-prey interactions. Black fly larvae
are excellent experimental subjects for laboratory and field studies, because
they rapidly respond to changes in flow, have high feeding and growth rates, and
occur in dense populations in local streams. Video equipment will record larval
feeding and spacing behavior, submerged force plates will measure larval drag,
and hot film anemometry will characterize the fluid environment on spatial and
temporal scales that are relevant to these small stream organisms. The results
will represent a significant advance in boundary layer hydromechanics and stream
ecology. The field studies are important because they will be the first to
quantify the influence of small-scale turbulence on benthic organisms. Results
will allow evaluation of adaptive paradigms and assessment of the non-
catastrophic costs of drag. The information from this study will provide
important insights that may be applied to physical ecology of other benthic
organisms.