* 8918216
* REU:  Long-Path FTIR Analysis of Ecosystem Processes Over   Varying Landscape and Spatial Scales
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/1990,08/31/1993
* Clifford Dahm, University of New Mexico
* Continuing grant
* None
* 08/31/1993
* USD 674,000.00

Long-path Fourier Transform InfraRed spectroscopy (FTIR) is a very valuable
technique for quantifying trace gas concentrations in the near-surface
atmosphere. Drs. Gosz, Dahm, and Risser performed path-averaged analyses for
CO2, H20, CH4, CO, and N2O over optical path-lengths ranging as far as 1 km and
at temporal frequencies as small as 1.5 second intervals. Their research to date
has extensively tested the FTIR instrument under field conditions and
experimented with various combinations of instrument setups to maximize
detection sensitivity for different path-lengths and gases. The instrument is
capable of making repeated high resolution analyses of key trace gases in the
atmosphere which are strongly influenced by terrestrial and aquatic nutrient and
energy cycling processes. This continuation proposal emphasizes how Drs. Gosz,
Dahm, and Risser will interface new developments in the field of
micrometeorology with long-path FTIR to move ecology to a new level of
technological sophistication that permits the examination of key processes and
rates of gas fluxes at realistic spatial and temporal scales in the field. The
major objectives of this proposal are: 1. Test Scale Theory Relating to
Ecosystem Processes. 2. Develop Path-Averaged Meteorological Flux Measurements
to Quantify Long-Path Fluxes. 3. Measure Ecosystem Function with Path-Averaged
Gaseous Fluxes. This research effort involves interdisciplinary inter- actions
with theoretical and experimental micrometeorologists (U.S. Army, NOAA, NCAR),
and theoretical and experimental ecosystem scientists. The range of scales that
can be studied with the concurrent use of the FTIR and new micrometeorological
instrumentation bridges the gap between traditional ecological techniques and
emerging macroscale air-craft and satellite- based technologies. A major goal of
this proposal is to further develop links between ecological and meteorological
measurements at appropriate scales for use in addressing issues of regional and
global environmental change. Drs. Gosz, Dahm, and Risser are productive and
innovative scientists. Their research program has introduced important new
technology to ecosystem research. The institutional support for this research is
excellent.