* 8918011
* Dissertation Research:  Dental Development in Upper         Pleistocene Hominids and Recent Humans
* SBE,BCS
* 11/01/1989,04/30/1991
* Erik Trinkaus, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan S. Friedlaender
* 04/30/1991
* USD 9,666.00

This is an investigation into the relative rates and patterns of dental
mineralization in Upper Pleistocene fossil hominids (Neanderthals and early
modern humans) compared with three recent human geographic populations. Using a
standard scoring system, frequency distributions of the various stages of
development that any tooth displays relative to specified states of development
of a "reference" tooth will be derived for the recent human samples. These
distributions will be compared to determine whether significant differences
exist in relative dental calcification rates and patterns among recent human
samples. These recent human data will provide the necessary background for
assessing the nature and extent of differences between recent humans and Upper
Pleistocene fossil hominids in relative dental development, so that any
differences in overall maturation rates can be assessed. A major gap in our
understanding of the difference between Neanderthals and recent humans is a lack
of knowledge of their dental development. We know that modern humans have
extremely delayed dental maturation, and there is strong evidence that the
earliest hominids had a much more rapid rate of dental development. Rapid dental
development implies a shorter developmental period with implications for the
timing of behavioral maturation. Did the shift occur before or after the
Neanderthals? Neanderthals have adult brain sizes and overall body sizes similar
to those of modern humans. But, did they mature at the same time and rate? This
study will assist in understanding possible differences in the life history of
modern humans and the Neanderthals.