* 8918790
* Microfolding:  Study of Protein Conformation Change by      Molecular Dynamics Calculations
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/1990,01/31/1994
* Jan Hermans, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Arthur Kowalsky
* 01/31/1994
* USD 270,000.00

Dr. Hermans proposes molecular dynamics studies to investigate equilibria and
kinetics of conformation change of peptides and proteins. Calculations will be
done for systems which are explicitly solvated with several layers of solvent
molecules. (1) Conformational free energy surfaces will be calculated in a
4-step process: conformation space will be explored by dynamics simulations in
vacuo; probability distributions near each free energy minimum will be computed
by free dynamics; free energy differences between conformations will be
determined by restrained free-energy simulations with applied torques, and by
free-energy simulations with molecular substitution; barriers between minima
will be explored separately. These results will be used in conjunction with
different approaches (free dynamics; a stochastic model; transition state
dynamics) in order to determine the rates of barrier crossings, i.e.kinetic
parameters of conformation changes. (2) He plans to develop a method for
determining a priori the effect of amino acid replacement on the stability of
folded peptide structures and of native, folded conformations of proteins. This
will have as aims both to develop techniques that consistently reproduce
available experimentally measured free energy changes, and to use the details
about structure and thermodynamics that the dynamics simulations are uniquely
suited to provide, and thereby quantitate the differences in terms of underlying
physical effects. (3) He plans to study conformational flexibility in enzyme
active sites in two examples: side chain flexibility in serine protease, and its
possible relation to specificity for different substrates; inhibitor flexibility
in dihydrofolate reductase and its relation to specificity for enzymes from
different species. (4) Finally, he will attempt to distinguish alternate
conformations of parts of protein molecules, namely, small surface loops and
peptide groups, according to free energy, in order to develop a tool applicable
in structure determinations where experimental data provide insufficient
detail.***//