* 8918971
* Production, Exchange, and Consumption in Household          Contexts:  Archaeological Investigations at an Uruk Town    in Mesopotamia
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/1990,09/30/1993
* Susan Pollock, SUNY at Binghamton
* Continuing Grant
* John Yellen
* 09/30/1993
* USD 82,415.00

In 1987, Dr. Susan Pollock conducted a first season of fieldwork at the Iraqi
site of Abu Salabikh. Dated to the Uruk period, this mound site contains the
remains of an early Mesopotamian town and documents the emergence of a state
level of organization in this region. Using a combination of methods, the nature
and distribution of materials across the site was determined and existing
ceramic chronologies refined to provide tight temporal control. Because of the
amount and variety of materials the site contains and the presence of buried
domestic structures, further work is desirable, and funds provided by the
National Science Foundation will permit an additional two field seasons of
excavation and analysis. Dr. Pollock and her collaborators will continue their
surface survey to determine lateral distribution of materials. Scraping -
removal of enough overburden to expose structure outlines - will reveal the
location of habitation areas and permit careful excavation of a series of
individual structures. Analyses of ceramics and other remains, such as stone
tools and seal impressions, will provide insight into daily family activities.
It will also allow comparisons across different social groupings and, on this
basis, a determination of socio-economic differentiation. This research is
important for several reasons. It will provide a unique insight into how complex
societies arise. Because Abu Salabikh is not deeply buried and dates to a
limited time period, it provides an excellent opportunity to undertake the kind
of social reconstruction which Dr. Pollock proposes. While archaeologists have
hypothesized on the factors which led to the rise of states in the Near East,
this has been done primarily on a grand socio-political scale and very few
researchers have focussed their attentions on the family level. Thus, this
project both corrects an imbalance and provides data of wide general interest.
Because students are included in the project, it will also contribute to the
training of future scientists. It should, in a small way, help to strengthen the
developing scientific ties between the United States and Iraq.