* 8918969
* Continuum Mechanics of Cellular Indentation Measurements
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/1990,07/31/1993
* Elliot Elson, Washington University School of Medicine
* Continuing grant
* Arthur Kowalsky
* 07/31/1993
* USD 321,000.00

The overall goal of the project is to develop a quantitative interpretation of
a new method for measuring deformability of cells in culture. The method is
based on a "cell poker", which measures the resistance of a cell to indentation
by a small glass probe. Initial work will involve theoretical studies of small
indentations of viscoelastic flat layers and spheres. This treatment will be
generalized to include a surface membrane and will be extended to large-
deformation viscoelastic behavior and to the analysis of heterogeneous and
anisotropic objects which model cell structure. The theoretical work will be
validated with experimental measurements on layer and spherical globules
composed of a viscoelastic fluid bounded by a surface tension "membrane", and
spheres composed of an elastic crosslinked matrix. Similar measurements will be
carried out on actin gels. A new cell poker has been devised that permits
fluorescence and optical microscopic observations simultaneous with indentation
measurements to observe strain patterns, deformed boundaries, and to select
specifically labeled cells for measurement. Finally, these quantitative methods
will be applied to measurements on cytoplasts, i.e. cells from which the nucleus
has been extruded, and to isolated nuclei to determine separately their
contribution to cellular mechanical properties. These measurements of cellular
deformability will allow characterization of the cytoskeleton and how it
influences the shape of a cell and its cytoplasmic consistency. ***