* 8918932
* REU:  Dance Language, Eusociality, and the Systematics of   Apis and the Apidae
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/1990,08/31/1994
* Deborah Smith, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Mary C. McKitrick
* 08/31/1994
* USD 244,000.00

Honey bees exhibit two complex social behaviors which have long fascinated
human observers: the "dance language," a series of body movements whereby
successful scout bees precisely communicate to their nestmates the locations of
flowers as far away as 10 kilometers; and highly organized, perennial colonies.
Little is known about how the behaviors we see in honey bees alive today emerged
from the simpler capabilities of their solitary-living ancestors. Since
behavior, unlike structure, is not fossilized, the historical sequences of
changes cannot be observed directly. Instead, it must be inferred from
comparisons of closely related living species. Since equivalent traits in
related species can be assumed to have descended from a common ancestor, one can
infer the characteristics of the ancestral trait, and the modifications that
occurred during descent, from the similarities and differences seen among
species now alive. There are 6-8 species of honey bees (genus Apis which all
have dance languages, but which differ in the details of the dances. All the
Apis species have advanced societies, but bees in other genera exhibit varying
degrees of social organization. These patterns have already been used to
formulate competing hypotheses about the evolution of these behaviors.
Ambiguities remain because no set of independent traits has satisfactorily
resolved the phylogenetic relationships among the honey bee species, and among
the different bee genera. The present project will undertake the first
comprehensive study of molecular variation among bees, though an analysis of
sequences of nucleotides (subunits of the DNA molecule) in a gene found in all
the species. Specimens will be collected in several locations in Asia and
Central America, the gene extracted and sequenced, and the phylogenetic
relationships among the species determined from variations in the sequences. At
the same time, further detailed studies will be done to obtain a clearer picture
of the pattern of behavioral variation among the species. Together these
approaches should lead to more satisfying answers to two questions: how the
dance was assembled from a set of simpler behaviors, and whether advanced
sociality originated uniquely in honey bees or was derived from an ancestor
which also gave rise to other highly social bees. Apart from leading to a better
understanding of the biology of a fascinating and ecologically important group
of organisms, this project will also provide a model for combining molecular and
behavioral approaches to reconstruct the evolution of complex behavior in other
animals. Additionally, the patterns of variation among different honey bee
populations in Southeast Asia, which is fragmented into islands separated by a
range of distances and for varying periods of time, could lead to insights into
the processes governing the behavioral and genetic divergence of animal
populations evolving in isolation. Finally, given the prominent role played by
the honey bees in the pollination of trees in tropical forests, these studies
could aid future attempts to understand the ecology of this important ecosystem.