* 8918496
* Electronic Properties of High Temperature Superconductors
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/1991,03/01/1994
* Philip Anderson, Zagreb University
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 03/01/1994
* USD 0.00

The objective of this three-year U.S.-Yugoslav cooperative research project in
condensed matter theory between Veljko Zlatic of the University of Zagreb's
Institute of Physics and Philip Anderson of Princeton University is to
investigate the electronic properties of high temperature superconductors and
develop relevant theoretical models for high Tc metals. Yugoslav involvement
will include both theoretical and experimental work. The investigators will
continue their work on Dr. Anderson's model, begun under a prior grant, and
construct other theoretical models emphasizing crystal structure and electron-
phonon coupling. In their experiments, the Yugoslavs will characterize
superconducting materials by measuring the thermodynamic, transport and
spectroscopic properties of crystals. Zlatic's work on the properties of high Tc
metals will complement Anderson's efforts to formulate a new high Tc
superconducting theory applied to metallic systems with local Coulomb
interactions. This project was approved by the U.S.-Yugoslavia Joint Board for
Scientific and Technological Cooperation and is supported through a joint fund
consisting of matching contributions from the U.S. and Yugoslav governments. The
U.S. contribution is provided annually by the Department of State. No NSF funds
are involved. The award, except for funds for U.S. scientist travel, is made to
the Yugoslav institution. NSF's goals of advancing scientific knowledge is
promoted through the joint efforts and complementary expertise of the Yugoslav
and U.S. scientists.