* 8918385
* Molecular Phylogenies of Parasitic Flowering Plants
* BIO,DEB
* 02/15/1990,08/01/1990
* Daniel Nickrent, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 08/01/1990
* USD 23,000.00

Evolutionary relationships among parasitic flowering plants are very poorly
known because of frequent morphological reductions in floral and vegetative
features. The group of parasitic plants that will be examined in this project by
Dr. Daniel Nickrent of University of Illinois is called the Santalales, an order
that includes sandalwood, the familiar Christmas mistletoe, and several less
familiar aerial and root parasites. Evolutionary relationships within
representatives of several families in the order will be determined by
comparison of DNA sequences that code for ribosomal RNA (rDNA). This will be
accomplished by using a new technique called PCR which allows for amplification
of the amount of DNA in a sample, thus providing a high enough concentration for
sequencing. Generation of rDNA sequences is rapid and efficient and provides a
large number of characters (nucleotide bases) useful in determining
relationships. In addition to representatives of the five families in the
Santalales, sequences of other plants doubtfully included in this order will be
determined to ascertain their correct taxonomic placement. This second group of
parasites includes the enigmatic and spectacular Rafflesia which has the largest
flower among all flowering plants, as well as some tiny-flowered parasites
originally (and incorrectly) classified with the fungi. Representatives from
other orders thought to be related to these parasites will also be sequenced
thus providing information relating to the origin of parasitism in the flowering
plants.