* 8918528
* U.S.-Japan Joint Seminar: Third Japan-U.S. Manufacturing    Research Exchange/July 1990/Nisshin, Japan
* O/D,OISE
* 05/15/1990,01/31/1992
* Kerstin Pollack, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Turczak
* 01/31/1992
* USD 34,270.00

This award will support the travel of twelve U.S. participants in the "Third
Japan-U.S. Manufacturing Research Exchange," to be held July 23-27, 1990, in
Nisshin, Japan. The meeting will take place under the auspices of the U.S.-Japan
Cooperative Science Program. The central goal of the exchange is to form the
foundation for a broad-based, continually regenerated program of manufacturing
research cooperation between the two countries. Specifically, the participants
expect to develop detailed research programs and forms of cooperation between
Japanese and American scientists and engineers for a period of approximately
three years in two areas of interest: (1) intelligent manufacturing control and
(2) product realization. Each side has organized a committee of experts to
prepare papers in these areas. For the U.S., the National Research Council's
Manufacturing Studies Board, through its Committee on Research Directions and
Needs in U.S. Manufacturing, is responsible for organizing participation in the
meeting and distributing the results of the exchange to the manufacturing
research community. This committee is chaired by Dr. Cyril M. Pierce, General
Manager, Manufacturing and Quality Technology Department, GE Aircraft Engines.
The Japanese organizer is Professor Toshio Sata, Executive Director, Institute
of Physical and Chemical Research (RIKEN), Wako, Japan. This will be the third
in a series of U.S.-Japan meetings, initiated in 1986, to encourage cooperation
between the two countries in manufacturing research. Representatives from both
academe and industry in each country will attend.