* 8918828
* The 1990 International Raman Spectroscopy Conference, August13-17, 1990, Columbia, South Carolina, Group Travel Award inIndian Currency
* NONE,NONE
* 02/01/1990,01/31/1991
* James Durig, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 01/31/1991
* USD 0.00

Description: This project supports travel by 15 Indian scientists to the U.S. to
participate in the 1990 International Raman Spectroscopy Conference planned for
August 13-17, 1990 at the University of South Carolina, Columbia, S.C. This is
the twelfth International Conference on Raman Spectroscopy (ICORS) following
those held biannually at various cities in the U.S., Europe, India and Japan.
The 1988 meeting was held in London and attracted 600 participants. For the 1990
meeting about 500 participants are expected. Invited and contributed lectures,
and poster presentations will describe new developments that relate to both
fundamental and practical problems involving the use of the various types of
Raman spectroscopy to determine the structure and dynamics of matter in the
gaseous, liquid and crystalline states. The areas of application include
physical, chemical and biological sciences. The Indian participants are likely
to enhance the exchange of information given the significant emphasis in India
on studies of Raman effects and the active research in Raman spectroscopy in
that country. Scope: Indian and U.S. scientists have long collaborated and
benefited from the collaboration in the area of Raman spectroscopy, a field
first discovered by C.V. Raman, an Indian scientist. Previous international
meetings held in the U.S., India and elsewhere resulted in publications in 1978,
1984, 1985, 1986, and 1989 with contributions from, U.S. and Indian researchers,
among others. Dr. Durig and his Indian counterpart, Dr. Hari D. Bist, of the
Department of Physics, Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur, India, are
eminent scientists in that field and have collaborated for many years in
research and conference organizations. This project is very likely to contribute
to a successful conference.