* 8918573
* Theoretical Studies in Interstellar Astrophysics
* MPS,AST
* 03/15/1990,08/31/1993
* Christopher McKee, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Vernon Pankonin
* 08/31/1993
* USD 224,900.00

The dynamics of the interstellar medium on small and intermediate scale sizes is
governed by energy injection from stars, particularly the ionizing radiation,
winds, and supernova explosions of massive stars. The evolution of ionized
hydrogen regions, both around isolated massive stars and clusters of such stars,
in an inhomogeneous medium will examined by Dr. McKee. The dynamics and spectra
of the remnants of supernovae which explode in ionized hydrogen regions will be
calculated, and the implications for the observed statistics of remnants
assessed. Supernovae from a cluster of massive stars create a "superbubble" in
the interstellar medium; the dynamics of such structures will be investigated,
with applications both to the Galaxy and to starburst galaxies. A powerful new
hydrodynamics computer code will be used to address some fundamental problems in
interstellar gas dynamics posed by energy injection, including the interaction
of a blast wave with an interstellar cloud. The spectra of interstellar shocks
provide astronomers with essential diagnostic tools for the study of the effects
of stellar energy injection, and a comprehensive attack on the structure of
shocks in molecular gas is planned. Extensive calculations will develop the
hypothesis that interstellar water masers are due to shocks in dense molecular
gas. Stars energize the interstellar medium through radiation and stellar wiinds
during the star's life, and for some stars, through supernova explosions at
their death. This energy is eventually radiated into intergalactic space, so the
energization of the interstellar medium may be viewed as an energy flow which
originates in stars in several forms, streams outward through the interstellar
medium, and finally leaves the Galaxy in the form of radiation, cosmic rays, and
in extreme cases, a wind. One of the central problems in interstellar
astrophysics is to understand how stellar energy injection produces the physical
conditions and morphology of the interstellar medium, both in our Galaxy and in
other galaxies. Dr. McKee's research will focus on energy injection by massive
stars, which dominates the energy injection into the interstellar medium.