* 8918638
* Photodissociation/Photoionization Mass Spectrometry
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/1990,08/01/1990
* Murray Johnston, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* robert miller
* 08/01/1990
* USD 103,500.00

This grant is in the general field of analytical and surface chemistry, and in
the subfield of mass spectrometry. Professor Murray Johnston will study the
laser photodissociation and photoionization of hydrocarbon molecules containing
four to ten carbon atoms. An important objective of the program is to identify
mechanisms of fragmentations of molecules after they have been photoionized.
This will lead to more specific means of determining structure in large
molecules from controlled fragmentations in mass spectrometry. This will improve
the determination of complex hydrocarbon mixtures, such as hydrocarbon fuels and
oils, which is accomplished by mass spectrometry. The research to be conducted
will focus on ultraviolet and vacuum ultraviolet unimolecular photochemistry and
photodissociation of alkanes and alkenes. The main objective is to understand
charge remote fragmentation and the localization of charge in "soft"
photoionization processes. This novel approach will allow for more controlled
photofragmentation, and will be compared with electron impact and chemical
ionization techniques. Gas phase alkanes and alkenes will be photodissociated by
an excimer laser and the photoproducts photoionized by 118 nm photons. Time of
Flight mass spectrometric detection will be utilized. Relative abundances of
specific fragments will be used to understand branching. The minimization of
rearrangements upon fragmentation with this method should allow cleaner
interpretation of structure in mass spectrometry.