* 8918380
* Collaborative Research:  Eucalypt Hybrid Zones as "Sinks"   For Herbiores:  Responses of Pests to Natural Hybrids
* BIO,DEB
* 01/15/1990,06/30/1992
* Thomas Whitham, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Lindsay Fox
* 06/30/1992
* USD 88,758.00

For studies of plant-herbivore interactions, hybrid zones represent natural
experiments in which genetic-based defenses have become scrambled through
backcrossing. Studies of insect pests of cottonwoods (Populus) show that pests
are concentrated in hybrid zones and, within the zone, on backcrossed trees.
Pests from river systems without hybrid zones perform better on the parent tree
species than do pests from areas with hybrid zones. These data suggest that
highly susceptible hosts (i.e., naturally occurring complex hybrids) not only
support most of the pest population, their presence may result in pest species
either losing or never evolving the ability to deal with the greater resistance
of the parental tree species. An implication of this work is that susceptible
hybrids can be used to manage pest dynamics in forestry and agriculture. Because
of the basic and applied implications of this topic, this project will examine
the generality of this phenomenon (the Sink Hypothesis) in a second system,
Eucalyptus, in which hybridization is common. The researchers will collaborate
with eucalypt systematists, geneticists, and ecologists to study pest dynamics
in several well known natural hybrid systems. The following questions will be
addressed: 1. Are hybrid eucalypts sinks for herbivores such that a small
proportion of potential hosts support most of the pest population? 2. If complex
hybrids are more susceptible to one pest, are they also more susceptible to very
different insect guilds? 3. Does the presence or absence of hybrid zones affect
pest densities in the pure host zone? These questions will be addressed in a
natural system, common gardens with trees of known genotypes, and by documenting
insect attacks on herbarium specimens of parents and hybrids collected
independent of the study. Answers to these questions have not been examined for
any system besides cottonwoods and should be fundamentally important in
understanding the ecological and evolutionary interactions of plants and pests.