* 8918942
* Antarctic Ice Sheet Response to Global Pliocene Warmth
* O/D,OPP
* 06/01/1990,11/30/1993
* George Denton, University of Maine
* Continuing Grant
* Julie Palais
* 11/30/1993
* USD 249,912.00

Current interpretations of glacial history in the Transantarctic Mountains
permit two vastly opposing views of Pliocene Antarctic climate and associated
ice response. One view, based on the semi-lithified Sirius Formation, calls for
extensive ice-sheet collapse and warm (2-5 degrees C) marine flooding in East
Antarctica, with Northfagus growing nearby. A contrasting view, based on
isotopically dated unconsolidated Pliocene drifts, calls for mountain overriding
by an expanded ice sheet under subantarctic climatic conditions. This
investigation is designed to improve our understanding of Pliocene glacial
history of the Transantarctic Mountains in order to reconcile these conflicting
hypotheses. Field areas are in the Dry Valleys where all Pliocene glacial
morphologic features and sedimentary units occur together with ashes from nearby
volcanoes. These ashes will produce a precise Pliocene chronology by the new
technology of laser fusion 40Ar/39Ar dating of single crystals. The resulting
glacial and tectonic history should clarify existing conflicts of Pliocene
climate and ice-sheet response. This will clarify the long-term mechanics of the
global climate system (particularly near 2.4 Ma), and its effect on eustatic sea
level, deep-sea oxygen isotope fluctuations, and the Antarctic response to
global Pliocene warmth.