* 8918147
* Synthesis, Organization and Function of Ribonucleic Acid
* NONE,NONE
* 02/01/1990,07/31/1995
* Robert Perry, Fox Chase Cancer Center
* Continuing grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 07/31/1995
* USD 800,000.00

The overall goal of this research is to elucidate mechanisms that regulate
genetic expression at the levels of transcription, RNA processing, RNA turnover
and translation. Attention is focused on the mouse genes encoding ribosomal
structural proteins (rp's) and immunoglobulins (ig's). For the rp genes, we are
(i) analyzing their distinctive equipotent promoters, (ii) studying the
importance of introns for stabilization and intracellular transport of mRNA, and
(iii) studying the translational control of rp mRNA. Future studies of these
genes will include a characterization of rp transcription factors and the genes
encoding them, elucidation of the roles of the oligopyrimidine cap sequence and
the internal promoter elements, studies of the interactions between the various
promoter elements, an analysis of the intranuclear turnover of intronless
transcripts, and definition of the structural features that limit the capacity
of rp mRNAs to bind ribosomes. For the ig genes, we are (i) studying the
regulation of heavy chain mRNA production by alternative RNA processing, (ii)
characterzing the interplay between elements of kappa gene promoters, and (iii)
defining the role of the kappa enhancer and chromatin restructuring in the
developmental regulation of kappa gene expression. Future studies of these genes
will include a comparison of overall cleavage-polyadenylation and splicing
efficiencies in early and late stage lymphocytes, a search for the parameters
that determine the relative efficiencies of JH-Cmu and JH-Cdelta splicing,
characterization of a novel kappa promoter element and its protein ligand,
cloning of the gene encoding this ligand, and localization of the genetic
segment that confers enchancer-independent expression of the kappa gene. The
results of these studies should not only increase knowledge of how rp and ig
genes work, but should also reveal general principles that apply to other genes
with similar properties. The experiments performed will continue to follow the
processes needed to get a gene expressed as a functional protein. These
processes are fundamental for most organisms. The results will aid in our
understanding of gene expression and be applicable to a wide range of biological
problems.