* 8918289
* Mechanism of Growth Hormone Action
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/1990,01/31/1994
* Jessica Schwartz, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Elvira Doman
* 01/31/1994
* USD 334,022.00

Although growth is a gradual process, many events leading to growth are likely
to be triggered by rapid changes which take place very early when growth is
stimulated by regulators such as growth hormone (GH). The PI's laboratory
recently found that GH stimulates two growth- related genes, c-fos and c-jun, in
less than 30 minutes of exposure of cells to GH. These very rapid changes in
gene expression are likely to be among the initial events triggered by GH in
target cells. Since these genes are known to act coordinately to activate other
genes in growing and differentiating cells, induction of c-fos and c-jun by GH
would be expected to lead to activation of other genes important in the effects
of GH on differentiation and/or metabolism. Thus, the overall objective of this
grant is to define the mechanisms for the stimulation by GH of the expression of
c-fos and c-jun, and to determine the consequences of such stimulation by GH in
differentiation of 3T3-F442A cells. Whether the effect of GH involves the
production of messenger RNA (transcription) for c-fos and c-jun, and/or whether
GH affects the stability of existing messenger RNA for each of the genes will be
determined. Whether known regulatory regions on the c-fos gene are sensitive to
GH will be examined. To determine the importance of GH- induced expression of
c-fos and c-jun in 3T3-F442A differentiation, the PI will prepare cells which
produce too much of the products of these genes, or cells in which expression of
c-fos and c-jun is blocked, and will examine the consequences of such changes on
differentiation. 3T3- F442A cells are well-suited for these studies, since: (a)
GH is a key factor in promoting their differentiation in fat cells, (b) the gene
products Fos and Jun/AP-1 are known to activate other genes in these cells, and
(c) these cells also exhibit a variety of other responses to GH. The results of
these studies will provide important new insights into early molecular events in
GH action and into the role of the growth-related genes c-fos and c-jun in GH
action.