* 8918276
* Examination of Marine Benthic Samples Collected Near Palmer Station, Antarctica After An Oil Spill From The Grounding OfThe Bahia Paraiso
* O/D,OPP
* 01/01/1990,12/31/1992
* Jeffrey Hyland, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 12/31/1992
* USD 61,555.00

This project supports the analysis of marine benthic samples collected in the
vicinity of Arthur Harbor, Antarctica, following an oil spill that resulted from
the grounding of the Argentine supply ship Bahia Paraiso. The vessel grounded on
January 28, 1989, and spilled an estimated 170,000 gallons of diesel and
aviation fuel, which contaminated shorelines located up to 15 miles from the
site of the accident. Although small in size, this spill is of significance
because the affected areas include sites that are used extensively for
fundamental scientific research and are composed of highly rich and productive
assemblages of marine flora and fauna, which might include components that are
very sensitive to unusual anthropogenic disturbances. The experimental design
includes tests for possible oil-spill effects on these various components of the
intertidal and subtidal communities. In addition, a great deal of importance is
placed on basic research approaches to provide detailed descriptions of the
structure and composition of these communities and to determine the role of
natural environmental factors (e.g., depth, sediment type, organic input,
environmental stability) in controlling patterns of spatial distribution and
long-term variability (for those components having an historical data base).
These studies will provide an empirical assessment of possible effects of the
Bahia Paraiso oil spill on benthic components of the Arthur Harbor region. In
addition, data from these studies will be extremely important in providing a
basis for a more comprehensive understanding of the natural structure and
dynamics of the Arthur Harbor benthic ecosystem, as well as a basis for
comparison of the benthos with other marine ecosystems of the world. Finally,
these analyses will provide baseline data to support continued studies of long-
term, natural and man-induced variation in important living components of this
diverse and productive region.