* 8918254
* Balance Between the Intake of Beneficial Nutrients          and Deleterious Allelochemicals in Caterpillars
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/1990,12/31/1993
* Simon  S Yu, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Gregory J. McCants
* 12/31/1993
* USD 205,999.00

The proposed research will investigate the mechanisms by which insects (in
particular, leaf-chewing caterpillars) cope with the potential toxins (termed
"allelochemicals") that occur naturally in their foodplants. Insects produce
certain enzymes that can detoxify may allelochemicals; they can also choose to
feed on or avoid certain plants, based on taste and/or smell of the
allelochemicals present. But how do insects respond to variation in levels of
nutrients and allelochemicals in their foodplants? And do these responses to
nutritional variation affect the insects' ability to detoxify or otherwise cope
with the allelochemicals? We know that many insect species respond to reduced
nutritional quality of their food by eating more, but we don't know the
consequences to the insects of this increased feeding, in terms of consuming
more of a toxin. Also, we don't know whether insects can balance their intake of
beneficial nutrients and deleterious allelochemicals to achieve their best
growth and survival under the circumstances. Within this context, the proposed
research addresses the interactions between nutrients, allelochemicals,
detoxication enzymes and insect feeding behavior. This research will provide
important basic information necessary for understanding the ecological and
evolutionary aspects of insect feeding behavior. The research will also
concentrate on important crop pests, and thus the results will lead to better
understanding of their feeding behavior, which in turn will contribute to
developing more effective methods to manage these pests.