* 8918210
* Studies of Organic Nitrate Concentration, Composition,      and Variation in the Troposphere
* GEO,AGS
* 06/15/1990,07/01/1991
* Elliot Atlas, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Jarvis L. Moyers
* 07/01/1991
* USD 27,682.00

This research project is concerned with the study of alkyl nitrates and other
organic nitrate species in the troposphere. Alkyl nitrates are products of
hydroxyl radical initiated hydrocarbon oxidation in the presence of the oxides
of nitrogen. Other organic nitrates are formed from alkenes, carbonyls, and
biogenic hydrocarbons when they are oxidized in the presence of nitrogen oxides.
Because of their potential contribution to the reactive nitrogen budget, and
because of their significance to tropospheric ozone chemistry, detailed
information is required to understand the sources, composition, concentration,
and transport of organic nitrates in the global troposphere. This research
program includes laboratory and field investigations of selected organic
nitrates compounds. Laboratory studies will improve analytical methodology and
examine reactions of hydrocarbons in test systems. The field program is designed
to accurately measure a suite of organic nitrates at remote sites subject to
episodic inputs of air masses containing primary and secondary organic
emissions. The sites include a station in the Arctic, in the North Atlantic, and
in the continental US. Since these sites have active atmospheric chemistry
studies already underway, the measurements can be related to a broad scope of
atmospheric chemical processes. Measurements of the concentration and
composition of nitrates (and other species) will be compared to existing models
of organic nitrate formation, sources, and transport. These studies should help
to refine understanding of nitrogen/carbon transformations and fate of reactive
nitrogen in the global atmosphere.