* 8918030
* RUI:  Coevolution of Resistance and Virulence in a Plant    and its Fungal Pathogen
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/1990,07/02/1991
* Ellen Simms, Wake Forest University
* Continuing Grant
* Lindsay Fox
* 07/02/1991
* USD 95,111.00

This experimental study is designed to test several assumptions and predictions
of genetic models used to explain the coevolution of plant resistance to
pathogens and pathogen virulence on hosts. These models indicate that
stabilizing selection can maintain genetic variation in host-plant resistance
and pathogen virulence when these traits are each accompanied by pleiotropic
fitness costs. Unfortunately, little evidence is available about the costs to
plants of pathogen-resistance; nor is there conclusive evidence that virulence
is costly to pathogens. Moreover, genetic modifier theory suggests that many
such traits may not be costly. The experiments have two main objectives: (1)
determine the genetic mechanisms underlying virulence in the fungal pathogen
Colletorichum dematium and resistance in its host, the tall morning glory,
Ipomoea purpurea, and (2) observe patterns of selection on virulence and
resistance traits in these species. Results from these experiments will test
three important assumptions of plant-pathogen coevolutionary theory: (1)
Pathogens impose selection on their host plants, (2) Stabilizing selection
maintains genetic variation for both resistance and virulence characters, (3)
Resistance to pathogens is costly. Findings will contribute directly to
ecological theory and will add substantially to basic knowledge which can be
used for problems in the applied ecology of disease management. //