* 8918960
* Archaeology in the Hinterland of Fort Ross, California
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/1990,01/31/1992
* Kent Lightfoot, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 01/31/1992
* USD 19,868.00

Under the guidance of Dr. Kent Lightfoot, a group of graduate students will
analyze materials collected in the initial phase of the Fort Ross archaeological
project. They will also conduct related documentary research to prepare for a
larger-scale field project. The Fort Ross site, located on the coast of
California, was established by Russia in 1812 (and maintained until 1841) as a
base for sea otter hunting. It also served as an agricultural station where
crops and livestock were raised for local consumption and for shipment to
Russia's Alaskan colonies. In addition to Europeans, the base contained Alaskan
natives. Presumably both groups interacted with the Native American peoples who
inhabited this coastal area. Dr. Lightfoot and his team are focussing their
attention on this interactive aspect and have located a series of likely native
American sites which both pre and postdate the establishment of the Fort.
Analyses will include obsidian hydration dating of lithic remains, processing
and cataloging of artifacts, analysis of faunal and floral remains, and sediment
studies. Relevant ethnohistoric and archaeological sources will also be examined
to put these materials into a broader anthropological context and to establish
directions for future research. This research is significant for several
reasons. First, excellent ethnographic data exists on aboriginal California
peoples, and archaeologists have used this information to reconstruct
hypothetical prehistoric lifeways. However, it is unclear how great the impact
of Russians and other Europeans was and some argue that aboriginal life was
markedly changed by this contact. This project will help to answer this
question. Secondly, the research will assist in the training of several young
and extremely promising scientists.