* 8918713
* Theory of Atomic Collisions
* MPS,PHY
* 01/01/1990,06/30/1993
* Joseph Macek, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing grant
* Barry I. Schneider
* 06/30/1993
* USD 233,340.00

This research will probe strongly interacting atomic systems to develop
practical computational schemes for treating them. There are five projects to be
undertaken: (1.) Perturbation Series of Strongly Interacting Atoms and Ions. The
new perturbation series developed for strongly interacting systems will be
formally extended to treat ionization and applied to compute cross sections for
the interaction of highly ionized atoms with low Z targets. Some connections of
this work and QED have recently been discovered and it is expected they will be
explored further. 2. New Time Dependent Variational Principle. A new time
dependent variational principle akin to the Schwinger principle for time
independent problems will be applied to some of the problems of part 1. The
advantage of the variational formulation is to be able to derive higher order
approxi- mations to the distorting potential used in the strong potential Born
calculations for highly ionized systems. 3. Hyperspherical Expansions. The
hyperspherical expansion developed earlier will be applied to the scattering of
H+ on deuterium as a test of the "translation factor free" theory. Particular
attention will be paid to electron transfer reactions. All that remains is the
actual coupled channel calculation using the computed wave functions and
potential curves. 4. Saddle Point Effects In Secondary Electron Spectra. Work on
saddle point effects in secondary electron spectra will be continued. New
approximations to the electron propagator will be developed which contain
rotational effects and the new propagator will be used to compute an approximate
wave function for the final state. The primary difficulty is the numerical
evaluation of the multiple integrals but this seems quite tractable. There are
close connections with experimental work at Nebraska and Tennessee. 5. Alignment
and Orientation in the Abramov Model. Alignment and orientation parameters are a
very sensitive test of collisional approximations. The Abromov model has been
developed to compute these parameters for states formed by electron capture at
low velocities. The model will be applied and tested against existing
experiment. The hope is to stimulate further measurements. There is close co-
operation with the experimental groups at Oak Ridge, Kansas State, and other
highly charged ion sources such as that at Cornell.