* 8918344
* Preparation of an ISSC Plan of Action for Research on the   Human Dimensions of Global Environmental Change
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1989,08/31/1990
* Harold Jacobson, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 08/31/1990
* USD 10,000.00

In order to increase our knowledge about the causes and consequences of global
environmental change, social scientists from around the world must work together
to shed light on how humans affect and respond to natural processes of change.
Many new insights will result from independent research projects, but
coordinated assessment of extant research and identification of research needs
is also needed in order to facilitate collaborative research and more effective
work by independent scholars. This project will enable the International Social
Science Council (ISSC) to develop an action plan for research on the human
dimensions of global environmental change for consideration and adoption at the
ISSC general assembly late in 1990. In establishing this action plan, ISSC
leaders and staff members will review the current state of knowledge with
respect to human impacts on and responses to global environmental change, paying
special attention to social dimensions of resource use, perception and
assessment of environmental change, and the effects of institutional mechanisms
on the global environment. A few broad-scale activities that should advance
multi-disciplinary understanding of these problems will be identified, as will
be a larger number of specific research projects that can be conducted in
parallel with one another or cooperatively on an international basis. NSF
support of this project will be complemented by grants from funding
organizations in other nations. Development of an action plan for research by
ISSC and its fifteen member unions should provide a substantial stimulus for
collaborative research by social scientists throughout the world. Because of the
global scale of the problem, an international approach to identifying and
understanding the ways in which human and natural systems interact is essential.
Because this project is undertaken by scholars from many countries, the ISSC
research plan is most likely to be one from which international collaboration
will result. This project therefore should speed the process of understanding
the myriad ways in which humans interact with the natural environment during
these times of rapid change.