* 8918065
* Cranial Morphology and Phylogeny of Ruminantia (Mammalia,   Artiodactyla)
* NONE,NONE
* 04/15/1990,03/31/1992
* S.David Webb, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 03/31/1992
* USD 32,300.00

The ruminants are a diverse and important group of mammals, comprising 35
genera in nine families, including bovids (goats, sheep, cows), cervids (deer,
elk) and giraffids. These and several extinct groups of ruminants are
represented in the fossil record, but the detailed morphology of their cranial
bones has not been studied in detail. To date, most comparative research on the
classification and evolution of fossil and living ruminants has been based on
post-cranial skeletal remains (especially features of the limbs) and teeth. Dr.
S. David Webb proposes an ambitious study of cranial morphology of
representatives of living and fossil ruminant groups, for the purpose of
reconstructing their evolutionary relationships. The results of his analysis
will be compared and integrated with results based on non-cranial data, and
several varieties of molecular data, including mitochondrial DNA sequences. The
proposed research has wide implications. A synthesis of new and existing data
will help to crystallize the most precise picture of ruminant evolution to date.
A robust family tree for adaptation, biogeography, functional morphology, and
biodiversity. The results of this research will find a wide audience among
comparative anatomists, mammalogists, and evolutionary biologists.