* 8918083
* EROL:  Impact of Damage-induced Changes in Oak Leaves on    Susceptibility of Gypsy Moth to a Baculovirus
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/1990,11/30/1994
* Mark Hunter, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* W. Scott Armbruster
* 11/30/1994
* USD 248,230.00

This project of both field and laboratory research intends to determine whether
damage-induced changes in oak leaf traits have a net negative or positive
influence on the gypsy moth (GM). Previous work demonstated that damage-induced
increases in leaf phenolics can depress larval growth and adult fecundity by 30%
or more (Rossiter et al. 1988). Thus tree responses could have a negative impact
on GM populations. Phenolic levels even lower than those exhibited by induced
tree leaves strongly inhibit infection of GM larvae by the Gypsy Moth Nuclear
Polyhedrosis Virus (GMNPV). Hence, the possibility exists that induced
"defenses" in oaks actually benefit the GM. These studies are designed to
compare these two effects and provide information allowing us to infer the net
influence of induction - positive or negative - on the GM. The project team will
use GM larvae to generate damage-induced changes in leaf traits, rear larvae on
induced and control leaves, and assess the influence of these diets on GMNPV
effectiveness. The results will permit a comparison of induction's ability to
reduce fecundity with its impact on mortality in GM populations, and will
clarify the relationship between hostplant chemistry and the success of this
forest pest. Results will contribute to ecological theory on
pathogen/plant/animal interactions and will be of immediate interest to forest
managers.//