* 8918643
* The Control of Long-term Carbon and Nitrogen Dynamics in    Conifer Logs by the Microelement Manganese
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/1990,11/30/1993
* Bruce Caldwell, Oregon State University
* Continuing grant
* None
* 11/30/1993
* USD 450,000.00

THE CONTROL OF LONG-TERM CARBON AND NITROGEN DYNAMICS IN CONIFER LOGS BY THE
MICROELEMENT MANGANESE This research will test the hypothesis that the long-term
carbon and nitrogen dynamics of conifer logs is controlled by the availability
of the microelement manganese. Recent research has revealed that a major lignin
degradative pathway is controlled by oxidative reactions involving Mn. Prior
research has revealed marked differences in the initial Mn concentrations in
conifer wood, and these differences correspond to species susceptible to brown-
rot (little lignin degraded) versus those susceptible to white-rot (lignin and
cellulose breakdown). Since lignin comprises approximately one-third of the
original conifer wood, the type of decomposition pathway followed controls the
amount of long-term carbon storage. Therefore, this research will have direct
implications for understanding the role of coarse woody debris (CWD) in global
carbon storage. Harmon, Jarrell and Caldwell hypothesize that: 1) early changes
in carbon and nitrogen dynamics are controlled by decomposer colonization
patterns, 2) long-term carbon dynamics are controlled by the availability of the
microelement Mn which determines, in part, whether lignin is decomposed, and 3)
nitrogen dynamics are controlled by the abundance of available carbon and not
total carbon. To test these hypotheses the investigators will conduct a three
year study of carbon and nitrogen dynamics that examines changes in wood cell
wall chemistry, manganese availability, microbial physiology and biochemistry,
nitrogen dynamics and mass losses in decomposing logs from different coniferous
ecosystems. They will also continue development of a decomposition model that
predicts long- term carbon and nitrogen dynamics for many species and sizes of
logs. Harmon, Jarrell and Caldwell are innovative and productive investigators
of the role of woody debris in forested ecosystems. The are part of the
outstanding team of forestry researchers at Oregon State University.