* 8918006
* The Role of the Canopy Subsystem in Tropical Forest NutrientCycles:  Mechanisms and Models
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/1990,01/01/1992
* Nalini Nadkarni, Marie Selby Botanical Gardens
* Continuing Grant
* James R. Gosz
* 01/01/1992
* USD 134,909.00

Dr. Nadkarni will investigate the functional role of the canopy- dwelling
epiphyte community in nutrient cycling in a primary tropical montane cloud
forest. She hypothesizes that epiphytic matter functions as a "keystone
component" by contributing to atmospheric nutrient recruitment and within-system
nutrient retention. Nadkarni combines several research approaches including: 1)
a process-oriented experimental approach in the lab and field to test specific
hypotheses on how epiphytes increase nutrient recruitment and nutrient retention
within the canopy and, 2) a plot approach to quantify nutrient pools and fluxes,
including an estimation of ecosystem-level ephiphyte biomass, litterfall,
throughfall, and certain gaseous fluxes. This information will be integrated
into a nutrient cycling model that will be tested and validated with
measurements of nutrient pools and fluxes in an adjacent secondary forest which
has virtually no epiphytes. This work will relate canopy processes to other
aspects of ecosystem ecology in tropical forests and will contribute to the
growing body of knowledge of the poorly known tropical tree canopy. More
generally, this can be viewed as a case study for any complex ecosystem that
contains "keystone ecosystem elements", certain components that may have greater
functional importance than their biomass or appearance suggests. Dr. Nadkarni is
an outstanding researcher in the area of tropical epiphytic communities. The
Marie Selby Botanical Gardens provides exemplary support for Dr. Nadkarni in
this critical area of research.