* 8918551
* LTREB:  Patterns of Community and Population Change in      Oldfields at the Hutcheson Memorial Forest Center
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/1990,04/30/1996
* Mark McDonnell, Cary Institute of Ecosystem Studies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Taber D. Allison
* 04/30/1996
* USD 145,003.00

The proposed research will accomplish three goals. First, it will continue the
Buell Succession Study (BSS) until at least its 38th year. Currently this study
is one of the longest, temporally most complete studies of oldfield succession
in North America. It consists of 11 fields, each containing 48 permanent plots.
Sampling of species composition and cover has been conducted continuously since
1958 in the oldest fields. The BSS data are therefore unique in scope and
density, but represent one of the most universal processes in ecology. Second,
it will develop a data management system capable of accommodating new data from
the BSS as it is collected. A compact, tractable data base will be produced.
This will encourage analysis and comparison. Third, in order to ensure utility
of the data base, the data will be analyzed. This exercise will serve as a check
for refinement of the data base, and will test two key hypotheses about
succession. The study will test predictions about community convergence and
trends of spatial heterogeneity through time. The principal product of the work
will be a reliable and flexible data base and the test of two critical problems
in succession theory. Once the data base is operational, other analyses can be
undertaken in the future. The study will ultimately be compared to the patterns
derived from this succession with those in other long term studies, especially
experimental ones. Thus, by ensuring the survival and fruition of the longest
and temporally densest study of oldfield succession in North America, a unique
opportunity to resolve persistent problems in the area of community dynamics and
to discover new patterns in succession will be possible.