* 8919166
* Protein Glycosylation in Gram Positive Bacteria
* BIO,MCB
* 10/01/1990,09/30/1993
* Kenneth Nickerson, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Robert Uffen
* 09/30/1993
* USD 124,000.00

The presence of glycoproteins in bacteria is very rare and virtually nothing is
known about the mechanisms of protein glycosylation in Gram positive bacteria.
The protein crystals produced by strains of Bacillus thuringiensis which can be
larvicidal for Lepidoptera and Diptera insects have recently been characterized.
The crystals are glycoprotein toxins containing roughly 3% covalently bound
sugars. These sugars, which include both neutral sugars and aminosugars,
contribute markedly to the crystal's biological activity. The present proposal
(i) identifies the oligosaccharide structures from 4 different B. thuringiensis
crystals including representatives of Lepidoptera- active and Diptera-active
toxins; (ii) determines the peptide sequence (Asn - X - Ser/Thr??) of the
oligosaccharide attachment sites; and (iii) determines the pathways for
oligosaccharide synthesis and attachment in bacteria. The carbohydrate structure
determinations are done in collaboration with the Complex Carbohydrate Research
Center at the University of Georgia. The Bacillus bacteria produce protein
crystals that are toxic to various insect larvae. The crystals are glycoproteins
containing about 3% sugar. The sugar residues play an important role in the
crystal's toxicity. Glycoproteins such as these are uncommon in bacteria, and
little is known about their synthesis by these organisms. This research explores
the structure and function of the sugar portions of glycoprotein toxins in
Bacillus. The long term goals are to enhance and broaden insect toxicity. This
could lead to the development of novel glycoprotein insecticides effective
against previously nonsusceptible insects, such as houseflies, mites and ticks.