* 8919231
* Learning and Development
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/1990,10/31/1993
* Peter Balsam, Barnard College
* Continuing Grant
* Fred Stollnitz
* 10/31/1993
* USD 278,898.00

The aim of the project is to develop a model system for the analysis of the
role of learning in behavioral development. Experience can affect two aspects of
development. Experience can affect which factors come to control a particular
behavior and it can influence the form of the behavior itself. For example, in
many species visual characteristics of food do not guide feeding behavior until
relatively late in development. Additionally, in many species the form of the
feeding behavior changes, as when young mammals go from suckling to independent
feeding. In both of these examples, experience plays an important role in
bringing about the developmental change. Developmentalists have long
acknowledged a central role for the effects of experience on behavioral
development, and traditional studies of learning and memory have occupied a
central place in psychology. Yet, there has been little specific application of
knowledge and principles in one domain to specific studies in the other domain.
The current research project explores the possibility for synthesis of these
areas by using principles of learning and memory to analyze developmental
transitions. The model system in which Drs. Balsam and Deich will study these
processes is the transition from dependent to independent feeding in ring doves.
Both the transitions in controlling stimuli and changes in the form of feeding
behavior will be described, and the processes underlying the transitions will be
analyzed. While methods and theory for the study of changes in stimulus control
have been well worked out in the area of learning, little attention has been
given to the problem of how new forms of behavior are acquired. So, in addition
to contributing to the understanding the role of learning in development, these
studies also should contribute to the development of general methodology and
theory for the study of the induction and maintenance of new forms of behavior.