* 8919790
* Mechanisms of Hormonal Modulation
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/1990,08/31/1993
* Jose Lemos, Worcester Foundation for Biomedical Research, Inc.
* Continuing grant
* Kathie L. Olsen
* 08/31/1993
* USD 153,260.00

In order for even simple behaviors to occur, nerve cells must communicate with
other nerve cells in the brain, as well as with specific targets throughout the
body. This communication is primarily achieved via chemical messengers called
hormones or neurotransmitters. One of the most challenging problems in
neurobiology is to understand how the electrical activity of a nerve cell is
transformed into these chemical signals which are then secreted or released to
act on other nerve cells or targets throughout the body. Dr. Lemos has developed
a cell system to directly examine the sites where this transduction takes place.
He will record electrical activity from isolated nerve terminals of
neuroendocrine structures and compare this activity to patterns observed in the
body of the cell. Using state of the art patch-clamp methodology, Dr. Lemos will
determine how particular ionic currents control the release of neuroactive
substances from the nerve terminals. These results will lead to a better
understanding of how neuronal information is encoded and communicated to other
cells. Deciphering how ion channels influence secretion not only enhances our
basic knowledge but could lead to the development of new therapeutic agents
targeted at the level of the nerve cell terminals for the treatment of diseases
of the nervous system.