* 8919221
* An Investigation of Locus Equations as a Source of          Relational Invariance in Speech
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/1990,01/31/1992
* Harvey Sussman, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Paul G. Chapin
* 01/31/1992
* USD 62,463.00

ABSTRACT The experimental and theoretical pursuit of invariance in speech has
involved many levels of linguistic abstraction. The objective of the research is
to investigate the "locus-equation" algorithm as a possible source of relational
invariance for place of articulation in stops. Locus-equations- regression fits
to a set of coordinates defined by the frequency of (i) the onset of CV
transition, and (ii) the vowel target- were shown, in preliminary work, to be
characterized by distinctive slopes differentiating the stop place dimension
independently of the vowel. Continuation of this work cross-linguistically, and
across a diverse subject population is planned. Corroboration of preliminary
findings would strongly imply the availability of a higher order level of
abstraction that could effectively code relational invariance for stop place
categorization. Three- dimensional graphic projections of formant transition
onset and offset points, in combination with statistical linear discriminant
function analyses, will test the notion of "sufficient perceptual contrast" as
an organizational framework for phonemic categorization. The significance of
this research is to further our understanding of phonemic-level decoding of
speech, and ultimately, to better conceptualize how the brain might
"spectrotopically" represent phonemic equivalence classes.