* 8919383
* Perception of 3-D Structure from Optical Motion
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/1990,06/30/1994
* Jack Loomis, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Jasmine Young
* 06/30/1994
* USD 215,000.00

Despite a long history of distinguished research, our understanding of how
humans perceive the shapes, sizes, and locations of objects in the three-
dimensional space surrounding them is still incomplete. In particular, we are
only beginning to understand how motion of an image on the retina, resulting
from movement of the object being observed or of the observer, leads to a
perception of object shape and of spatial layout of a complex scene. One reason
that this aspect of space perception is only now receiving due consideration is
that proper investigation of the question was impossible until recently, when
fairly powerful graphics computers became widely available. This research will
address how adult human observers are able to perceive three-dimensional shape
solely from retinal image motion as might be produced by a rapid succession of
flat images on a computer video display. The primary goals are to identify which
aspect of the retinal image motion is critical for the perception of 3-D shape
and to develop a computational model that can predict the perceived shapes
corresponding to different patterns of retinal motion. Another goal is to
determine the degree to which the perception of 3-D shape, once built up,
perseveres in the absence of sustaining retinal stimulation; there is evidence
that some sort of internal representation does remain even when sensory
stimulation is interrupted. A final goal is to determine how the perceived shape
produced by retinal stimulation depends upon the perceived distance of the
stimulus; prior work suggests that the perceived shape of a simulated object
undergoing rotation varies in a different fashion with distance of the simulated
object than the perceived shape of such an object undergoing side-to-side motion
(translation). If confirmed, this result will provide important clues to the
nature of the brain process involved in the perception of three-dimensional
shape from motion. Enhanced understanding of these processes may lead to two
important applications. First, it will indicate ways of optimizing displays for
use in scientific visualization; scientific visualization refers to the use of
3-D animations as tools in understanding abstract scientific concepts (e.g.,
electron cloud), structures (e.g., complex molecules), and processes (e.g.,
molecular interactions). Second, enhanced understanding of how humans recover
shape from motion will point to one possible way for computer visual systems to
exploit optical motion in the analysis of complex scenes. In addition,
understanding human perception of shape from motion will contribute to
understanding of the more general problem of visual space perception, mentioned
above.