* 8919916
* Interactions Between Cognition and Language in the          Transition from Infancy to Early Childhood
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/1990,06/30/1991
* Alison Gopnik, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Jasmine Young
* 06/30/1991
* USD 52,000.00

Earlier studies have found that 15-21-month-old children often develop
particular non-linguistic problem-solving abilities at about the same time that
they develop words that embody the concepts to which those abilities are
relevant. Later in life, in school, for example, the words children know clearly
influence the kinds of problems they can solve. This research will explore
whether language can influence cognition in the same fashion even at this very
early age? It turns out that different languages emphasize some types of
concepts more clearly and saliently than others. For instance, Korean and
Japanese place less emphasis on nouns than English does and more on verbs.
Children learning Korean and Japanese typically learn verb morphology, the way
in which verbs change their form to reflect tense, person, and the like, earlier
than English-speakers, but they use fewer nouns. This learning clearly reflects
the frequency of these kinds of words in the language they hear. Does this
difference in linguistic input also affect the development of non-linguistic
cognitive abilities? The research will involve testing Korean- and Japanese-
speaking children longitudinally and cross-sectionally and will compare their
linguistic and cognitive development to that of English speakers. The children
will receive two types of tasks. The first kind, tool-use tasks, measure
children's ability to understand actions and the relations between means and
ends; these concepts typically are embodied by verbs. The second is sorting
tasks, which measure children's ability to understand object categories; these
concepts are typically embodied by nouns. The children's early words will also
be recorded. If there is a tight correlation between the development of
linguistic abilities and non-linguistic problem-solving abilities at this early
age, then non-linguistic abilities related to verbs, such as tool use, will
develop earlier in the Korean and Japanese speakers, while abilities related to
nouns, such as object sorting, will develop earlier in the English speakers.
This research potentially has great relevance to early-childhood education.
Children are increasingly entering school from environments in which a language
other than English is the predominant if not exclusive medium of communication.
The results of this line of research should help preschools to deal with these
normal children whose pattern of developed abilities would not be the same as
that of children from monolingual English-speaking environments.