* 8919431
* Workshop:  Instabilities and Nonequilibrium Structures,     Valparaiso, Chile, December 1989.
* O/D,OISE
* 12/15/1989,05/31/1991
* Neal Abraham, Bryn Mawr College
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 05/31/1991
* USD 7,200.00

This award supports an international workshop on nonequilibrium physics to be
held at Valparaiso, Chile in December of 1989. The U.S. organizer is Neal
Abraham of Bryn Mawr College. His Chilean counterparts are Enrique Tirapegui of
the University of Chile and Walter Zeller of the Catholic University in
Valparaiso. The workshop will draw about eighty scientists from Latin America,
twenty European scientists and eight from the U.S. The principal speakers will
come from all three communities and will lecture on topics in instabilities and
nonequilibrium structures, a subject which has shown remarkable growth and
development over the last decade. The workshop will focus on the statistical
mechanics, pattern formation, nonlinear dynamics, chaos and turbulence of
nonequilibrium systems. This is a subject of much current interest with broad
applicability in fluid dynamics, lasers, plasmas, superconductivity and
molecular and quantum dynamics. Because of the variety of analytical, numerical
and experimental tools for the study of these various experimental systems, this
is a good topic for the interaction with a wide range of experts with interested
scientists in Latin America and will help the local scientific community to
produce at an international level.