* 8919532
* Physiological Influences on Ovulation
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/1990,07/31/1992
* Wenda Trevathan, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan S. Friedlaender
* 07/31/1992
* USD 38,235.00

The proposed project will investigate possible physiological influences on non-
ovulatory sexual behavior in humans. Previous work suggests that a woman's
temporal pattern of heterosexual activity may optimize her reproductive cycle
through an effect on ovulation or the luteal phase of her cycle. Possible
pathways suggested for this effect include the action of olfactory pheromones
and the vaginal absorption of components of seminal fluid. Investigation of
patterns of sleeping with a man (which involves close proximity) and the use of
condoms or coitus interruptus (which prevent the transfer of seminal fluid) will
help determine whether the mechanism is olfactory or seminal. The current study
will employ a large sample of heterosexual women who will keep daily records
across their menstrual cycles. The relationships among ovulation, luteal phase
length, cycle length, pattern of sexual activity, birth control method, and
pattern of sleeping with a man will be analyzed using appropriate statistical
tests. The proposed study should resolve many of the problems with previous
studies and clarify the association between sociosexual behavior and
reproductive physiology in women. If a pheromonal or seminal mechanism
regulating human female reproductive cycle is supported, the results may suggest
a possible remedy for people seeking assistance with problems of infertility.