* 8919524
* The 1989 Mountain Lake Virginia Workshop and Symposium      Addressing Transgenic Animals as Bioreactors for TherapeuticProteins
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/1989,08/31/1990
* William Velander, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Dov Jaron
* 08/31/1990
* USD 9,000.00

Transgenic production animals which express therapeutic proteins in their milk
offer a potential significant source which could augment plasma-derived
proteins. The (tissue culture) production of these same proteins using
genetically engineered mammalian cells is currently limited in its ability to
perform post-translational modifications. These modifications may be essential
for proper functionally and non-immunogenicity. For example, uniformly modified
production of Protein C (a central regulator of hemostasis) using mammalian cell
culture is being achieved at levels which will probably not supply the currently
projected l00 Kg per annum need for Protein C. It has been established that
transgenic animals can be made to produce human proteins in their milk and
therefore used as bioreactors for that same purpose. Several exciting
developments in this area have occurred over the past year for both rodent and
large production animal species. This symposium and workshop is the second of a
series of two- proposed meetings to gather together important contributors
(biologists, biochemical engineers, etc.) in transgenic science and milk
processing. The central and unique goal of this two-part transgenic animal
workshop is to assess the impact that this rapidly growing area of biology will
have upon biochemical engineering and the production of protein therapeutics.