* 8919554
* Preattentive and Attentive Visual Information Processing
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/1990,12/31/1994
* Howard Egeth, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Jasmine Young
* 12/31/1994
* USD 296,865.00

This research will explore visual processing of complex displays. The basic
question addressed is whether processing in such displays is serial or parallel.
In other words, the research asks what determines the extent to which people can
grasp or apprehend several objects simultaneously (parallel processing), as
opposed to one object at a time (serial processing). A necesary prerequisite to
exploration of the determinants of parallel and serial processing is
quantitative methods that will permit characterization of performance in a
particular situation as parallel or serial. Development of such methods has
proven to be a difficult task. Several methods proposed in the past to
characterize processing mode have been shown to be problematic. This research
will explore the use of several "diagnostics" that should allow a clear
determination of processing mode when they are applied simultaneously. The first
part of the research will consist of an effort to validate the potentially
useful diagnostics. Following this validation, the research will turn to
exploration of what determines whether search is parallel, serial, or perhaps
something else in between. One crucial variable is the complexity of the
stimulus. Processing should be parallel when the subject has an easy task such
as locating a single red target in a background of blue distractors, but what
will happen if the target is defined as red and square, and the background
consists of red circles and blue squares? Such conjunctively defined targets
have sometimes been reported to require serial processing; if the present
research confirms (or refutes) this with new and improved diagnostics it will
have important theoretical repercussions. In addition to stimulus complexity,
this research will explore the effects of several other factors, such as the
distance between the elements of a display and the spatial patterns formed by
the elements of a display. It is important to know about the effects of these
factors for two reasons. For one, they are of practical importance in designing
equipment that maximizes effective performance when people are interacting with
machines. For another, analysis of these effects will help researchers to
develop theoretical models of visual processing.