* 8919095
* RUI:  Archaeological Research in the Northern Valley of     Mexico
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/1990,12/31/1991
* Elizabeth Brumfiel, Albion College
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 12/31/1991
* USD 37,340.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Elizabeth Brumfiel will conduct
archaeological excavation and exploration in the Xaltocan region of the northern
basin of Mexico. Xaltocan was an ancient political center located ca. 35
kilometers north of modern Mexico City. In 1987, Dr. Brumfiel conducted
extensive surface survey of the area and that research provides the baseline for
the current project. She will excavate ca. 20 2x2 meter test pits, in addition
to two deep excavations. Using these data she will pursue several goals. First,
since this Northern Basin region is not well known, she will develop a ceramic
chronology which will provide a basis for the assignment of individual surface
sites. Secondly, she will examine the relationship between surface and
subsurface occurrences, and this will allow researchers to determine how well
surface materials reflect what lies below in sealed contexts. This research is
of interest for several reasons. Many large surface surveys have been conducted
in the Basin of Mexico and based on these results, demographic reconstructions
attempted. However, it is unclear how valid it is to use surface materials in
this way, and Dr. Brumfiel's work will provide the basis for such an assessment.
Given rapid urbanization in the Basin and the consequent destruction of
archaeological sites, future researchers will have to rely increasingly on
surface survey data, and in this context Dr. Brumfiel's research assumes great
importance. It is also known from ethnohistorical literature that Xaltocan
played a critical role in the late prehispanic Mexico, yet the area has not been
studied in an archaeologically systematic fashion. This is just what Dr.
Brumfiel proposes to do. The project is also important because it will support
research at an undergraduate institution, will directly involve students in the
work, and, therefore, hopefully encourage them and their classmates to pursue
scientific careers.