* 8919475
* University of Washington Workshop on Phonology in the       Lexicon to be held June 8-10, 1990
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/1990,06/30/1991
* Ellen Kaisse, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Paul G. Chapin
* 06/30/1991
* USD 14,964.00

Abstract There has not been a general integration of the research in Lexical
Phonology (hereafter, LP) since the model was first proposed roughly ten years
ago. Certain aspects of the LP model require reassessment, such as the
representation of lexical phonological domains, the relation between
derivational morphology and lexical entries, the relation between inflectional
morphology and syntax, the segregation of certain characteristics within the
lexical or postlexical components, and predictions concerning historical change.
This reassessment is best achieved by bringing together the researchers in
phonology and morphology who have advanced and challenged various portions of
the model in recent years. These researchers are scattered around North America
and Europe and do not meet regularly to discuss and assess each other's work.
This workshop should bring the field to a new consensus concerning the state of
the theory of Lexical Phonology. The results of the workshop will be released in
a publication of the proceedings. The venue for publication may be either a
special edition of a journal such as Phonology (Prof. Kaisse is a co-editor of
this journal), an anthology in a Foris series (e.g., 'Publications in Language
Sciences' or 'Linguistics Models'), or a volume in the University of Washington
Working Papers in Linguistics.