* 8919614
* Theory for Diffuse Matter Astrophysics
* MPS,AST
* 04/15/1990,03/31/1994
* William Watson, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Vernon Pankonin
* 03/31/1994
* USD 265,000.00

Dr. Watson will continue his theoretical research program related to
astrophysical environments in which the matter is diffuse. The emphasis will be
on astrophysical topics in which an improved understanding of the microscopic
processes and physical aspects of radiative transfer is likely to play an
important role. Theory for astrophysical masers will be a central goal. At the
outset, Dr. Watson will focus on various aspects of the transfer of polarized
maser radiation that potentially are involved in a full understanding of the
recent detections of "Zeeman patterns" in the spectra of water masers in star
forming regions. To do this, Dr. Watson will build upon current developments in
making the theory considerably more realistic for polarized maser radiation. Dr.
Watson will also perform research related to understanding the power of
astrophysical masers and the implications for the energetics and dynamics of
star forming and circumstellar regions. Although outstanding astrophysical
issues ordinarily are phrased in global terms, such as star formation, dark
matter in the Universe, and galaxy formation, the foundations for understanding
the phenomena and for interpreting the relevant observations frequently depend
in a critical way upon the detailed treatment of the physical processes. Of
particular relevance to Dr. Watson's work is that much of our observational
information in astronomy comes from studies of emission and absorption of
spectral line radiation. The observed intensity of such radiation from diffuse
astronomical environments can be particularly sensitive to the details of
atomic, molecular, electronic, and radiative transfer processes. As
astrophysical observations continue to be pursued with improved refinement and
sensitivity, as well as new environments and wavelengths, it is reasonable to
expect that research which emphasizes the role of the above physical processes
will continue to play a significant part in the progress in many areas with
broad impact in astronomy and astrophysics.