* 8919269
* Chemosensory Control of Cnida Discharge
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/1990,04/30/1994
* Glyne Thorington, Loma Linda University
* Continuing grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 04/30/1994
* USD 270,000.00

The discharge of cnidae, the stinging cells of cnidaria, requires that
appropriate and concomitant chemical and mechanical stimuli be received. The
goals of this research are to elucidate the cellular and molecular mechanisms
whereby supporting cells in the tentacles of sea anemones chemosensitize
adjacent cnidocytes to discharge cnidae in response to triggering mechanical
stimuli. Experiments have been designed to test critical aspects of a
comprehensive model of chemosensitization. The model proposes plausible
functional relationships among the currently identified components of the
chemosensitizing system of the cnidocyte- supporting cell complex. Essential
features of the model are: 1) Chemoreceptors and sensitizing systems are located
on supporting cells. 2) The chemosensitizing system primes the triggering
contact mechanoreceptor by simultaneously elevating intracellular levels of
calcium and depolarizing the cell membrane, and 3) Supporting cells are coupled
to adjacent cnidocytes. This study of the mechanisms controlling the discharge
of the stinging cells of sea anemones will yield valuable insights into cellular
and molecular mechanisms of sensory transduction, stimulus-secretion coupling,
intracellular sensory integration, and intercellular communication in these
relatively primitive multicellular organisms. It should, further, provide new
approaches to studying symbioses between animals of this and other groups of
animals, and new information about the mechanism of self recognition in
cnidarian species. In addition, the results of this research may suggest ways of
protecting humans from the stings of sea anemones and jellyfish.