* 8919865
* Oculomotor and Pupillary Development in Human Infants
* BIO,IOS
* 01/15/1990,12/31/1991
* Sandra Shea, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Comer
* 12/31/1991
* USD 63,479.00

The overall goal of this research program is to investigate oculomotor and
pupillary immaturities of the infant's visual system and map how these
immaturities change, systematically or otherwise, as the infants mature. In
order to carry this out, Dr. Sandra Shea has initiated a series of experiments
designed to describe and analyze some of the changes in the human infant's
visual system in the first few months of postnatal life. What is of interest is
the rate, pattern, and interaction of improvement. The questions under
investigation share the common theme of looking at the rapidly changing visual
system, but differ in the various aspects of the system being studied. Dr. Shea
will concentrate on developing descriptive tests and quantitative measures for
saccadic localization and tracking movements in infants. This work is important
because until now, most of the work on human eye movement has been performed on
adults and therefore, on mature visual systems. When confronted with
abnormalities in the infant system, baseline (normal) data is absent which would
explain to researchers or clinicians why various components of the oculomotor
system are at different stages of development. The work supported by this award
will aid in collecting that baseline data.