* 8919549
* Identification of Transmitter(s) at Rat Medial Septum/      Diagonal Band Complex
* BIO,IOS
* 01/15/1990,12/31/1994
* Joel Gallagher, University of Texas Medical Branch at Galveston
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Comer
* 12/31/1994
* USD 198,237.00

This project intends to define the chemical and electrical properties of two
connected parts of the brain termed the medial septum and diagonal band of
Broca. One unique function postulated for neurons of these brain regions is
their ability to serve as generators for a specific electrical activity referred
to as "theta rhythm". This particular rhythm has been associated with normal
developmental and behavioral phenomena such as learning and memory, and abnormal
behaviors such as dementia, depression, and affective disorders. However, the
specific neurons within the complex under study responsible for the generation
and/or modulation of theta rhythm and the cellular mechanism underlying this
electrical activity are not known. Dr. Joel Gallagher has postulated that the
neurons in this complex are heterogenous. As a result, different types of
neurons serve different functions. These different neurons may be identified and
characterized on the basis of their intrinsic electrical properties, their
unique cellular anatomy and their complement of receptors for transmitters and
modulators. Although the medial septum and diagonal band of Broca has been
investigated as a general entity, Dr. Gallagher will examine each component of
this complex in order to begin to understand how specific neurons in each
component receive and transfer information at the cellular level.