* 8919910
* Stratigraphy, Paleontology, Structural Geology and          Paleoglaciology of the Lake Neogene Glacigene Sirius Group  of the Dominion Range-Beardmore Glacier Region
* O/D,OPP
* 06/01/1990,05/31/1993
* Peter-Noel Webb, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Scott Borg
* 05/31/1993
* USD 215,083.00

This award supports continuing study of the late Pliocene- early Pleistocene
terrestrial glacigene Sirius Group of the Transantarctic Mountains. The program
consists of a six week field season in the Dominion Range-Beardmore Glacier
region in the 1990-91 austral season, followed by laboratory data reduction. The
following are among the principal targets to be addressed during the field and
laboratory studies: (1) pre- Sirius paleotopography and structural geology; (2)
section measurement, lateral and vertical facies changes; (3) collection of
interglacial beech forest (Nothofagus) and other macro-and microplant material;
(4) search for fossil insect, crustacean, bivalve, and fish material in the
finer-grained lacustrine facies; (5) collect additional matrix and microclast
samples from the Sirius Group with the aim of expanding the collection of
Cretaceous-Paleogene-Neogene microfossils which were transported from the
interior basins of East Antarctica during the late Plicoene-early Pleistocene;
and (6) continue to test the hypothesis that Pliocene glaciation in this part of
Antarctica involved high frequency variations of relatively small ice sheets,
the development of interglacials of protracted warm periods, and major marine
invasions of the antarctic interior by transgressions associated with higher
stands of sea level.