* 8919257
* Metabolism of Isoleucine to Insect Juvenile Hormone II via  Propionyl-Coenzyme A
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/1990,12/31/1993
* David Schooley, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Continuing Grant
* Machi F. Dilworth
* 12/31/1993
* USD 260,000.00

It has been shown that isoleucine and valine supply propionate units used
specifically for the biosynthesis of the ethyl-branched juvenile hormones (JHs).
Insect corpora allata (CA) which do not metabolize them readily (the CA of
Lepidoptera) secrete propionate and ethyl-branched JHs. This research will
extend these studies and determine what allows the CA to violate the rules of
sesquiterpenoid biosynthesis and to incorporate propionyl-CoA into this pathway.
The metabolism of ıU-14c! isoleucine will be examined in several tissues of
insects which make the ethyl-branched JHs vs. those that produce only JH III.
These data are important for interpreting metabolic differences between species.
In addition, the metabolism of ıU-14c! isoleucine in isolated mitochondria will
also be studied. This work will determine whether or not there is an efficient
transport system for exporting propionyl-CoA from the mitochondria. Carnitine
propionyl transferase and methyl citrate formation will be examined as likely
possibilities for propionyl CoA transport. If this phenomenon cannot be
explained by a unique system for propionate transport, the possibility will be
investigated that certain enzymes might be located in different subcellular
organelles than those in which they are generally held to exist. Juvenile
hormones are a group of structurally related compounds secreted by members of
the class Insecta and which possess morphogenetic and gonadotropic activity. It
is important to have a basic knowledge of the metabolic pathways involved to
understand why and how insects are able to synthesize these hormones. Knowledge
of the biochemical details of this pathway could point the way towards synthesis
of chemicals which specifically inhibit it. These chemicals would be
antihormones (and probably, therefore, specific insecticides) to the order of
insects that includes moths, which are some of the most damaging of crop pests.