* 8919498
* Forgetting in Short Term Memory
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/1990,12/30/1992
* Barbara Dosher, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Jasmine Young
* 12/30/1992
* USD 196,667.00

This research will investigate the accuracy and speed with which people can
retrieve material from memory; its aim is to account for dissociations between
different kinds of performances which depend primarily on short-term memory. The
aspects of short- term memory performance on which the research will focus
include the accuracy with which people can retrieve memorized materials when
they are asked to recognize them (studied via forgetting functions), the speed
with which they can retrieve such materials (studied via reaction time or scan
time), and the accuracy with which they can produce memorized materials when
asked to recall them (studied via ordered recall or span). These measures are
sensitive to differences in materials and between individuals. Though analysis
of individual differences in performances in problem solving, reading, etc.,
shows that short-term memory is one good predictor of these performances, the
various measures can show odd dissociations. For example, retrieval times and
production in recall show related dependence on materials, but individuals whose
performance is above average on one measure may not be above average on the
other. This research will test a precise quantitative model of short-term memory
performance. The core of the model is short-term forgetting, fairly directly
measured by forgetting functions. Experiments will show whether, as the model
suggests, retrieval time is tied primarily to speed of forgetting, while
production or recall also is strongly affected by initial efficiency in
learning. Experiments will outline the relations between the three aspects of
short-term memory within individuals for different materials, including
characters and words, both controlled and uncontrolled for phonemic complexity,
and geometric and graphical items. The project aims to produce an accurate model
to account for the common materials effects, explain the dissociation in
measures for the individual, and to suggest how the various short-term memory
measures should be interpreted with respect to their role in different kinds of
mental tasks. Because of the dependence of so many tasks on short-term memory,
the results of this research will bear on issues such as reading, problem
solving, and decision making, as well as on education in these tasks.