* 8919196
* New Techniques for Design and Implementation of One-        Dimensional and Two-Dimensional Multirate Digital Filter    Banks
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/1990,06/30/1994
* Palghat Vaidyanathan, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* John Cozzens
* 06/30/1994
* USD 243,713.00

The proposed effort is focused on study of multirate digital filter bank systems
for application in one-dimensional and two-dimensional signal processing. The
basic philosophy behind these systems is that if a discrete-time signal is split
into a number of adjacent frequency bands, then the information in each of these
bands can be coded separately. This often results in improved efficiency in
storage/transmission of such signals. The improvement is a consequence of the
fact that, the peculiarities of each frequency band (such as the average energy,
the impact on human perception, etc.) can be exploited in the process of judging
the precision required for each sub-band. In this way a signal can be compressed
even if it is not ban-limited, simply by exploiting the fact that some frequency
bands are more important than others. Effort will be directed towards the design
and implementation of the set of filters which will perform the band-splitting
and reconstruction. This is a very unconventional filter-design problem, because
of aliasing and other types of distortions which result from the use of non-
ideal band-splitting filters and decimators. Because of these, more complicated
algebraic tools (such as paraunitariness and losslessness) are required in the
design and implementation phase. In addition to its application in a number of
engineering problems, the multirate filter bank structure is closely related to
fundamentals of signal sampling, reconstruction, and block processing. A
thorough understanding of this will therefore unify several aspects of interest
to the signal- processing scientific community.