* 8919264
* Mitochondrial Alterations Associated with Cytoplasmic Male Sterility in Plant Development
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/1990,05/31/1994
* Christopher Makaroff, Miami University
* Continuing grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 05/31/1994
* USD 269,625.00

Growth and differentiation in nearly all eukaryotic cells depends on the
metabolism and generation of energy by the mitochondrion. Proper functioning of
the mitochondrion involves an integrated system of both nuclear and
mitochondrial gene expression. Cytoplasmic male sterility is one system in which
tissue-specific mitochondrial function and the role of nuclear factors on
mitochondrial biogenesis can be studied. Previous studies have identifed
alterations in two loci, atp6 and atpA, that may be involved with male steriltiy
in Ogura radish. These alterations will be characterized further by the
following experiments: 1. Western hybridization analysis, in organello
translation, protein purification and NH2-terminal sequencing will be conducted
to investigate: A) the abundance of the ATP6, ATPA and an Ogura- specific
polypeptide, ORF105, B) the NH2-terminal sequence of ATP6, and C) the effect of
nuclear restorer loci on their expression. 2. Biochemical and physiological
studies (e.g. measurements of ATPase activities, mitochondrial respiratory rates
and membrane potentials) will be conducted on mitochondria isolated from normal,
and fertile and sterile Ogura radish plants in an attempt to identify in which
processes Ogura mitochondria are dysfunctional and if there is any correlation
with the putative alterations identified by molecular analysis. 3. Genetic and
molecular approaches (e.g. analysis of recombinant mitochondrial genomes) will
be utilized in an attempt to establish a genetic, casual relationship between
altered mitochondrial sequences and cytoplasmic male sterility. The relationship
between mitochondrial function and cytoplasmic male sterility not only allows an
understanding of the cells "power plant", the mitochondria, but also will reveal
basic information about the development of the pollination mechanism.