* 8919768
* Pericyclic Transition Structures
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/1990,01/31/1994
* Henry Shine, Texas Tech University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Jennings
* 01/31/1994
* USD 279,856.00

In this project in the Organic Dynamics Program, Professor Henry J. Shine will
study "Pericyclic Transition Structures" in the Chemistry Department at Texas
Tech University. Professor Shine is collaborating with Professor William H.
Saunders in the Chemistry Department at the University of Rochester. In this
study heavy atom kinetic isotope effects with specifically labelled substrates
are being measured and bond order modeling calculations are being carried out in
order to define the transition structures of reactions that are known to be
pericyclic. Heavy atom (carbon, nitrogen, and, oxygen) kinetic isotope effects
(KIE) and bond order modeling calculations are being made in order to define the
transition structures of several pericyclic reactions. Reactions being studied
are the aromatic Claisen rearrangement (allyl phenyl ether), the benzidine
rearrangement (hydrazobenzene), and the aliphatic Claisen rearrangement (allyl
vinyl ether and two of its derivatives). The objective in the aromatic Claisen
rearrangement and in the benzidine rearrangement is to use them to probe along
the reaction coordinate for coupled motion of carbon atoms not directly involved
in bond breaking and making. In the aliphatic Claisen rearrangements the
objective is to define their transition structures and synchronicities, over
which controversy has arisen from theoretical treatments. Modeling calculations
will be made to fit KIE to bond orders and, hence, to optimized transition
structures.