* 8919841
* Active Zones, Ca++ Currents, and Modulation of Release
* BIO,IOS
* 02/15/1990,01/31/1992
* Alan Grinnell, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Stacy Springer
* 01/31/1992
* USD 155,525.00

The function of the nervous system depends on the proper connections between
individual and groups of nerve cells. Nerve cells communicate with each other
and with muscle cells through the release of chemical transmitters at close
contact points called synapse. While much is known about the structure of these
"synaptic' connections, far less is understood about how these connections
adjust to changes by drugs or endogenous chemical substances like hormones. How
the communication between nerve cells is changed or "modulated" in both the
short and the long term is important to our understanding of the nervous system
under normal conditions and those produced by disease. "Neuromodulation" may
also be a consideration in the development of new therapeutic approaches. The
chemical transmitters used by nerve cells to signal to each other are released
from specialized areas called "active zones." The release process is dependent
on the movement of calcium into the nerve cell through channels which are
clustered at these active zone regions. Since the release of chemical
transmitters is dependent on calcium, any modulation of the movement of calcium
through its channels can drastically affect the communication between nerve
cells and from nerve cells to muscle. This research project will study calcium
movement in frog nerves and in specialized cultured cells which may possess
nerve-type calcium channels. Unlike other preparations, these may provide direct
access to nerve cell calcium channels in order to study neuromodulation. In this
way it is possible to understand the factors which control communication in the
central and peripheral nervous systems.