* 8919508
* Prenatal Development of Functional Connections in the       Mammalian Visual System
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/1990,08/31/1992
* Carla Shatz, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Stacy Springer
* 08/31/1992
* USD 236,000.00

This research project is dedicated to answering three basic questions about the
development of the visual system: 1) how do nerve cells connect to each other;
2) how do nerve cells know where to connect to each other and 3) how does nerve
cell activity influence the connections? The answers can be found by studying
the prenatal and postnatal development of the cat visual system, which is
remarkably similar to that in the human. During development the connections
nerve cells make are not the same as those found in the adult. It is important,
therefore, to ascertain what determines which connections are eliminated or
preserved. Although it is known that activity influences which connections nerve
cells make, it is not clear how it is done. This project will study the anatomy
and physiology of developing nerve cells and whether certain types of "growth-
associated proteins" (GAP) regulate this process. Abnormal nerve cell activity
during development may lead to birth defects. The use of certain drugs which
cross from mother to fetus may have this effect. Toxic substances could also
affect the proper development of the visual system after birth by abnormally
stimulating or inhibiting nerve cell activity. Studying the processes regulating
normal development can further our understanding of defects of the visual
system.