* 8919453
* Avian Vocal Ontogeny
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/1990,10/31/1993
* Luis Baptista, California Academy of Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Fred Stollnitz
* 10/31/1993
* USD 157,736.00

Scientists have discovered a number of parallels between speech development in
humans and song development in birds. These parallels include learning early in
life, and speaking two languages or singing two song types at dialect
boundaries. White-crowned sparrows learn songs from adults in the population.
Cultural tradition and isolation gives rise to regional dialects. In the
laboratory, white-crowned sparrows will learn song from tape recorders before
they are 50 days of age, but the stronger stimulus of a live, interacting tutor
is necessary for song learning beyond that age. The present studies were
designed to find out if young birds learn songs from neighbors after leaving
their birthplace (at the age of 50 days) and settling, and if subordinate
individuals tend to learn songs from dominant individuals. Dr. Baptista will
also investigate whether or not nonmigratory individuals develop songs faster
than migratory individuals, since sedentary birds establish territories at an
earlier age and song has important functions in acquiring and maintaining a
territory. Singing and territoriality are two of many behaviors birds need in
order to survive. Knowledge of how birds interact with their physical and social
environment is prerequisite to any intelligent management program to save our
vanishing habitat and wildlife.