* 8919645
* RUI:  Maternal/Fetal Adaptation to High Altitude
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/1990,06/30/1995
* Lorna Moore, University of Colorado at Denver-Downtown Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 06/30/1995
* USD 208,857.00

Studies of high altitude adaptation have had a long and productive history in
physical anthropology in order to understand the mechanisms by which human
populations adapt to environmental stress. Yet, our understanding of the extent
to which adaptation has been achieved and the processes involved remains
fragmentary. The overall purpose of this research project is to determine
whether populations longer resident at high altitude are better adapted than
shorter resident groups as a result of their superior abilities to transport
and/or extract oxygen from the blood. Because birth weights are reduced at high
altitude and decreased birth weight is associated with increased infant
mortality, an important criterion for assessing adaptation is the preservation
of birth weight values associated with low mortality risk. Given the likelihood
that persons have lived at high altitude for exceedingly short and long periods
of time in Colorado and Tibet respectively, this project will study groups at
the two locales. The study will examine the relationship between altitude and
birth weight, birth weight and gestational age, and the causes of neonatal
deaths. In addition, studies of maternal arterial oxygen content, uterine blood
flow, and uterine oxygen delivery are proposed for the two sites. Study methods
include the recording and comparison of birth weight, gestational age and other
data obtained from birth and death certificates on approximately 110,000 births
in Colorado and from approximately 8000 births in Tibet. The proposed study will
be able to determine whether or not Tibetans are protected from altitude-
associated fetal growth retardation and to identify the components of maternal
oxygen transport involved.