* 8919167
* Second International Congress on Optical Particle Sizing    to be Held in Tempe/Phoenix, Arizona, March 5-9, 1990
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/1990,12/31/1990
* Edwin Hirleman, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Mihail Roco
* 12/31/1990
* USD 10,450.00

Funds are provided to partially support the Second International Congress on
Optical Particle Sizing and the associated Workshop on Future Directions in
Optical Particle Sizing Research, to be held March 5-9, 1990. The impetus comes
from the researchers in the area who, because of the interdisciplinary nature of
the many applications of particle technology, are active in a broad range of
formal technical organizations and societies. The Congress and Workshop will
bring together researchers from industry, government, and academia to discuss
the present state and future needs for radiation sources and electro-optical
components used in characterizing particles and dispensed media. Particulate and
multi-phase flow processes control the ultimate performance of a large number of
important systems involved in metallurgy, pharmaceuticals, atomization and
sprays, cloud physics, and thermal or plasma spraying/coating. Advances in both
research and industrial process facets of these applications will require
improved diagnostics for the multi-phase system, with characterization of the
dispersed phase being a dominant part. Optical methods for multi-phase flow
diagnostics, by virtue of being noncontact, nonintrusive, and potentially real-
time, will be required in next-generation sensors for intelligent process
control.