* 8919182
* Mechanisms of Genomic Rearrangement in Yeast
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/1990,04/30/1993
* Lorraine Symington, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 04/30/1993
* USD 405,000.00

We have isolated a hyper-recombination mutants, TOP3 that identifies a novel
eukaryotic topoisomerase in the yeast, Saccharomyces cerevisiae. The predicted
open reading frame of the TOP3 gene is homologous to the bacterial type, I
topoisomerase, TopA, but not homologous to eukaryotic type I or II enzymes. We
plan to investigate the biochemical properties of this novel enzyme and to
define its substrate preferences. Null mutations exhibit pleiotropic phenotypes
such as slow growth, reduced diploid formation and a sporulation defect. We will
investigate the consequences of these pleiotropies by examining mitotic and
meiotic nuclear division, spindle formation and the mating reaction. Genetic
experiments will address these pleiotropies by in vitro mutagenesis of the TOP3
gene and by searching for genetic suppressors of these phenotypes. A slow growth
suppressor, sgs1, has already been isolated and will be cloned and mapped using
a modified Ty mutagenesis method that we will develop. Lastly, we will begin to
investigate whether the TOP3 gene is a general feature of all cell by attempting
to identify a homologue in the evolutionarily distant yeast Schizosaccharomyces
pombe by using either nucleic acid homology or protein homology as a probe. It
is our goal to understand the role that this novel topoisomerase plays in cells
growth and development. The process of genetic recombination is observed in all
living organisms. Although this process has important biological consequences
both for individuals and for populations, and the details of its mechanism has
been under intense study in a number of laboratories for years, we still do not
have a good understanding of how this process helps living organisms survive.
During his previous investigations into the mechanism of recombination in yeast,
the author of this proposal discovered anew gene involved in this process; this
gene encoded an enzyme of a type not previously seen in yeast or higher
organisms. Mutants defective in this gene also had defects in many aspects of
their life cycle. This is a proposal to investigate how this gene is involved
with these other life processes.