* 8919917
* US-France Cooperative Research:  Particle Dynamics and      Biogeochemistry of Trace Elements in Natural Waters
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1990,09/30/1993
* Francois Morel, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 09/30/1993
* USD 11,850.00

This award will support collaborative research in biological oceanography
between Dr. Francois Morel, Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Dr. Jean-
Marie Martin, Ecole Normale Superieure, Paris, France. The objective of this
project is to study the nature, dynamics, metal binding and geochemical role of
colloids and microparticles in natural waters. The US and French groups have
several common long term research aims: 1) to characterize aquatic particles
(including colloids) and their dynamics 2) to characterize and model the binding
of metals to particles and colloids and 3) to quantify; and model the role of
solution/particle exchanges in the geochemistry and geobiology of trace elements
in natural waters. In this project the collaborators will focus on 1) the
development of fluorescence spectroscopy techniques for the characterization of
aquatic particles and colloids and 2) the development of thermodynamic models of
metal binding, validated and contrained with new specific calorimetric, kinetic
and spectroscopic data. The project will benefit from the complementary
expertise of the US investigator in large particles and geochemistry and the
experience of the French in colloids and physicochemical mechanisms. Because
microparticles and colloids have major carriers of trace elements in natural
waters, an elucidation of their dynamics is essential to an understanding of the
biogeochemistry of trace elements, both natural and anthropogenic.