* 8919438
* Comparative Neuroanatomical Study of the Brain of the       Florida Manatee (Trichechus manatus)
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/1990,02/28/1993
* Wallace Welker, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Platt
* 02/28/1993
* USD 110,750.00

Because the brain is the principal organ that produces behavior, one of the
goals of neuroscience is to determine what structural specializations of the
brain are involved in specific behavior. Comparisons of brain structure in
diverse animals with similar or different behavior is one of the approaches of
comparative neurobiology. Such studies can lead to new insights about brain form
and function by revealing important differences from the patterns found in
typical laboratory animals. This work will provide important detailed
histological sections of brains from the Florida manatee, or sea cow. This large
aquatic mammal, despite its appearance, is related to the elephants, has several
unusual brain specializations, and is an endangered species. The brains for this
work have come from animals mortally injured, chiefly by boating accidents,
obtained by the U.S. Fish & Wildlife Service. The brain sections will be
incorporated into an existing archival collection of the highest quality of
mammalian brains, now containing examples of more than 100 species representing
17 different taxonomic orders. This collection facilitates quantitative,
comparative analysis of particular brain regions in animals with known behavior.
These tissues will be extremely valuable not only to neuroanatomists and
neurobiologists, but also to systematists and zoologists.