* 8919808
* Dissertation Research:  A Comparative Study of Two Species  of Macaque in Central Sulawesi
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/1990,02/29/1992
* Alison Richard, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan S. Friedlaender
* 02/29/1992
* USD 10,761.00

This is a fifteen month comparative study of the ecology and behavior of Macaca
tonkeana and Macaca hecki in the narrow isthmus of Central Sulawesi, Indonesia.
The isthmus averages only 35 km in width, and the ranges of these two species
come into contact in this narrow area. The two species are morphologically very
similar, previously having been classified as the same species. Differences
between these two species have persisted despite the lack of geographical or
climatic barriers to contact. This suggests that features of the ecology and
behavior of the two species may serve as mechanisms to keep the two species
distinct in an area of parapatry. The focus of this investigation will be to
identify and examine these mechanisms. Knowledge of the presence or absence of
ecological and behavioral separation between M. tonkeana and M. hecki will
increase our understanding of the manner in which these two forms are maintained
as distinct entities in an area of parapatry or possible sympatry. This study
may contribute to new models for understanding and interpreting the maintenance,
and ultimately, the creation of diversity in the genus Macaca and other closely
related primates. The proposed research is relevant to attempts to understand
general mechanisms of diversification in primates and other mammals.