* 8919513
* Construction and Performance Verification of a Multi-Stage  Standardization System for Sulfur Gases
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/1990,05/31/1992
* Sherry Farwell, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* Jarvis L. Moyers
* 05/31/1992
* USD 174,041.00

The primary goal of this project is to design, construct, and validate a
reliable calibration system for preparing ultra- trace gas standards for five
sulfur-containing compounds; hydrogen sulfide, sulfur dioxide, carbonyl sulfide,
carbon disulfide, and dimethylsulfide. Although these sulfur species are of
major atmospheric importance, the measurement equivalency of the different
analytical methods used for their analysis is often unknown. Consequently, an
intercomparison project is being developed by the scientific community to
address this issue. The central calibration system built during this initial
phase of the overall intercomparison project will provide the reference gas
standards required to access the performance characteristics of the various
analytical techniques. This calibration system will consist of a three-stage
dynamic dilution apparatus that contains a source of sulfur-free zero dilution
air, an all-Teflon flow network, compressed gas cylinders as the source of each
sulfur gas, electronic mass- flow controllers for the precise regulation of all
gas flows, and separate inlet systems for the introduction of potential matrix
interferences. Concentrations of the sulfur gas standards prepared by the
calibration system will cover a range from 950 pptv to 12pptv and have a maximum
uncertainty of less than 7%.//