* 8919097
* Regulariation and Control of Multibody Systems with         Irregular Modes of Operation
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/1989,08/31/1991
* F. Amirouche, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Elbert L. Marsh
* 08/31/1991
* USD 30,000.00

Certain mechanical systems, especially robotic systems operating in the presence
of obstacles, are subjected to sudden changes in their motion in avoiding the
obstacles. Such changes can severely affect the system's performance by inducing
vibrations and thereby inaccuracies. Most research on robot collision avoidance
has focused on description of the obstacles and derivation of the geometric
(kinematic) conditions for avoiding collision between bodies. The related
dynamics problem has not received a great deal of attention. The objective of
this research is to develop a control algorithm that will be able to control the
system dynamics to accommodate the rapid changes in motion. The methodology used
in this project is based upon the variational formulation of dynamics. The
controller developed will provide the optimum control forces to satisfy
constraint conditions, can be activated at any specified time of a prescribed
task interval, and will be computationally efficient to implement. This research
will be carried out for redundant rigid robotic systems. If successful,
subsequent research will explore broader application of the method to high speed
flexible systems. Smoother motion associated with this controller could improve
system performance, reliability, and position accuracy.