* 8919235
* Kinetics of Phase Transformations
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/1990,11/30/1993
* William Klein, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce A. MacDonald
* 11/30/1993
* USD 410,437.00

This grant is a combined experimental and theoretical examination of phase
transformations in materials. Fast (millisecond ) synchrotron-based time
resolved X-ray scattering is employed to study spinodal decomposition and
ordering in alloys. Preliminary research has concentrated on the classic cases
of spinodal decomposition in aluminum-zinc and ordering in copper-gold and
showed that there is no significant timescale during which the Cahn-Hilliard-
Cook linear theory or its extension, the Langer-Bar-On-Millier nonlinear theory
are valid. Now the research is centered on alloys with smaller strain effects
(iron-chromium and iron-cobalt), alloys with second-order ordering transitions
(iron-cobalt and aluminum-iron), and alloys that undergo simultaneous ordering
and phase separation (aluminum-iron). In some of these cases these fast
experiments probe transformation kinetics in regions of the phase diagram in
which neither phase is the true equilibrium structure. The simulations and
theory part of the research pursues large scale studies of spinodal
decomposition and continuous ordering in both Ising models and fluids, for short
and long range interactions. Included are studies of crystallization in simple
fluids. Limits of the present nucleation theories are studied by taking
simulation data as the limit of miscibility is approached and seeing where the
theory begins to fail. Geometric models are developed for nucleation and
spinodal decomposition