* 8919473
* A Comparison of the Influence of Fossorial Rodents on the   Dynamics of Mediterranean Grassland Landscapes in Chile and California
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/1990,06/30/1993
* George Cox, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Emily B. Rudin
* 06/30/1993
* USD 16,834.00

This award supports cooperative research on the systematic biology of fossorial
(burrowing) rodents to be conducted by George Cox of San Diego State University
and Luis Contreras of the University of La Serena in Chile. The work will
consist of comparative studies of two aspects of fossorial rodent ecology: mound
formation and population energetics and its impact on plant communities. The
California group will focus on the first of these and the Chileans will
emphasize the second. Nevertheless, basic data collection procedures will be
used by both groups to obtain data essential to synthetic comparisons of the
Californian and Chilean relationships. These two areas are highly similar in
soil and climactic conditions. A combination of radiotracking and individual
marking will be used to follow pocket gophers and coruros near their colony
sites. Differences in mound building, food caching and tunneling will be studied
to determine the effect of colonial behavior and differences in establishing
permanent territories and nomadic behavior. Comparison of the behavior of these
two groups of fossorial rodents will reveal characteristics that lead to the
production of large-scale patchiness, consisting of mounds and temporary pond
basins in North America but not in Chile. This will contribute to the
understanding of recent evolutionary history of the two climate ecosystems. Both
scientists and graduate students from both countries will participate in the
field studies of site ecology. Thus the strengths of both groups will contribute
to the science produced by this collaboration under the Science in Developing
Countries program.