* 8919341
* Physiology and Biochemistry of Calcium Oxalate Formation in Plants
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/1990,11/30/1993
* Vincent Franceschi, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Maryanna P. Henkart
* 11/30/1993
* USD 165,000.00

Calcium oxalate formation is pervasive in plants and can account for the
preponderance of calcium in plant organs. Little is known about the physiology
and biochemistry of this form of calcium compartmentation. A procedure has been
developed to isolate calcium oxalate-forming cells (crystal idioblasts) as
protoplasts from Pistia stratiotes. Using this system soluble and insoluble
proteins of crystal idioblast and mesophyll protoplasts will be compared by gel
electrophoresis to identify idioblast-specific proteins. Protein components of
the specialized crystal chamber membranes and possible existence of crystal
matrix proteins will also be explored. Biosynthetic pathways for oxalate
synthesis in idioblasts and mesophyll cells will be determined. Calcium binding
proteins will be identified on gels and blots by standard techniques.
Characteristics of calcium uptake by crystal idioblast and mesophyll protoplasts
will be determined by exposure to 45Ca (with and without inhibitors of calcium
channels, calmodulin, and ATPases) followed by silicone oil centrifugation.
These studies will provide valuable information, unobtainable by other means,
about mechanisms and regulation of calcium oxalate formation in plants and will
further our understanding of the importance of this phenomenon to calcium
metabolism of plant tissues.