* 8919086
* Chemistry of Plant-Insect Interactions in Costa Rica
* O/D,OISE
* 01/15/1990,06/30/1992
* Frank Stermitz, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 06/30/1992
* USD 17,540.00

This award will support Professor Frank R. Stermitz of Colorado State
University in collaboration with Professor Oscar Castro of the Centro de
Investigacion de Productos Naturales (CIPRONA) in Costa Rica. The investigators
intend to extend current research on the chemistry of alkaloid containing plants
and insects involved in specialized interactions with these plants. Insects that
specialize on one or a few plant species have to overcome chemical defenses
elaborated by the host plant. They may use chemicals from the plant to fashion
pheromones, or defensive substances, or may have achieved special methods for
the metabolism or elimination of plant chemicals. The researchers will study
three sphingid moth species in Guanacaste National Park in Costa Rica that
distribute themselves among three plant species, all in the family Bignoniaceae.
There does not appear to be any obvious seasonal or environmental reasons for
these special choices of hostplant and it is suggested that chemical factors may
play a part. Support from the Science in Developing Countries Program will allow
the collaborators to expand the investigation to other species as well. The
chemical study of plant species utilized by specialist insects will be valuable
in understanding the evolution of plant defense and insect specialization. It
has been conservatively estimated that over 50% of all biological species are
made up of combination of phytophagous insects and their hostplants. Thus, in
the long term, understanding of plant-insect interactions will provide
information on a major part of the world's biodiversity.