* 8919644
* Towards an Integration of the Non-Invasive Methodologies of Cognitive Neuroscience:  The Eleventh Carmel Workshop,      January 3-8, 1990; Carmel, California
* SBE,BCS
* 11/15/1989,11/30/1990
* Alfred Fregly, Department of Air Force Office of Scientific Research
* Interagency Agreement
* Jasmine Young
* 11/30/1990
* USD 10,000.00

The explosive progress in the neurosciences over the last decade has not been
matched by an increased understanding of the human brain and its role in human
cognition. Progress in cognitive neuroscience has been slowed by obvious ethical
constraints on the experimental study of the human nervous system. However,
several recent technological developments have made it possible to visualize
aspects of brain activity in novel and powerful ways. Of particular importance
is the fact that these techniques can be used with awake behaving humans with
virtually no risk and practically no inconvenience to the subject. Two classes
of techniques are particularly noteworthy, the radiological and the electro-
magnetic approaches. Radiological approaches make it possible to visualize
metabolic processes in the intact brain. Positron Emission Tomography (PET) and
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) are typical of these approaches, as they allow
investigators to determine with very fine spatial resolution the site of brain
activity which is invoked in the course of clearly specified cognitive activity.
The electro- magnetic approaches monitor either the electrical or the magnetic
activity of the brain. These can be monitored with remarkable temporal
resolution, but with rather poor spatial resolution. This action will provide
NSF's share of the funding for a conference to be held in Carmel, California,
during the first week of January, 1990, to discuss ways and means to integrate
these novel techniques in order to enhance their power as tools for cognitive
neuroscience. For technological and theoretical reasons, each technique has
developed its own experimental paradigms. The conditions which are optimal for
recording within one approach often conflict with the demands which others
impose on an experiment. A necessary condition for the integration is a thorough
mutual understanding of the paradigmatic constraints that shape the work in each
of the domains. It is for this reason that the conference will bring together
investigators who represent each of four main techniques to be considered. The
conference will be divided into three parts: For the first day and a half,
several prominent investigators will provide tutorials. Then the participants
will meet in four smaller panels, each of them receiving a very detailed charge.
A day and a half will be devoted to the panel discussions. Then, in the last two
days, each panel will report to the assembled group its response to the charge.