* 8919210
* Scanning Tunneling Microscopy Investigations of Low-        Dimensional Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 04/15/1990,07/01/1991
* Charles Lieber, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* David Nelson
* 07/01/1991
* USD 151,000.00

There is currently considerable interest in understanding the structure,
electronic properties, and reactivity of metals and semiconductors since these
materials figure prominently in many important technological areas including
microelectronics and catalysis. To understand the macroscopic behavior of such
systems requires knowledge of the structural and electronic properties at the
molecular level. The overall objective of this study is to characterize with
atomic resolution the structural and electronic properties of low-dimensional
materials that exhibit interesting structural, electrical, and catalytic
behavior. A the scanning tunneling microscope (STM) will be used to probe these
key properties directly in real-space. Specific materials that will be
investigated with the STM include tantalum disulfide/ diselenide, chemically-
modified tantalum disulfide (i.e., metal-substituted, anion-substituted, and
intercalated materials), and graphite intercalation complexes. Emphasis will be
placed on characterizing in detail the structure and electronic properties of
the charge density wave (CDW) phases in the metal dichalcogenide materials and
on correlating changes in the CDW phases with the chemical modifications. The
studies will provide systematic atomic-resolution data that will be compared
with theoretical models to develop a better microscopic understanding of the
structural and electronic properties of these interesting low-dimensional
materials, and to understand how these properties can be varied through chemical
modification. This award is jointly funded by the Solid-State Chemistry Program
of the Division of Materials Research, and by the Analytical and Surface
Chemistry Program of the Chemistry Division.