* 8919601
* Development of Sexual Behavior:  A Marsupial Model
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/1990,12/31/1993
* Barbara Fadem, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey-RBHS-New Jersey Med
* Continuing Grant
* Kathie L. Olsen
* 12/31/1993
* USD 217,000.00

Sex differences in reproductive behavior in mammals are determined not only by
the genes and by hormones produced in adulthood, but also by steroid hormones
secreted by the gonads during prenatal and postnatal development. Although it is
known that testicular androgens play an important role during perinatal
development, androgens are metabolized into estrogens within CNS target cells.
To determine whether an androgen or its estrogenic metabolite is the
differentiating hormone is complicated since placental mammalian fetuses have
systems which actually "protect' them from maternal estrogen. Thus, getting
estrogen to the fetus and quantifying the amount of estrogen acting on the fetus
developing in utero is extremely difficult but of critical importance. Dr. Fadem
uses gray opossums as a model system to examine the role of estrogen. The
newborns are born at a developmental stage equivalent to that of a 13-day fetal
rat or 8-week human embryo. Hence, these marsupials are mammals in which much of
the fetal development occurs outside the body of the mother, making the fetal
environment accessible. Dr. Fadem will manipulate the hormonal milieu during
early fetal life. Her work will help define the role that estrogen plays in the
development of sexually dimorphic behaviors, morphology and physiology. These
data will contribute to a better understanding of various human disorders that
result from insufficient or excess hormone exposure during sexual
differentiation.