* 8919148
* Block Travel Funds:  1990 IFAC Congress, Tallinn, USSR,     August 13-17, 1990
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/1990,07/31/1991
* William Levine, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 07/31/1991
* USD 20,250.00

The International Federation of Automatic Control (IFAC) is composed of 44
National Member Organizations (NMO), each one representing the technical
societies concerned with automatic control in its own country. The U.S. NMO is
the American Automatic Control Council (AACC) consisting of representatives from
seven member societies of which the largest is the IEEE Control Systems Society.
IFAC sponsors many conferences, but the most important is the triennial World
Congress. The 11th such IFAC World Congress will be held August 13-17, 1990 in
Tallinn, USSR. The 12th will be held in Sydney, Australia, in 1993, and the 13th
in San Francisco, U.S.A. in 1996. The official theme of the 11th IFAC World
Congress is "Automatic control in the service of mankind." One objective of the
Congress is to strengthen the connections between theory and applications by
including papers whose topics range from basic research to industrial and social
applications. A second objective is to strengthen the cooperation between
researchers from various parts of the world, including the U.S. In the past,
this conference has been very successful in attracting researchers and other
engineers and scientists from all over the world. The most recent IFAC World
Congress, the 10th held in Munich, FRG, in 1987, had an attendance of over
1,500. Thus, the conference is expected to be a particularly good forum for the
exchange of ideas among U.S. and non-U.S. experts in automatic control. The
conference will be comprised of invited sessions and regular sessions. It will
address control theory topics as well as applications to industrial controls,
manufacturing systems, automation, and other related issues.