* 8919557
* Herbivory and Phytoplankton Growth in the Subarctic Pacific:Project SUPER
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/1989,12/31/1990
* Nicholas Welschmeyer, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 12/31/1990
* USD 81,333.00

This proposed SUPER - SUbartic Pacific Ecosystem Research is a renewal of the
1984-86 SUPER Program. The initial and proposed project have focused on
understanding the food web relationships and other upper ocean processes leading
to the population dynamics of phytoplankton and zooplankton in the Subarctic
Pacific. The population dynamics in this region contrast greatly with the wide
seasonal fluctuations (blooms, etc.) characteristic of the North Atlantic. While
the North Atlantic has been considered by many to be the model of how high
latitude oceans work, increasing evidence suggests the North Pacific may be more
of a norm. Initially, work in the Subarctic Pacific centered on the larger size
fractions of both phytoplankton and zooplankton and on the notion that
phytoplankton growth was continuously balanced by zooplankton feeding (the Major
Grazer Hypothesis). Unusual characteristics of the surface water mass allowed
the maintenance of higher zooplankton abundance in the euphotic zone, thus
allowing zooplankton to closely tract any phytoplankton increases. The lag seen.
The results of the initial SUPER Program, indicate that zooplankton
numbers/feeding capabilities are 10X too low to account for the balance of
populations, and the copepods must have a direct feeding connection to
microzooplankton (heterotrophic flagellates and ciliates). The Major Grazer
Hypothesis is not an accurate paradigm of the ecosystem dynamics; and
alternative Limited Mixing/Micrograzer Hypothesis has been forwarded and tests
of this new hypothesis are proposed. This will involve comparisons of
phytoplankton (all sizes) production rates with zooplankton (all sizes) grazing
rates, and a quantitative assessment of nitrogen dynamics as a basis for
estimates of phytoplankton production capabilities. Over 30 scientists have
contributed reviews of the proposed program withoverwhelming support for the
investigation. All of the SUPER investigators are leaders in their respective
subdisciplines; all are productive and experienced in large program
cooperation/collaboration. Dr. Welschmeyer's component is considered an
essential facet of the multi-disciplinary, multi-institution effort. The
Biological Oceanography Program strongly recommends support of the entire
integrated program. An award to Dr. Welschmeyer for research on phytoplankton
rates, zooplankton feeding rates, and sediment trapping studies is recommended
at the following levels: FY 87, $197,201; FY 88, $141,573; FY 89 $81,333.