* 8919004
* Assembly and Stability of Microtubules from Antarctic Fish  at Low Temperatures
* O/D,OPP
* 10/01/1990,03/31/1993
* Harry Detrich, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 03/31/1993
* USD 188,000.00

The long-range goals of the proposed research are to determine, at the molecular
level, the structural adaptations that enable the tubulins of Antarctic fishes
to polymerize at the low body temperatures of -2 to +2 C experienced by these
cold-adapted vertebrates, and to examine the dynamics of the fish microtubule.
The specific objectives of this project are four in number: 1) to clone and to
sequence DNAs complementary to messenger RNAs (cDNAs) that encode the alpha and
beta tubulins of an Antarctic fish; 2) to determine the structure and number of
the tubulin genes within the genome of an Antarctic fish; 3) to determine the
organization and functions of the structural domains of tubulins from Antarctic
fishes; and 4) to characterize the dynamic behaviors of Antarctic fish
microtubule at low temperatures. Experiments will be performed on tubulin cDNAs
and genes derived from the nucleic acids of Notothenia coriiceps neglecta and on
microtubule proteins purified from three Antarctic fish species: N. coriiceps
neglecta, N. gibberifrons, and Chaenocephalus aceratus. The nucleotide sequences
of the alpha and beta tubulin cDNAs and genes from N. coriiceps neglecta will be
established by standard methods. The structural domains of tubulins that are
necessary for the assembly of cold-stable microtubule will be defined by limited
proteolytic digestion of the proteins followed by microtubule assembly assays.
Finally, the dynamics of Antarctic fish microtubule at low temperatures will be
examined by electron-microscopic and video-enhanced light- microscopic methods.
Comparison of the primary sequences and structural domains of tubulins from
Antarctic fishes with those of tubulins from temperate and warm-blooded
vertebrates should reveal the structural features necessary for microtubule
assembly at low temperatures. This work will also provide, for the first time,
valuable information concerning the structure of tubulin genes from an extreme
Antarctic poikilotherms.