* 8919039
* Connection to the Minnesota Regional Network
* CSE,CNS
* 04/15/1990,09/30/1992
* John Smaby, Minnesota Private College Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* George O. Strawn
* 09/30/1992
* USD 190,000.00

Ten colleges of the Minnesota Private College Council request support in the
form of telecommunications equipment and leased lines in order to connect their
campus networks to the Minnesota Regional Network (MRNet). The institutions
involved - Augsburg College, Bethel College, Concordia College, Gustavus
Adolphus College, Hamline University, Macalester College, College of St.
Catherine, College of St. Mary, College of St Scholatica, and the College of St.
Thomas - will develop a consistent system-wide architecture for national network
access and will provide a structure for general access to the Internet.
Additionally, a higher quality communications system will be fostered by
providing network-wide management and information services through MRNet and the
Minnesota Supercomputing Center. The proposed connections will provide reliable,
relatively high- speed, and flexible access to functions such as file transfer,
remote login, and teleconferencing. The links will enhance the research and
personal-productivity capabilities of faculty and students and will make
available significant, additional resources to supplement course work. It will
also facilitate access to national networks and their services, including
supercomputing resources and large database access.