* 8920133
* Center for Magnetic Resonance Technology for Basic          Biological Research
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/1991,01/31/1996
* Mary Dawson, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Cooperative Agreement
* Kathie L. Olsen
* 01/31/1996
* USD 5,918,863.00

The University of Illinois will establish a Science and Technology Center for
Magnetic Resonance Technology for Basic Biological Research. The Director of the
Center will be Professor Paul C. Lauterbur. The goal of the Center is to develop
the world's most advanced magnetic resonance imaging instrumentation technically
feasible for the study of living organisms, individual cells, live animals, and
humans and apply it to the most challenging problems in the life sciences, with
a specific focus on brain physiology, anatomy, and function. Five institutions
will contribute to the program in a coordinated fashion. These comprise the
University of Illinois, the Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory, the Texas Accelerator
Center, the University of Chicago, and the IBM Watson Research Laboratory. The
two principal elements of the Center's program are: 1. The development of
magnetic resonance imaging instrumentation covering a wide range of
methodologies and technical approaches, including the design and implementation
of a four Tesla, one-meter bore magnetic resonance imaging and spectroscopy
system, advanced NMR microscopy instrumentation for both imaging and
spectroscopy, further development of targetable NMR reagents for the study of
perfusion and cell labeling, and the development of tools for mathematical
modeling of complex physiologic processes. 2. The application of this
instrumentation and its associated methodologies for the study of a wide range
of the most challenging life sciences problems. Specifically it will be devoted
to the understanding of complex biological processes relating structure,
dynamics, and chemistry of the living brain. Development of the magnetic
resonance imaging instrumentation will allow metabolic processes in living
animals and humans to be studied noninvasively in real time, and its application
to brain physiology, metabolism and function would mark a major breakthrough in
this field. The ability to construct images using nuclei other than protons
(such as phosphorus) will add a new dimension to new ways of studying biological
problems. This Center will stimulate enhanced activity in education and in the
development of human resources.