* 8920811
* Advanced Study Workshop on Black Sea Oceanography,          23-27 October 1989 in Cesme-Izmir, Turkey
* O/D,OISE
* 10/15/1989,09/30/1990
* James Murray, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Edward Murdy
* 09/30/1990
* USD 60,000.00

ABSTRACT NARRATIVE Description: This proposal requests funds for the partial
support of a workshop on Black Sea oceanography to be held October 23-27, 1989
in Cesme-Izmir Turkey. The cooperating P.I.s are Dr. Erol Izdar of Dokuiz Eylul
University of Izmir, Turkey and Dr. James W. Murray, University of Washington.
Dr. Izdar recently received an award to conduct this workshop as a NATO Advanced
Study Workshop. The NATO grant covers the operational expenses of the workshop
and travel expenses of non-U.S. NATO participants. This proposal is intended for
the travel and expenses of 26 U.S. participants. The remaining U.S.
participants, about thirteen will be supported by other means. The proposed
workshop has a major objective of making an international interdisciplinary
presentation of and the discussion the results obtained from the five cruises
conducted on the Black Sea from April 15 to August 2, 1988 as the International
Oceanographic Expedition of the Black Sea. This expedition was planned and
organized by U.S. and Turkish scientists meeting in Izmir, Turkey in June 1987.
The five separate cruises, each with a major and separate emphasis, were
conducted by some 110 scientists from 39 institutions from eight countries.
Scope: The proposed workshop shop is scheduled about a year after the completion
of the at-sea phase. This interval has provided time and opportunity for
significant data analysis. This international conference will be the first
formal opportunity for a number of the 110 scientists from the different
cruises, disciplines and countries to come together in one location and compare
their data and discuss it in an interdisciplinary context. This workshop will
fulfill an important phase detailed in a U.S.-Turkish Memorandum of
Understanding (MOU) drawn up and signed at the June 1987 meeting. The MOU
provided formal ship clearances to conduct research in the Turkish Exclusive
Zone of the Black Sea. This clearances were necessary to open up sea areas of
scientific interest to fulfill the objectives of the five cruises. The MOU also
made reference to the conduct of workshop in Turkey approximately one year after
the Expedition. This proposal fulfills objectives of the Science in Developing
Countries Program in its exchange and transfer of scientific knowledge through
international collaboration.