* 8920162
* Center for Biological Timing
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/1991,07/31/2002
* Gene Block, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Cooperative Agreement
* Christopher Platt
* 07/31/2002
* USD 15,076,776.00

Nearly all biological systems show periodic patterns of activity. Commonly
known examples are daily (circadian), tidal, lunar and yearly rhythms of
activities such as sleep, locomotion, migration and reproduction. It remains
unclear what kinds of "biological clocks" monitor time and regulate these
activities, although some notable progress has been made on certain cases in the
past decade. This Center for Biological Timing provides a coordinated effort of
seventeen laboratories at three universities, in a way impossible for individual
research projects. Molecular, cellular and system-level processes will be
studied to see how they generate, synchronize and integrate critical
physiological oscillations within neural and endocrine systems. Research at the
molecular and cellular levels will concentrate on the role of genetic
transcriptional and translational events, the participation of intracellular
"second messenger" pathways, and the role of membrane properties in the
generation and control of oscillations. Research at the level of functioning
systems will concentrate on interrelationships among elements in the timing
system, particularly those between oscillating elements themselves, and between
oscillators and external cues that entrain or modulate the period or phase of
the oscillators. Research on neural and hormonal outputs will focus on how the
timing systems and rhythmic processes are integrated into the behavior of the
organism, and in turn can be modulated by a number of pathways. A
biomathematical core facility will provide a rigorous quantitative framework on
which to build the biological analysis of temporal structure. This center
exploits a unique opportunity to combine formal mathematical modelling,
molecular biology, physiology and behavioral approaches in a unified setting on
an important biological issue. It will enhance activity in education and the
development of human resources in this multidisciplinary area, and industrial
participation is encouraged. Impact of the center will be strong across all
fields of biology, and likely on applied areas such as agricultural productivity
and human performance.