* 8920830
* Transient and Stationary Multiwave Mixings in Highly        Nonlinear Thin Materials
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/1990,12/31/1993
* Iam-Choon Khoo, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 12/31/1993
* USD 173,000.00

This program will involve experimental and theoretical studies of transient
multiwave mixings in thin structures of highly nonlinear materials. The
principal materials to be used in the experiments are liquid crystals, but some
studies will also be extended to semiconductor materials to further establish
the generality of the theories and observations. In these media, recent theories
and experiments by the principal investigators have demonstrated that many
useful multiwave mixing effects can occur efficiently in the stationary regime
as well as in the transient regimes. The proposed studies will delve into
several fundamentally interesting and important aspects of these effects,
especially in the transient regime. These include: the roles played by intense
temporal and spatial self- and mutual-phase modulations/shifts and side
diffractions that invariably accompany efficient wave mixing in highly nonlinear
thin materials; the interrelationship between the phase modulation effects and
other geometrical/optical/material parameters such as the laser pulse width and
intensities, material response time and nonlinearity (electronic, thermal,
orientational, local or diffusive, etc.) the interaction length, wave mixing
angle, anisotropy and birefringence, polarization, temperature, etc. This
program of research will result in new fundamental measurements and theoretical
formalisms for quantitative descriptions of, and application guidelines for, a
broad new class of nonlinear devices including beam and image amplifiers, beam
combining and steering, phase conjugator and self-pumped oscillators, based on
coherent multiple wave mixing effects.