* 8920119
* Center for Clouds, Chemistry and Climate
* GEO,AGS
* 02/01/1991,06/30/1996
* Veerabhadran Ramanathan, University of Chicago
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jay S. Fein
* 06/30/1996
* USD 2,951,486.00

The chemistry of the atmosphere is undergoing significant changes, not only due
to natural causes, but also due to human activities. The emissions of pollutants
by human activities have caused significant increases in the concentration of
several trace gases. This inadvertent experiment is predicted to have profound
effects on air-chemistry and climate. The basic goal of the Center for Clouds,
Chemistry and Climate (C4) is to develop the observational and the modeling base
to understand and to predict the changing climate and air-chemistry. Climate-
chemistry interactions, the role of clouds in such interactions, realistic
treatment of clouds in global models and the role of human activities are the
major research themes. The multi-institutional structure of the center involving
universities, European institutions, federal labs and industries will facilitate
unprecedented cross-fertilization between groups from diverse disciplines and
accelerate the progress of research in these institutions. The proposed research
should advance our knowledge of how micro-and macroscales interact and advance
the treatment of clouds in global models. These fundamental advances should lead
to improved predictions of the human impacts on the environment and to a better
understanding of regional weather and climate phenomena, including global
climate change by greenhouse gas warming. The utility and relevance of the
research is very high. As indicated by the participation of industry, there is
immediate technological relevance of experimental methods (data handling and
image processing) developed for this project. The role of clouds is the
fundamental unifying theme of the center which brings together scientists from
several institutions in the U.S. and Europe who are involved in the study of
chemistry, microphysics, radiation, nonlinear dynamics, weather and climate.
Important regional scale climate changes are associated with clouds since they
govern the rate of precipitation, sunlight, UV irradiance on the biosphere, soil
moisture and removal of chemicals from the atmosphere. The radiative effects of
clouds are so large that just a few percent change in cloudiness is sufficient
to amplify or ameliorate by a factor of two the greenhouse effect of the trace
gas increases during the last century. Even the sign of such changes are
unknown. Clouds are the most poorly treated features in global models. The
uncertain role of clouds in climate and chemistry is a Gordian knot of problems
dealing with global changes. Clouds form because of microscale and macroscale
interactions between chemistry, radiation, thermodynamics and dynamics and they
in turn influence these processes significantly on the planetary scale. In the
presence of sunlight, chemical reactions take place in cloud droplets converting
sulfur and nitrogen compounds to sulfuric and nitric acids which are scavenged
out by millimeter and larger sized rain drops. Deep clouds rapidly transport
short-lived pollutants form the surface layer to the upper troposphere thus
transferring a local problem into a global one. A fuller understanding of cloud
phenomena requires a complex array of interrelated observations ranging from
laboratory measurements, aircraft observations of a single cloud to satellite
observations of the whole globe. It requires microphysical models to understand
the interactions within a single cloud droplet to global models to unravel cloud
feedback problems. It also requires a dedicated group to collaborate across
disciplinary boundaries. The proposed research will address all of these
requirements. Large volumes of satellite data will be analyzed to establish the
link between sulfur chemistry and climate and to unravel the role of cloud
radiative-dynamical interactions in major climate events such as the El-Nino of
1982/83 and the severe summer of 1988. Global models of chemistry and climate
will be employed to understand the chemical coupling between nitrogen oxides,
methane, other hydrocarbons and ozone in pristine and polluted environments.
High resolution radar and satellite observations will be used in conjunction
with microphysical and regional scale models to understand how the effects of
individual clouds aggregate to govern regional scale climate and chemistry. C4
scientists will also participate in field measurements to develop and verify
models of chemistry and climate. Useful results from the proposed research
include: global distribution of UV irradiance on the biosphere; regional
distributions of the anthropogenic radiative forcing during the last century;
improved treatment of clouds in global models; and prediction of regional
changes. Summer courses and workshops will be conducted to reach out to high
school and college science teachers and other students. This outreach effort
will take advantage of the effective educational programs currently in operation
in the Chicago area.