* 8920676
* Improved Aluminum Reduction Technology to Exploit Non-      Consumable Anodes
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/1990,12/31/1992
* Theodore Beck, Electrochemical Technology Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 12/31/1992
* USD 249,851.00

Current production of aluminum in the United States is approximately 3.8 x 106
metric tons per year. The presently used system for the production of aluminum
is the Hall-Herault cell. It is operated at 950oC to 980oC and consists of a
carbon cavity (lining) which conducts current from a molten aluminum cathode on
the bottom of the cathode cavity. Consumable carbon anodes are suspended in a
cryolite electrolyte (bath) which floats on the alumina cathode (metal pad).
Alumina powder is fed periodically or continuously, carbon anodes are consumed
continuously (with periodic replacement in prebaked anode plants), and molten
metal product is siphoned approximately daily. In this work the PI will examine
new electrode materials and new concepts for electrochemical cell design and
operation which could save energy and lower operating costs on retrofit older
plants, as well as decrease both capital and operating costs for new aluminum
reduction plants. The aluminum industry has for decades been pursuing a non-
consumable anode that can be substituted for the consumable carbon anodes in the
Hall-Herault cells. The PI plans to test a new alumina/carbon composite anode
made of a Ni-Fe-Cu cermet material. This composite anode technology utilizes the
same reaction as the Hall-Herault technology but the alumina in the anode is
dissolved at the anode-bath interface at exactly the location where oxide ions
are discharged on the carbon matrix. The results is that high alumina solubility
in the bath is not required, and low-temperature baths could be used. The bath
to be used in this research is a mixture of sodium and lithium cryolites having
a freezing point less than 670oC and operating at about 700oC. Titanium diboride
sleeves inside the crucible will serve as an alternate cathode to graphite.
Phase I results have shown that the electrolyte compositions have the
appropriate properties for cell operation and process feasibility has been
proven. The overall objectives of the Phase II research are to develop the basic
engineering and materials science required for the Phase III and the following
commercialization of the new technology. The specific objectives are: a.
Materials Science o Determine optimum particle size of alumina and treatments to
avoid or control agglomeration to minimize the formation of muck in the cell. o
Determine optimum corrosion-resistant alloy anode composition. o Develop
quantitative understanding of oxide growth rates and corrosion rates of alloy
and cermet anodes. o Develop understanding of the role of lithium ions in
electrical conduction phenomena for alloy and cermet anodes. b. Engineering
Science o Develop quantitative fluid dynamics and mass transport correlations
for bath/alumina slurry/gas bubble system. o Develop scaling laws for mass and
heat transport and current distribution in the cells. o Develop quantitative
understanding of conditions of convection and diffusion that avoid or result in
solid salt cathode deposits. o Determine current efficiency and identify
mechanisms of inefficiency in the low-temperature slurry electrolyte system. o
Determine potential balance in cell: reversible potential, activation and
concentration overpotentials and ohmic drops in electrodes and bath. The results
of Phase II will thus provide information for scaleup to commercial size cells.