* 8920548
* Seminar on Ethical and Policy Issues Arising From the       Project to Map and Sequence the Human Genome
* BIO,DBI
* 11/15/1989,10/31/1990
* Daniel Kevles, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ronald J. Overmann
* 10/31/1990
* USD 15,400.00

Professors Daniel Kevles and Leroy Hood of the California Institute of
Technology have organized a seminar for the 1989/1990 academic year to address
issues of ethics and policy related to the human genome project. The seminar
will bring together faculty, research staff, and students associated with the
new Science and Technology Center (STC) for Biotechnology with members and
affiliates of the Caltech Program on Science, Ethics, and Public Policy, which
is situated in the Humanities Division. Specialists and humanists working on the
genome project or concerned with the ethical issues surrounding it in the Los
Angeles area will also participate. With support from this grant, Professors
Kevles and Hood will bring to Caltech outside speakers for eight sessions of
this seminar. The issues to be examined at these seminars center on the ethical
and policy issues concerned with accomplishing the mapping and sequencing of the
genome and with the information that the genome project will produce. With
respect to the issues surrounding the mapping and sequencing of the genome,
speakers will examine the implications of the genome project for biology in
general, including questions of the pace and strategy of the project, its
implications for the allocation of R&amp;D resources, prospects for
international cooperation, and likely impact upon the conduct of biology. With
respect to issues centering on the information produced by the project, speakers
will address such concerns as "ownership" of the information and how the
information is to be used. It is vitally important that these kinds of issues be
addressed by scientists and humanists who will play central roles in the
development of the human genome project. Working together to avoid the ethical
quagmires which could beset this project, they may increase public confidence in
and support of the project. As the site of the STC for biotechnology, there is
hardly a better place for such discussions to take place.