* 8920651
* Equipment for Laser Direct-Write
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1989,08/31/1991
* Klavs Jensen, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 08/31/1991
* USD 76,200.00

The fabrication of integrated circuits involves creation of patterned,
multilayer, thin film structures composed of insulators, semiconductors, and
conductors. Typically, these structures are constructed by using
photolithographic techniques in conjunction with additional processing steps,
including chemical vapor deposition (CVD), etching, doping, etc. Some of steps
(e.g. wet etching) lack sufficient resolution for high ensity devices, while
others (e.g. high temperature CVD) subject the wafer to extreme conditions that
may damage underlying structures. This has resulted in increased interest in
laser processing of microelectronic devices. The PI's research is focused on
laser induced deposition. The process of scanning a laser beam across a
substrate, causing reactants in either the gas, liquid or solid phase to react
and deposit on the substrate is referred to as laser direct- write Potential
applications of laser processing include repair and modification of devices and
masks, production of small quantities of custom devices, and construction of new
structures that take advantage of the laser controlled chemistry and the optical
properties of the precursor and substrate materials. This equipment grant will
provide funds for the purchase of a laser directwrite system for investigating
fundamental mechanisms underlying nonlinear morphological effects in direct
laser writing of metal and semiconductor lines from spun-on metalorganic layers
as well as gaseous reactants. The system consists of a microscope for focusing
radiation from an Ar+ laser onto a substrate. An x-y translation stage moves the
substrate relative to the laser beam so that lines may be written. The nonlinear
behavior that will be investigated include multiplicity phenomena, periodic
patterns, and volcano-shape deposits. These effects are observed over a wide
range of operating conditions in a large number of applications including the
deposition of gold from organogold films, silicon from silane, and Y-Ba-Cu-O
superconductors from spun-on metalorganic films. The overall goals are to
understand the underlying fundamental processes and to develop predictive models
that may be used to prevent or control the nonlinear behavior.