* 8920650
* Single Catalyst Pellet Performance in Exothermic Multiphase Reaction Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/1990,09/30/1993
* Michael Harold, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Burka
* 09/30/1993
* USD 219,806.00

Many commercially important chemicals are produced by the reaction of a volatile
and a nonvolatile component on a supported catalyst. A large fraction of these
actions are oxidations and hydrogenations of organic compounds over precious
metal and nickel catalysts. Such reactions are an important step in the
production of specialty chemicals (for example aniline and crotonaldehyde) and
biochemicals (for example hydrogenated vegetable oils and xylose). In addition
to being multiphase in nature, these reactions are typically fast (mass
transport limited) and quite exothermic. The reaction heat can lead to liquid-
phase vaporization both within the catalyst pellet pores and on the external
surface. The gas-phase catalytic reaction occurring in the gas-filled pores can
result in a large rise in the intraparticle temperature and pressure. The
overall rate may also increase substantially as a result of the phase change and
gas-phase catalytic reaction. Undesirable high temperature excursions (hot
spots) within a catalytic reactor may result. These single pellet phenomena
complicate the design and control of multiphase catalytic reactors. With a
better understanding of these systems new types of multiphase reactor operations
and designs can be developed in which the beneficial influence of the
nonisothermal phenomena is exploited or the detrimental impact is avoided. The
PI is planning a fundamental experimental and modelling study of the behavior of
a single supported catalytic pellet in an exothermic multiphase reaction system.
The single pellet or even single pore level often dictates the overall reactor
behavior. Two experiments involving cyclohexene hydrogenation on a supported
palladium pellet are planned. In the first experiment the pellet is suspended in
a tube and contacted by a flowing liquid film and annular gas flow. The overall,
rate, degree of external wetting, pellet mass, and the pellet temperature will
be monitored as various bulk conditions are changed. The dependence of the
overall rate, temperature rise, and the degree of internal and external wetting
on the bulk conditions will be determined as phase change occurs. In the second
experiment a novel multiphase diffusion and reaction cell will be developed to
study in more detail the intraparticle temperature profile. The single pellet is
wetted on one face by the liquid and on the other by the gas. The large
differences of temperature rise in gas- and liquid-filled catalyst pellets
provides a means of probing the location of gas- or liquid-fill pores.
Development and numerical solution of several pertinent models of the single,
partially wetted and filled catalytic pellet will be carried out. The research
should provide fundamental data to be ultimately used in multiphase reactor
design.