* 8920470
* MRI: A Feature - Based Word Recognition System
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/1990,09/30/1991
* Carol Espy-Wilson, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Paul G. Chapin
* 09/30/1991
* USD 11,800.00

ABSTRACT The aim of the project is to develop an approach to a feature- based
word recognition system which can cope with the wide range of variability that
can occur in the acoustic manifestation of words. The variability in the
acoustic pattern of words has many different sources, including intra- and
inter-speaker differences in speaking style and rate, various contextual
effects, and anatomic differences between speakers. Thus, whereas linguistic
descriptions use binary-valued features, the acoustic correlates of the feature
have varying degrees of strength and extent over time. The research will be
divided into three stages. To ensure an adequate representation of the
variability that can occur, a database of around 200 words will be designed. The
test words will be excised from a variety of contexts and spoken by several
talkers, both males and females. Next, an acoustic study of the corpus will be
conducted to supplement data in the literature on the acoustic correlates for
features and to further study variability. Finally, a speaker-independent
isolated word recognition system will be developed and tested with a new
database of the same 200 words. The recognition system will consist of three
components: property detectors for extracting the acoustic properties for
features, a lexicon which will consist of some arrangement of features for each
word, and a matcher for mapping between the extracted acoustic patterns and the
lexical representation. There will be several ways to handle variability. First,
the acoustic properties for features will be based on relative measures so that
they will be minimally dependent upon the speaker's characteristics. Second,
unlike traditional feature- based recognition systems, lexical access will be
achieved directly from the acoustic properties rather than from postulated
phonetic segments. In this way, contextual information can be taken into account
more directly during the matching process. Finally, the investigator will
develop a framework for expressing variability within the lexical representation
of words. Although variability has several sources, it appears that the
resulting acoustic changes can be expressed in terms of a few feature- altering
processes including phonetic lenition, feature assimilation and some other
structurally-dependent variants. Thus by incorporating the feature-altering
processes in the lexical representation of words, it should not be necessary for
the recognition system to have "seen" or have a rule for all of the variability
that can occur in a particular word before it is able to recognize it. The
results of this project should contribute to our understanding of acoustic
phonetics, and also to the development of improved technologies for automatic
speech recognition.