* 8920161
* Mathematical Sciences:  Center for Computation &amp;            Visualization of Geometric Structures
* MPS,DMS
* 02/01/1990,08/31/1998
* Albert Marden, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Cooperative Agreement
* Ann K. Boyle
* 08/31/1998
* USD 13,613,498.00

This proposal from the University of Minnesota, requests funds to establish a
Science and Technology Center for Computation and Visualization of Geometric
Structures. The Director of the Center will be Professor Albert Marden. The
Center involves collaboration among eighteen mathematicians from thirteen
institutions throughout the U.S. and Europe. In addition to faculty from the
University of Minnesota, the Center will involve participants from Brigham
Young, Cornell, Courant Institute, Harvard, Princeton, Rutgers, SUNY Stony
Brook, University of California, San Diego, as well as Ecole Normale Superieur,
Paris, the University of Warwick, and AT&amp;T Bell Laboratories. Under the
aegis of the Geometry Supercomputer Project at Minnesota, these researchers have
been collaborating for the past three years. Through this collaboration they
have demonstrated their ability to make such a distributed Center function. The
subject of mathematics, an extremely rich and varied territory, has had a
tendency to fragment into many subdisciplines, with little communication between
them, or their closely related fields, such as computer science. The goal of the
Center is to tie these differently perceived fields together under the unifying
topic of geometry and geometric representation on the computer. The Center's
scientific program is based on a core of scientific investigations whose origins
are in "pure" mathematics as well as models of physical phenomenon. It is
organized into five groups: topology; geometry and symmetry dynamics; geometric
optimization; computation, geometry and graphics; and fractal geometry. The
proposed research includes a range of high-level mathematics centered on
geometry utilizing high-level computer science centered on geometry, in the
environment of a high-quality laboratory for computation, graphics, and
visualization. Through the common thread of visualization, the research forms a
coherent body. The Center will provide leadership in typing diverse fields of
mathematics and computer science together and will facilitate knowledge transfer
between fields. In addition, the solutions of some of the proposed problems will
require the development of software tools that could reach beyond the basic
mathematical areas involved and have important applications to research in other
scientific fields, such as molecular biology, where visualization modeling are
essential. This Center will stimulate enhanced activity in precollege education
and in the development of human resource.//