* 8920652
* Non-Conventional, High-Resolution Pattern Generation
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/15/1990,05/31/1994
* R. Fabian Pease, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Brian J. Clifton
* 05/31/1994
* USD 398,401.00

The generation of high resolution (submicron) precise patterns in thin films is
a crucial pacing technology in the manufacture of mocroelectronics. We propose
to investigate novel approaches to achieving economical, highly precise
generation of patterns in the size range 1-micron to below 100 nm. Some of the
work is an extension of the existing project on the use of the scanning
tunneling microscope (STM) as a pattern generator for microlithography; other
aspects are distinct. The following specific topics will be investigated. 1.
Conduction and exposure mechanisms of ultrathin organic thin films under the
exposure conditions of the STM. 2. The effect on STM beam parameters of
insulating films partially filling the gap. 3. The engineering and use of micro-
electron optics (that is, electron optical elements built on a micron scale
using silicon micromachining techniques) in general and in particular for
increasing the clearance between tip and target in an STM writing configuration.
4. Ways of increasing throughput of STM writing through, for example,
multiplexed exposure points with independent blanking. 5. The techniques and
implications of 'smart substrates' (i.e. substrates with some latent structure
that ensures that pattern edges can only occur in precisely-defined locations)
for achieving economical, highly-precise pattern generation.