* 8920568
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science
* SBE,SES
* 01/15/1990,06/30/1992
* NONE NONE, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 06/30/1992
* USD 4,100.00

Few political analysts would disagree with the statement that economic
conditions are important to voters. How the economy fares, to one degree or
another, determines whether members of the electorate will support the
reelection bid of the governing party (or parties). In this Doctoral
Dissertation Research Support project the investigator begins with the premise
that economic conditions influence support for elected officials. What
distinguishes this study from previous research is the assumption that voters
judge the state of the economy primarily in local terms. What matters to the
voters of Liverpool, England, is economic conditions in Liverpool. Prior studies
have assumed that what matters to voters in places such as Liverpool is the
state of the British economy. This investigation analyzes the effects of both
national and local economic conditions on support for governing parties in
Western Europe in national and subnational elections. Since voters get
information about the economy in two ways, personal experience and from opinion
makers, this study will provide new insights into where voters get their
information. If, as the researcher assumes, the local economy matters, the study
adds weight to the argument that voters learn about the economy through personal
experience and not just via reports in the evening newspaper or on the local
telecast. Thus, the study should provide information not only about whether or
not the local economy matters, but also about how the local economy matters.
Does it matter only for local and regional elections? Or does it matter for
national elections as well? The results of this investigation will be of
interest to social scientists and analysts far removed from political science.
Economists will be interested in how the public forms economic judgments.
Sociologists will appreciate the explicit role which the general level of
economic and social development play in this study. Political actors will also
have reason to take note of the conclusions of this study. If local economic
conditions count, political parties and elected officials gain leverage in their
own reelection attempts. Local economic conditions are more easily adjusted for
short-term political gain than national economic conditions.