* 8920694
* Adaptive Solution of Partial Differential Equations on      Parallel Computers Using An Equational Language
* CSE,CCF
* 04/15/1990,09/30/1992
* Joseph Flaherty, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* S. Kamal Abdali
* 09/30/1992
* USD 64,000.00

The goal of this project is to develop a software environment where scientists
and engineers need not know intricate numerical and programming details in order
to efficiently solve computational problems involving partial differential
equations on parallel computers. The basic premise is that numerical software
consists of two parts: a core which is invariant for a group of related methods
designed for different architectures and an architecturally dependent part.
Traditional languages tend to cloud common features of the software and
interweave the two parts. This project aims at building a new language based on
the assertive programming paradigm and at searching for unified principles for
designing efficient parallel procedures for solving systems of partial
differential equations. In the assertive programming paradigm, computations are
specified as sets of assertions about properties of the solution, and not as
detailed procedural implementations. Architecture and implementation language-
dependent procedures are automatically generated from the assertive description.
Assertive programming for parallel scientific processing is supported by
equational languages in which assertions are expressed as algebraic equations.
In this research, an Equational Programming Language (EPL) system is being built
to (i) provide the tools for users to specify parallel numerical algorithms in
an architecture-independent way and (ii) develop tools for automatic generation
of architecturally dependent parts of those numerical algorithms. Adaptive
methods for partial differential equations use local information about the
computed solution and its discretization error to automatically refine meshes,
redistribute meshes, and/or vary the numerical method in different parts of the
problem domain. The project continues the investigation of parallel adaptive
techniques for two- and three- dimensional partial differential systems.
Particular studies include dynamic scheduling and load balancing techniques
based on using local error estimates to predict the work remaining to solve a
problem, parallel iterative techniques for algebraic systems, and parallel
algorithms for finite quadtree and octree structured meshes. Newly designed
procedures will be implemented using the EPL system.