* 8920418
* Dynamic Responses in the Auditory Nerve and Cochlear Nucleus
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/1990,10/31/1993
* Robert Smith, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Platt
* 10/31/1993
* USD 264,201.00

The organ of the inner ear which detects sound is the cochlea, and the auditory
nerve carries information from the receptors to several clusters of cells
forming the cochlear nuclei in the brainstem. Although most tests of auditory
coding have used tone bursts to elicit nerve responses, adaptation is common in
receptor organs, so that the neural responses may change during the stimulus.
Also, natural sounds have a dynamic rather than constant character. Since
intensity variations are basic components of natural auditory stimuli, dynamic
response properties can play an important role in the detection, identification,
and masking of such stimuli. This project will involve recording activity of
single neurons and of compound neural responses from the whole auditory nerve.
Changes in adaptation and in sensitivity will be studied as they are affected by
the intensity, frequency, or modulation frequency of the sound. A newly
discovered residual potential in the cochlea will be investigated to determine
its neural basis, along with exploration of the interactions in one ear produced
by stimulation of the brain or by the opposite ear. This fundamental work will
have impact on auditory neuroscience, and the aspects of coding will be
important to other sensory systems and to information processing paradigms.