* 8920865
* FASEB Conference:  Synthesis and Functions of Vitamin       K-dependent Proteins
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/1990,06/30/1991
* George Long, Federation of Amer Societies For Exper Biology
* Standard Grant
* Fred G. Heineken
* 06/30/1991
* USD 6,780.00

This conference addresses issues on the Synthesis and Function of Vitamin
K-dependent Proteins. The conference will be held from July 22-27, 1990, at the
Vermont Academy, Saxtons River, Vermont, under the auspices of the Federation of
American Societies for Experimental Biology. The meeting will bring together a
diverse group of researchers who share a common interest; the synthesis or
functions of vitamin K- dependent proteins. The meeting will be limited to 150
scientists who will be selected on the basis of their ability to actively
participate in the exchange of information in this area. The meeting will be
focused around lectures by invited experts in nine sessions: Physiological and
chemical properties of vitamin K-dependent plasma proteins; properties and
synthesis of vitamin K- dependent bone proteins; expression of recombinant and
transgenic vitamin K-dependent proteins; genetic disorders and molecular biology
of vitamin K-dependent proteins; vitamin K epoxide reductase and anticoagulant
action; y- glutamyl carboxylation and >-aspartyl hydroxylation; new vitamin
K-dependent proteins; vitamin K nutrition and human requirements; and infant and
clinical vitamin K nutrition. In addition to these scheduled sessions, two or
three poster sessions will be held which will allow junior investigators to
present their data. Although they share a common interest, this diverse group of
scientists seldom meets together, and the meeting will effectively bring them
together for a stimulating exchange of ideas and information.