* 8920933
* Trade, Growth and Technology
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/1990,11/30/1992
* Elhanan Helpman, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 11/30/1992
* USD 111,847.00

The purpose of this project is to analyze the interactions between international
trade and economic growth. Theoretical models of the growth process will be
developed based on endogenous technological progress and the accumulation of
human capital. The models will be designed to permit the study of how
international trade linkages and the international dissemination of knowledge
and information affect the incentives of individuals and firms to invest in new
skills and technologies. This research is important because it will provide a
better basis for understanding the role of international trade in promoting
growth and development in the U.S. and other economies. This project consists of
two parts. The first part is aimed at developing a theoretical framework for
analyzing the process of ongoing product improvements. The framework will be
used to study the positive and normative issues concerning R&amp;D rivalry
between firms in industrialized countries and linkages between innovating firms
in the developed countries and imitating firms in the less developed ones. The
second part is concerned with analyzing the process of the international
transfer of information and technology. Various mechanisms for technology
transfer will be investigated including the transfer of knowledge between
trading partners, between subsidiaries of multinational corporations, and
between the parties of international licensing agreements.