* 8920586
* Further Studies in the Microstructure of Financial          Markets
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/1990,01/01/1991
* Douglas Gale, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 01/01/1991
* USD 0.00

This project has two main objectives. The first is to understand why commonly
used securities do not contain the kinds of contingencies that theory suggests
are needed for efficient risk- sharing. In particular, we do not observe
securities, such as income bonds, that make payoffs contingent on readily
available accounting information. The project explores a number of possible
explanations for these phenomena. The second objective is to extend earlier work
by the investigators on the incentives to introduce new securities and the
principals that should guide their design, to get a deeper understanding of the
market institutions that promote efficient innovation. The project emphasizes
the question of why there is a tendency to standardize contracts or securities.
This pathbreaking work is opening up a new and important line of research in
financial economics and it could eventually change the way markets are studied.
Economic theorists have shown empirically that markets are incomplete and
theoretically that this incompleteness can lead to inefficient decisions and
market instability. But most of the past research starts by assuming incomplete
markets, while this project shows that it is possible to explain the specific
features of incomplete financial markets (e.g., no income bonds, use of a few
standard securities) as the consequences of rational behavior under uncertainty.
The research also promises useful new insights into the relationship between
managerial incentive contracts and stock prices. The types of general
equilibrium models developed by these investigators for the study of the
microstructure of financial markets could eventually be used to study other
types of incomplete markets.