* 8920045
* Synthesis, Structures and Chemistry
* O/D,OISE
* 07/26/1989,07/26/1993
* Neil Bartlett, Jozef Stefan Institute
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 07/26/1993
* USD 0.00

In this renewal of a three-year U.S.-Yugoslav cooperative research project in
flourine chemistry between Boris Zemva, Josef Stefan Institute, and Neil
Bartlett, University of California, Berkeley, the investigators propose to
further their general method for the synthesis of polymeric binary flourides
(metal compounds containing flouride) developed during the prior joint research
program. Through these studies, the investigators will apply their methodology
and characterize and prepare binary flourides. The Yugoslav group is
acknowledged by flourine chemists worldwide for their first-class research and
the U.S. investigator, who enjoys an illustrious career, is noted for his
initial discovery of nobel gas chemistry. Their joint research and complementary
expertise and interests will yield new insights into the structure of binary
flourine compounds, which could be applied, for example, to the area of
hazardous waste treatment. This grant allows them to continue a highly
productive 17-year collaboration. U.S.-Yugoslav Joint Board on Cooperation in
Science and Technology is supported through a joint fund consisting of matching
contriubutions from the governments of the United States and Yugoslavia. The
U.S. contribution is provided annually by the Department of State. No NSF funds
are involved. Grants are made to the principal scientific institution in
Yugoslavia, but include dollar funds for U.S. scientists' travel to Yugoslavia
and for Yugoslav scientists' living expenses in the U.S.