* 8920219
* Science and Technology Research Center in Computer Graphics and Scientific Visualization
* CSE,CNS
* 02/01/1991,07/31/2002
* Richard Riesenfeld, University of Utah
* Cooperative Agreement
* Gregory R. Andrews
* 07/31/2002
* USD 35,473,614.00

This proposal from the University of Utah, in cooperation with Cornell
University, Brown University, the University of North Carolina, and the
California Institute of Technology, requests funds to establish a Science and
Technology Center for Computer Graphics and Scientific Visualization. The
Director of the Center will be Professor Donald P. Greenberg. The first
generation of computer graphics will be harnessed into a comprehensive coherent,
and fundamental conceptual base for graphics and visualization. It will provide
tools for a new computational thrust in human-computer modeling and simulation
and play a key role in our ever-increasing information-based society. With
increasing data from large-scale simulations or data collection, graphics is
becoming the means to evaluate and assimilate results. Computer graphics will
become the dominant means of communication between humans and machines. The
major components of the Center's research are: o Modeling: Current geometric
modeling systems for objects with complex shapes have been based primarily on
boundary representations. New candidates will be explored in order to lay the
foundations for a more general and sophisticated intellectual base. The trimmed
surface' approach will be investigated to make this a useful paradigm for
modeling. o Rendering: While the global illunimation algorithms that are now
used can handle specular environments (ray tracing) and diffuse environments
(radiosity), no comprehensive theory exists that can accurately simulate global
specular and diffuse reflection. Light-reflection models will be established to
simulate reflectance functions and determine illumination methods for the
general surface. Techniques for progressive refinement of rendering methods will
be validated through comparison to physical experiments. o Architecture/Software
for Visualization: The development of algorithmic improvements and specialized
hardware will be pursued to accelerate the computations. Emphasis is on
portraying the time varying behavior of a model in real time in order to steer a
scientific calculation. The development of direct three-dimensional view and
manipulation paradigms will be accelerated, as will the development of parallel
rendering boards as full fledged nodes on state-of-the-art message-passing
multicomputers. 8920219 Greengers Page 2 In a field that has developed in a
fragmented fashion, the Center brings together disparate researchers and areas
to create a unified approach for producing images by formulating definitions and
models as tools for image design. This effort will atempt to develop a common
intellectual base and software for graphics research. This Center will stimulate
enhanced activity in education and the development of human resources.