* 8920965
* Historical and Experimental Examination of Government-      Sponsored Cartels
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/1990,05/31/1992
* Gary Libecap, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 05/31/1992
* USD 81,194.00

This project contributes valuable new insights into the behavior of firms in
government-sponsored cartels and pioneers a new methodology in economic history
by linking laboratory experiments with analysis of important historical
questions. Part of the new research involves further empirical analysis of the
formation of the government-sponsored citrus cartel, the structuring of firm
production quotas within cartels, and the characteristics of those firms that
violate and those that adhere to their quota allotments. Another part of the
research involves the development of models of the observed cartels and the
design of experiments to test the models in the context of naturally- occurring
institutions. The methodologically research is especially exciting because it
addresses a fundamental problem with historical research. Models developed to
"explain" historical events often cannot be tested for external validity without
application to independent data. Yet, it is generally the case in historical
analysis that such independent data arenot available. The advantage of
laboratory experiments is that the researcher can replicate a microcosm of the
historical event in the laboratory to offer independent verification. The
project addresses a gap in our understanding of firm behavior under government-
sponsored cartels both from a historical perspective and from the perspective of
current regulatory policy. There has been little historical analysis of the
individual behavior of firms in government-sponsored cartels. This is an
important gap in our understanding because industries are always looking to the
government for protection from competitive pressures. We need to know a great
deal more about how individual firms have behaved under regulation in the past
in order to make well-informed policy in this area.