* 8920802
* Decision Theory as Philosophy
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/1990,01/31/1992
* Mark Kaplan, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Ronald J. Overmann
* 01/31/1992
* USD 39,997.00

Epistemology is the philosophical theory of knowledge--what knowledge is and how
we come to possess it. It has been the traditional concern of epistemology to
say, in some general way, by what principles the opinions and beliefs of a
rational person ought to be constrained. Epistemology has drawn for these
constraining principles from reflections on metaphysical matters, investigations
of the context of justification of a theory, observations concerning the actual
practice of inquiry or investigations into cognitive processes exemplified by
human inquirers. In this research project, Dr. Kaplan is investigating how
Bayesian decision theory, a theory that says something general and informative
about when it is rational to prefer one gamble to another, is essential for a
theory of epistemology that says something general and informative about when it
is rational to invest more confidence in one hypothesis than another. Dr. Kaplan
aims to explain why the central result of Bayesian decision theory constitutes a
genuine and important contribution to epistemology. To do this, he is presenting
a new argument for the claim that rational confidence is a probabilistic affair.
Given this argument, the very intelligibility of the talk about belief,
acceptance and knowledge becomes doubtful. Dr. Kaplan offers an intelligible
reconstrual of acceptance and belief that enables a Bayesian epistemology to
resolve difficulties for theories of rational belief and acceptance that are
intractable outside of a Bayesian framework.