* 8920108
* Center for Ultrafast Optical Science
* MPS,PHY
* 02/01/1991,07/31/2002
* Herbert Winful, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Cooperative Agreement
* C.  Caldwell
* 07/31/2002
* USD 25,768,523.00

The Science &amp; Technology Center will develop lasers and techniques to
generate ultrafast optical pulses for probing fundamental processes in various
scientific disciplines. The Center will have 3 main research thrusts: (1)
Generation, amplification, manipulation, and measurement of ultrashort
(femtosecond), ultrahigh peak power optical pulses; (2) Subsequent application
of these pulses to research in disciplines such as atomic, molecular, plasma,
and condensed matter physics; and (3) Advancements in photonics and electronics.
A variety of new laser techniques will be investigated to produce even shorter,
higher peak power pulses across the entire optical spectrum. Ultrashort optical
pulses will be used in time-domain studies of ultrafast phenomena and ultrahigh
field physics. Ultrafast electronic processes will be studied in quantum-
confined semiconductors, high-temperature superconductors, and surface physics.
Ultrashort optical pulses will generate picosecond electron bursts to study
structural events in surface physics on the picosecond time scale. The photonics
program will include generation, modulation, and detection of light at
frequencies approaching one terahertz. In addition, the study of propagation and
nonlinear effects in guided waves may lead the way to advancing integrated-optic
devices. The research has the promise of making contributions to science in many
different areas as well as contributions to technology--high-speed data
transmission, optical computing, and high-speed photography. This Center will
stimulate enhanced activity in precollege education and in the development of
human resources.