* 8920706
* Study of Stratospheric Aerosols and Their Heterogeneous     Effects on Ozone
* GEO,AGS
* 02/01/1990,07/31/1993
* David Hofmann, University of Wyoming
* Continuing Grant
* Jarvis L. Moyers
* 07/31/1993
* USD 674,850.00

Fine particulate matter in the stratosphere impedes the passage of solar
radiation to the earth's surface. The size, shape, and chemical composition of
airborne particles determine the extent to which different wavelengths of light
are attenuated by processes of absorption or scattering. Therefore, knowledge of
the altitude profiles of these stratospheric aerosols, of their physical and
chemical characteristics, and of their spatial and temporal changes, is required
in any effort to predict their effects on the heat balance of the atmosphere, or
on warming or cooling effects at the earth's surface. As a result of study on
the Antarctic ozone hole, the role of particles on the chemistry of the
stratosphere is also being more fully appreciated. Some baseline level of
aerosol distribution characterizes the undisturbed stratosphere, but volcanic
eruptions inject gases and ash particles at unpredictable times and places and
in quite significant amounts. An assessment of either long- term or episodic
effects of volcanoes or other natural influences requires the acquisition of a
long time series of observation. Through the decade of the seventies and up to
the present, the principal investigators of this grant have maintained a regular
series of instrumented balloon flights to measure the size distributions and
altitude profiles of stratospheric aerosols. This observational program has
provided the only available set of data based on instrumental measurements made
in the stratosphere. The instrumented balloon system already in place at
Laramie, Wyoming, was able to characterize aerosols in the plume of El Chichon,
a Mexican volcano that erupted in 1982. This project will continue this
important record of stratospheric particulate with improvements in the size
resolution of the particles. The stratospheric aerosol presently appears to be
at background levels, but in the advent of a major volcanic eruption, the
project will focus on identifying any depletion in ozone associated with
heterogeneous reactions on the particles. Measurements at high latitude (Kiruna,
Sweden), are aimed a determining the particle size distribution of polar
stratospheric clouds which are thought to be instrumental in ozone depletion as
observed in Antarctica.