* 8920704
* Integration of Neural Networks and Expert Systems in MachineDiagnosis
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/1990,08/31/1992
* David Hornig, Carnegie Group Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 08/31/1992
* USD 225,506.00

Neural Networks and Expert Systems have each shown important successes in
diagnostic domains ranging from process control to vehicle power trains. Neural
networks are particularly effective at lowering knowledge engineering costs by
automatically learning patterns from training data, while expert systems are
more effective at representing knowledge gained from experts, at providing
explanations of its diagnoses, and at performing sequential actions such as test
sequencing, repair, and repair validation. The proposed work investigates a
hybrid system where neural networks perform an initial diagnosis via acoustic
signal recognition, and an expert system performs follow-up tests leading to a
specific diagnosis and repair strategy. The Phase I prototype showed that a
standard low-cost platform could support a hybrid of neural network, expert
system, and data acquisition software, that the hybrid system has a smooth user
interface, and that the neural network can successfully classify acoustic signal
data. The Phase I survey showed considerable interest from potential users in
industry and the military. The Phase II study will address critical research
issues: comparison of various neural network paradigms for effective signal
classification, comparison of neural networks with traditional signal
classification techniques, and effective techniques for explaining the hybrid
systems's reasoning to the developer and end user. The hybrid system has
potential applications in situations where signal data and symbolic data must be
used together for a definitive and repair procedure. Potential applications
include factory floor, military, aerospace, nuclear power plant, commercial
vehicles, and materials certification.