* 8920013
* Visual Communication and Species Recognition
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1990,02/28/1993
* David Clark, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Fred Stollnitz
* 02/28/1993
* USD 83,847.00

Dr. Uetz and Mr. Clark will investigate visual communication behavior and its
role in species recognition in salticid spiders, which have well-developed
vision. Experiments will be performed to study the relative importance of
morphology (form, coloration, markings) and species-specific behavior patterns
(movement, sequence) of courting males in eliciting responses from females.
Using a newly-developed method, Dr. Uetz and Mr. Clark will investigate the
interaction of morphology and behavior in courtship of Maevia inclemens, a
salticid spider that has two distinct male forms differing in appearance and
behavior. Courtship behavior sequences of males of both types will be
videotaped, digitized, and stored on the computer. Morphological characteristics
and behavioral patterns of the two morphs will then be experimentally
manipulated using computer/video animation techniques, and presented to female
spiders on microtelevision screens. Responses of female spiders to various
combinations of these computer-generated video images, as well as to videotapes
of real spiders, will be studied. By experimentally separating form and
behavior, and recombining them in novel combinations, Dr. Uetz and Mr. Clark
will be able to have complete control over stimuli presented to the female
(which is not possible with live male spiders), and to identify critical visual
elements involved in courtship of this unique spider. These experimental studies
will allow Dr. Uetz and Mr. Clark to test hypotheses about animal communication
and its adaptive functions, and will contribute to better understanding of
species-recognition mechanisms. In addition, the development of this powerful
new computer-assisted technique for studying animal behavior has enormous
potential for a number of areas of investigation, including mate choice,
agonistic behavior, visual perception, and neurophysiology.