* 8920666
* Attracting Minority Scholars to Ethics and Values Studies   in Science and Technology
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/1990,05/31/1993
* Mark Frankel, American Association for the Advancement of Science
* Standard Grant
* Rachelle D. Hollander
* 05/31/1993
* USD 80,195.00

As the United States becomes a racially more heterogeneous society, the
perspectives and experiences of different ethnic groups need to be identified
and understood if U.S. ideals of participation and accountability, and social
justice and equality are to be maintained. Ethics and Values Studies supports
research and educational projects on ethical and value aspects of the
interaction between science, technology and society. Projects examine the social
values and mutual obligations and responsibilities that arise in these
interactions. The first phase of this project, to be undertaken by the American
Association for the Advancement of Science with the cooperation of several
cosponsoring organizations, consists of a workshop that will introduce minority
scholars to research, education and resources in ethics and values studies.
Tentatively, the workshop is expected to occur over eight days in the summer of
1991, in or nearby Washington, DC. There will be a national recruitment effort
for both faculty and participants. An advisory board, including minority
representatives and EVS scholars, will assist project staff throughout the
development and assessment of the effort. The workshop will identify research
opportunities and acquire more knowledge on the content of minority perspectives
on ethical and value aspects of science, technology and society interactions. It
will provide participants with the opportunity to define a research and
educational agenda for themselves and other EVS scholars, and establish a
network of individuals and resources. Phase two of the project will provide
further support for workshop participants to undertake followup research and
related activities. In this way, the project can make a contribution to defining
and understanding ethical and value aspects of the interactions of science and
technology with our pluralistic, heterogeneous culture. The investigators,
advisory board, and tentative faculty for this project are highly qualified;
numerous professional societies and minority organizations have agreed to
sponsor it and help recruit appropriate participants; the issues are very
important; results will be appropriately disseminated. The project is
meritorious and recommended for award.