* 8920440
* U.S.-China Cooperative Research (Biology):  Determinants of Lifetime Reproductive Success in the Small Mammal, the      Black-Lipped Pika
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/1990,11/30/1992
* Andrew Smith, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Alice C. Hogan
* 11/30/1992
* USD 62,300.00

This is a two.year collaborative project between two American principal
investigators .. Andrew T. Smith of Arizona State University and F. Stephen
Dobson of Auburn University .. and Wang Xuegao of the Northwest Plateau
Institute of Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences. This institute is located in
the city of Xining in the Qinghai.Xizang (Tibetan) Plateau. Direct observation
of the number of offspring produced in a lifetime by each member of a known set
of individuals, or "Lifetime Reproductive Success (LRS)" is an important measure
indicating fitness differences between the sexes or among individuals that live
under different social or ecological conditions. Studies of LRS are essential
for a broad understanding of adaptation in a social context. Professors Smith
and Dobson will measure LRS for a natural population of black.lipped pikas
(>Ochotona> >curzoniae>), small mammals related to rabbits that inhabit alpine
meadows on the Qinghai.Tibetan Plateau. Black.lipped pikas present a model
system for such an investigati>on because: 1) high mortality rates cause a
nearly complete annual turnover in the population; 2) high population density
ensures a large number of cohesive families (the primary social unit); 3) most
environmental factors associated with LRS can be easily measured; 4) among
families a variety of mating systems (monogamy, polygyny, polyandry) are
simultaneously present; and 5) these mating systems are formed annually during a
short episode of male dispersal, and once formed each family mating system
remains stable throughout the year. These characteristics allow for contrast of
LRS between males and females concurrently occupying different mating systems.