* 8920861
* Measurement and Analysis of Jupiter's Decametric Radio      Emission
* MPS,AST
* 03/15/1990,08/31/1993
* Thomas Carr, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Vernon Pankonin
* 08/31/1993
* USD 140,000.00

Dr. Carr will continue research toward understanding the emission from Jupiter
which occurs at relatively long wavelengths. He will broaden a monitoring
program that has been conducted at the University of Florida Radio Observatory
since 1957, and which includes continuous monitoring of S burst storms with a
radio spectrograph of very high sensitivity and resolution and observations with
interferometers having baselines of 30 miles east-west and 100 miles north-
south. Dr. Carr plans to make a new determination of the rotation period of
Jupiter's magnetosphere which should help establish the magnitude of wandering
of Jupiter's magnetic pole. A new catalog of S burst storms will be used to test
current theories for the emission of S type bursts. Jupiter's decametric
wavelength bursts and the bursts from the active Sun are by far the most
powerful of the radiations of extraterrestrial origin that are received on
Earth. The bursts from Jupiter occur only below a frequency of 40 MHz, and they
can be studied from Earth down to about 10 MHz, below which observation is
prevented by the effects of the terrestrial ionosphere. The close approach of
two Voyager spacecraft to Jupiter in 1979 provided new insights into the
phenomenolgy and beaming geometry of the decametric wavelength component.
Despite the enormous amount of observational data that resulted from the Voyager
encounters, ground-based observations have lost none of their importance. The
low frequency radiations from giant planet magnetospheres are still unexplained.
We are still in the stage of unraveling the more and more complex
phenomenologies of the radiations, but phenomenology and theory are now being
tied together. This will be strengthened as ground based monitoring programs
span more years, as the observations become more sophisticated, and as the
Galileo spacecraft adds important post- Voyager data to what is known about
those radiation components that are prevented by the ionosphere from reaching
the Earth's surface. Dr. Carr's project is a principal component in the ground-
based effort to understand the nature of these long wavelength emissions.