* 8920136
* Southern California Earthquake Center
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/1991,01/31/2002
* Thomas Henyey, University of Southern California
* Cooperative Agreement
* James H. Whitcomb
* 01/31/2002
* USD 30,804,225.00

This proposal from the University of Southern California, in cooperation with
the California Institute of Technology, the University of California, Los
Angeles, the University of California, Santa Barbara, the University of
California, San Diego, the University of California, Santa Cruz, Lamont-Doherty
Geological Observatory of Columbia University, and the U.S. Geological Survey,
requests funds to establish a Science and Technology Center entitled Southern
California Earthquake Center. The Science Director of the Center will be
Professor Keiiti Aki and the Executive Director of the Center will be Professor
Thomas Henyey. The goal of the Center is to understand the physics of
earthquakes, to develop a framework to integrate earthquake information of
translation into hazard mitigation for societal benefit, to achieve a prototype
application of a time-space dependent probabilistic hazard analysis for southern
California, and to characterize earthquake ruptures before their occurrence
through numerical modeling of rupture, geological field mapping of fault
geometry, subsurface imaging of three-dimensional fault surfaces, and
application of theoretical and statistical approaches to the physics of fault
rupture. The approach is keyed to the development of a Master Model, which is a
framework in which geologic, geodetic, geophysical, and seismological
information pertinent to earthquakes in southern California will be integrated
for the purpose of developing a time-space dependent probabilistic hazard
analysis of the region which may be used for predicting the levels of strong
ground motions. The Center's activities can be categorized into four major
areas: data base maintenance, modeling and model construction, model
maintenance, and interpretation and use of the models. Research groups will be
organized to develop each technical component of the Master Model. Core
activities include: establishment of a data center for real-time seismic data
acquisition, data archiving and distribution, and data retrieval service; fault-
specific geophysical, geodetic, and geologic field studies; analysis of existing
and new short-period network data to improve the delineation of active faults;
development of a physical model of the earthquake process to establish a
physical basis for the characteristic earthquake model; investigation of source,
path, and site effects for strong ground motion prediction; regional tectonics,
and commencement of a conceptual study for a pilot geotechnical project in an
area prone to liquefaction and/or landsliding. Much of the industrialized world
lives in earthquake prone regions such as the Pacific Rim and the Alpine-
Himalayan belt. Earthquake belts generally provide the most hospitable climates
and the greatest abundance of natural resources. Thus, as population densities
and concentrations of wealth grow in these areas, the earthquake risk increases.
Earthquake hazard mitigation is increasingly important to society - the 1989
Loma Prieta earthquake alone caused over $7 billion in damage and 66 deaths.
Only through understanding the process can reliable forecasts be made of when
and where potential destructive earthquakes may occur. The Center will stimulate
enhanced activity in precollege education and in the development of human
resources.