* 8921992
* Organic Synthesis via Transition
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/1990,09/30/1993
* Louis Hegedus, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* John S. Showell
* 09/30/1993
* USD 249,128.00

This research is being supported by the Organic Synthesis Program. Dr. Hegedus
will continue his development of transition metal based reagents as highly
selective synthetic tools. The scientific significance of the research is that
new chemical transformations of general use for organic synthesis will be
developed, that new organic compounds with interesting physical, biological, and
chemical properties will be produced, and that efficient synthetic approaches to
a variety of heterocyclic and carbocyclic systems will be developed. The overall
objective of the research is to develop new synthetic methods using transition
metal complexes to permit new modes of reactivity for organic functional groups.
This will be achieved by careful study of the fundamental chemistry of the
metal-organic species involved, to permit the development of useful, new
synthetic transformations. The newly developed processes will be applied to the
synthesis of complex molecules when possible. Reactive organic intermediates
such as electron-rich ketenes, chiral enamides, highly functionalized chiral
quarternary centers, and "push-pull" allenes, will be made routinely accessible
and usable for synthesis by generating them from metal complexes. The newly
developed methodology will be used to synthesize the biologically active beta-
lactam (+)-thienamycin, chiral tertiary alcohols for incorporation into
macrocyclic antibiotics and polyether antibiotics, triquinanes and
pyrroloindoloquinones.