* 8921190
* U.S.-New Zealand Cooperative Research:  Thermal History of  the Taranaki Basin, New Zealand
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/1991,02/28/1993
* David Chapman, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Alan Milsap
* 02/28/1993
* USD 8,363.00

This award will support collaborative research between Dr. David S. Chapman of
the University of Utah and Dr. R. Allis of the Geophysics Division of the New
Zealand Department of Scientific and Industrial Research (DSIR). The New Zealand
Taranaki Basin is an important global example of an evolving rift basin, yet the
thermal history of the basin is relatively unknown. This research is to develop
a thermal history of the Taranaki Basin using recently-developed techniques
which combine detailed thermal history modeling with quantitative kinetic models
of hydrocarbon generation. The thermal history will be based on bottom-hole
temperature, thermal conductivity measurements, and burial history data from
petroleum exploration drillholes. Kinetic theories of oil/gas generation will be
used to predict hydrocarbon generation. the thermal history generated should
result in answering significant questions about the timing of hydrocarbon
generation relative to the structural evolution of the Taranaki and other rift
basins. The project represents excellent collaboration between the New Zealand
group with its expertise in thermal processes and geothermal systems, in
particular, in the Taranaki Basin and the U.S. expertise in combining kinetic
models of hydrocarbon generation with thermal history modeling. This is
important fundamental work in advancing techniques of basin analysis, as well as
having potential for aiding exploration for hydrocarbons.