* 8921468
* Active Site Structure and Chemistry in Enzymatic            Sulfite Reduction
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/1990,12/31/1993
* James Cowan, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing grant
* John Gilje
* 12/31/1993
* USD 346,250.00

With support from the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry
Program and the Biochemistry Program Dr. James A. Cowan and Dr. Richard P.
Swenson will investigate the active site structure and mechanism of a
metalloprotein from the bacterium Desulfovibrio vulgaris which mediates the
reduction of sulfite. This enzyme is involved in the overall reduction of
sulfate to hydrogen sulfide, an extremely important natural process,
particularly in the ecology of wetlands. The development of a clear
understanding of structure/function relationships for this relatively small
multielectron redox enzyme is expected to also provide better insight into the
operation of more complex and experimentally less tenable systems, such as the
human respiratory enzymes. A variety of physical methods, including NMR
spectroscopy, will be used to characterize the structural environment of the
enzyme active site, in terms of the ligands coordinating to the prosthetic
groups and of neighboring residues that might be involved in catalysis. Sulfite
labeled with S-35 and O-18 will be used to investigate the mechanism of the
enzyme. Exchange interactions and the coordination and redox chemistry of the
coupled siroheme-Fe4S4 complex in both the native enzyme and with bound
exogenous ligands will be studied. A cloning program will be developed for the
dual purpose of providing larger quantities of the enzyme and, by mutagenesis,
to clarify the roles of specific residues in the function of the enzyme.