* 8921327
* Schematic Processes and the Effect of Television News on theCognitive Complexity of Political Thought
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/1990,04/30/1992
* Michael Milburn, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli Jr.
* 04/30/1992
* USD 100,135.00

This research examines the effect of different ways of presenting news events
upon viewers' comprehension and political understanding of those events. Three
experiments are undertaken. The first presents different groups of subjects with
news broadcasts that include different types of explanations for the same
events. This is followed by a measurement of the complexity of the subjects'
thinking about the events, particularly with respect to the number of different
perspectives on the issue that the individuals are able to consider. The second
study examines the extent to which the dramatic presentation of news events is
emotionally arousing and whether this arousal limits the viewers' comprehension
of the news stories. The final experiment examines the effect of the
presentation of violence on the news and the effect such portrayals have on the
viewers' comprehension and recall of the facts in the stories. The results of
these studies will contribute to scientific knowledge in general through an
examination of the effects on individuals' thinking of viewing different
messages in the mass media. These studies should also contribute to social
scientific understanding in particular by examining the operation of different
social cognition processes in the context of media viewing. Different political
constructs, such as "fanatic" or "oppressed minority" imply very different
causal explanations for events. Making different constructs salient will likely
have a significant impact on the way in which individuals think about different
political events. These experiments contribute to an understanding of the way in
which language influences individuals' understanding of the operation of the
political world. The results of this research should also make a substantial
contribution to increased understanding of the effects of mass media on the
public's perception of political events. The mass media are an increasingly
important part of the way in which citizens acquire knowledge about public
affairs. If the manner of presentation of news events actually inhibits
individuals' comprehension of those events, then steps could be taken to change
the media's style and content.