* 8921864
* Evaluating Probabilistic Alternatives for Unique and        Multiple Occurring Events
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/1990,09/30/1991
* Ulf Bockenholt, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Shelton White
* 09/30/1991
* USD 55,352.00

Experiments have shown that people's evaluations of probabilistic outcomes do
not conform to normative theory, especiallywhen they are asked to provide the
probability that a single, isolated event will occur. However, there is evidence
that people responddifferently when probabilities refer to unique rather than
multiply occurring events. This project explores whether the observed
discrepancies are tied to situations in which probabilities apply to events that
occur only once. This work is important because it will provide information on
the generalizability of the conclusion that decision makers generally violate
expected utility theory when making actual choices. The study will investigate
whether framing risky prospects as multiply occurring events induces a long run
perspective that results in the processing of probabilistic information more in
accordance with normative principles. Consistent with this hypothesis is recent
evidence found by the investigators and others that some of the systematic
violations of normative theory are reduced when subjects evaluate multiply
occurring prospects. A series of experiments will beconducted to investigate
people's responses to single and multiply occurring events. The first two
experiments examine the impact of the option of multiple play on subjective
utilities and probabilities. Another experiment looks at the question of whether
opportunity for multiple play reduces framing effects. A final experiment will
examine how experienced experimental subjects perceive probabilistic events ina
financial audit context.