* 8921951
* RUI:  Research in Database Foundations and Logic Programmingat an Undergraduate Institution
* CSE,IIS
* 07/15/1990,12/31/1992
* Jack Minker, Towson University
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 12/31/1992
* USD 89,248.00

This research is primarily theoretical, building foundations and developing
algorithms for various aspects of knowledge base systems. The topics addressed
are: view updates, the theory of multidatabases, logic programming with null
values, and efficient search of disjunctive databases. The view update problem
is concerned with the appropriate translation of the user's request to update a
particular view into an update of the underlying relations. Presently known
solutions for relational database systems will be extended to knowledge base
systems. A multidatabase is a collection of different databases that a user may
wish to access simultaneously. A theoretical framework is needed to provide
robustness in this complex environment. A null value is a special value that
typically stands for unknown or inapplicable data. A new approach to the
treatment of null values, using logic programming, is developed. Disjunctive
databases allow for the representation of indefinite information. A new
algorithm is developed for searching disjunctive databases. The cooperation
between Towson State University and a major graduate university, the University
of Maryland at College Park, will strengthen the research environment in the
Department of Computer and Information Sciences at the former undergraduate
institution.