* 8921505
* New Strategies for the Synthesis of Carbocyclic and         Heterocyclic Compounds
* NONE,NONE
* 01/15/1990,12/31/1993
* Rick Danheiser, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* John S. Showell
* 12/31/1993
* USD 437,015.00

The Organic Synthesis Program is funding the continuation of the research
program of Dr. Rick L. Danheiser. Dr. Danheiser will continue his fruitful
development of new methods to synthesize carbocyclic and heterocyclic compounds
containing five-membered rings. This will provide the new tools required by the
increasingly complex requirements of industry and agriculture. One important aim
of the project is the continued development of the recently discovered general
?3+2! annulation strategy. In this process an allenylsilane functions as a
three-carbon annulation unit combining with an electrophilic pi bond to form a
new five-membered ring. The extension of this strategy to the synthesis of
several important classes of five-membered ring compounds will be investigated.
Specific targets of interest include cyclopentanone derivatives and heterocyclic
systems such as pyrroles and carbapenems. Research will also be carried out
aimed at the development of a general synthesis of substituted azulenes. The
azulenes constitute the best known class of polycyclic nonbenzenoid aromatic
compounds, and recently the novel electronic properties and biological activity
of certain natural and semi-synthetic azulenes have led to commercially
important applications of these compounds in fields such as medicine and
electrophotography. However, progress in these areas has been hindered by the
availability of very few general methods for the synthesis of azulenes,
particularly substituted systems. The development of a general ?3+2! annulation
route to substituted azulenes will provide access to compounds with potential
applications as drugs, liquid crystal elements, and novel electronic materials.
Another important objective of the project is the development of new cyclization
methods based on unusually facile pericyclic and anionic ring closure reactions
of allenes. Preliminary experiments have been carried out that indicate that
certain allene derivatives undergo efficient cyclization under remarkably mild
conditions. A principal aim of the project will be the application of this
process in a new synthesis of substituted indoles. The indole nucleus is the
central structural feature in a large array of natural products including plant
growth regulators and clinically important pharmaceuticals. Relatively few
general methods for the construction of substituted indoles exist, and the new
methodology to be investigated will provide improved access to a variety of
important indole derivatives.