* 8921227
* Expert Systems for Parameter Estimation in Pollutant        Transport-and-Fate Modeling
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/1990,03/31/1993
* Robert Wolpert, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Shelton White
* 03/31/1993
* USD 146,472.00

This proposal outlines an ambitious effort to investigate state- of-the-art
modeling technology in the context of a practical problem with national
consequences. Risk management decisions in toxicology, health policy,
environmental management, and related fields are often supported by complex
mathematical models. These models are intended to predict the consequences of
each alternative course of action. The model predictions depend on values
specified by the potential users. However, these values are often not known with
certainty. In failing to reflect uncertainty in parameter specification, the
models may lead to inappropriate risk management decisions. The investigators
propose to apply a set of hierarchical Bayesian methods to characterize
uncertainty in models which predict the concentration of synthetic organic
chemicals in surface waters. The ultimate goal is the creation of an expert
system to assist users in selecting values of parameters in risk management
models. The general class of problems is an important one, but one that has only
been worked on by a few investigators. The research team is well trained and
well versed in the relevant analytic tools. There is every reason to believe
they will complete the project they propose successfully.