* 8921423
* Employee-Organization Relationship: An Inducement           Contribution Approach
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/1990,04/30/1993
* Anne Tsui, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Shelton White
* 04/30/1993
* USD 175,399.00

The proposed research investigates contemporary economic and structural
pressures facing many American business firms. The objective of this ambitious
project is to examine an inducement- contribution approach for managing
employee-organizational relationships. The link between macro variables
(contract versus mutual investment strategies) and micro variables (individual
incentives) is implied in the literature, but has not previously been
investigated. The proposal describes an investigation of the relations between
two types of organizational inducement strategies, on the one hand, and three
forms of employee contributions, on the other. The research is based on a
conceptual perspective drawn from the work of managerial theorists,
organizational sociologists and psychologists, and institutional economists.
Based on an integrative theoretical approach, a set of hypotheses are proposed
for empirical analysis. The methodology involves a cross-sectional study of
three companies in each of three industries, with an average of ten occupational
job groups within each company. The data collected from the research are likely
to have long-term significance for both theory and application. Moreover, the
project should set the stage for follow-up research in this field in coming
years.