* 8921474
* Assimilation and Structural Explanations of Asian           Intermarriage in the U.S.
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1990,12/31/1992
* Sean-Shong Hwang, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Continuing Grant
* Paige Smith
* 12/31/1992
* USD 100,112.00

This study involves a comparative analysis of intermarriage patterns of the six
largest Asian-origin groups in the continental United States: Chinese,
Filipinos, Japanese, Koreans, Asian Indians, and Vietnamese. The Principal
Investigators will draw on data from the 1980 5% Public Use Microdata Sample of
the U.S. Census (PUMS) to examine the tendency of individuals to marry a member
of the same ethnic group or someone from a different ethnic group. Previous
research on the intermarriage of Asians in the United States has been limited by
geographical and/or group constraints. These researchers will rectify this
situation by conducting a comparative analysis of the extent and determinants of
Asian intermarriage. They will integrate two theoretical perspectives on
intermarriage. The first, the assimilation model, assumes that people make
marital decisions according to their cultural preferences and factors such as
citizenship, ability with English, and socioeconomic attainment. The second, the
structural model, suggests that marital decisions are constrained by the
structural and demographic reality of the society in which they live, including
such factors as the relative group size and racial and educational heterogenity.
Combining these two perspectives provides a more realistic model of the actual
dynamics of the intermarriage process in general, and for America's fastest
growing ethnic minority -- Asian Americans. This is the first effort to provide
a systematic analysis of Asian intermarriage encompassing the entire continental
United States, and will advance current knowledge on the assimilation process of
this important subgroup of the population. As such, this study will contribute
to models of intermarriage that recognize sociocultural and socioeconomic
diversity.