* 8921939
* Theoretical Studies of Interstellar Matter
* MPS,AST
* 03/15/1990,08/31/1993
* Alexander Dalgarno, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Vernon Pankonin
* 08/31/1993
* USD 300,000.00

Dr. Dalgarno will continue research on the chemical processes in the
interstellar medium. Quantum mechanical calculations will be carried out on a
variety of atomic and molecular processes that are significant in astrophysical
environments with particular attention to processes occurring in the
interstellar medium and in the ejecta of supernova 1987A. Theoretical studies
will be performed on the ionization structure, heating and cooling mechanisms
and the molecular composition of supernovae, interstellar clouds, and the
influence of ultraviolet photons and X-rays on the structure of molecular clouds
in galaxies. The infrared response of molecular hydrogen to X-rays will be
calculated. Although it is extremely tenuous, the interstellar medium (ISM) is
the site of many complicated atomic and molecular reactions. Essentially all
elements are present in varying quantities, and they are known to combine to
form diverse molecules such as water, ammonia, alcohol, and even more
complicated species. Also, larger particles of ice and dust are present. This
complicated medium is then continually bombarded with various sources of energy
including cosmic rays, X-rays, low and high energy photons, collisions between
atoms and molecules, shock waves, various bulk movements of the ISM, and
turbulent kinetic energy. This reactive "soup" quite expectedly emits photons
from many electronic transitions and observing these gives data on the physical
and chemical conditions in the vast space between the stars. However, because of
the complications involved, interpretation of ISM observations is not
straightforward and requires laboratory measurements and quantum mechanical
calculations for their understanding. Dr. Dalgarno's highly regarded theoretical
research is directed toward furthering our understanding of the constituents and
activity in the ISM.