* 8921109
* The Selective Universalization of Domestic Policy, 1965-1990
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/1990,02/29/1992
* Kenneth Bickers, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 02/29/1992
* USD 154,118.00

Growth and change in federal domestic programs has proceeded at a rapid pace
over the last quarter century, producing a large and increasingly complicated
maze of federal domestic spending programs. In this research, the investigators
examine the evolution of these programs from 1965-1990 with the purpose of
addressing basic questions about the inception and development of domestic
spending programs. What are the typical characteristics of newly created
programs? Why are some programs repeatedly reauthorized while other programs are
terminated shortly after adoption? How do domestic programs change over time? Do
the structural characteristics of programs affect their longevity or how monies
are distributed to groups of recipients? Compared to conventional research on
these topics, this project goes beyond examining spending levels, and asks how
these programs are organized and who receives benefits. The approach taken in
this project is based on a rethinking of the legislative norm of universalism.
This norm suggests that members of Congress prefer to support domestic spending
programs that provide "something for everyone." In its original
conceptualization, the norm of universalism suggested that all programs, both
new and old, provide benefits, albeit of varying levels, to every congressional
district. In reality, this condition does not hold. The researchers suggest that
domestic spending programs begin as fiscally modest project grants, bestowing
benefits to relatively few congressional districts. To survive successive
legislative reauthorizations, these narrow purpose grants must evolve by
shedding their high application costs, lowering eligibility standards, and
distributing monies to an increasing number of congressional districts. Programs
which fail to conform to this pattern of change are expected to decline in size
and to become candidates for termination. Hence only some programs are expected
to be universalized. Among this select group, universalism will tend to occur
only through time. In order to undertake this investigation the researchers are
developing a new data base. The Catalog of Federal Domestic Assistance
chronicles the changes in domestic spending since 1965 and provides a rich
source of information on which to base a systematic investigation of the
evolution of domestic programs. A major part of this investigation will involve
extracting data from these catalogs and compiling a data base on the population
of domestic programs over the past quarter century. When complete, this data
base will contain annual information for each program including appropriation
levels, the type of program (e.g., formula grant, project grant, direct loans,
non-financial assistance, etc.), the functional policy area served by the
program, the categories of organizations and individuals eligible to apply and
receive benefits, matching requirements, and other information.