* 8921884
* The Role of Institutions in the Survival and Efficiency of  Common-Pool Resources
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/1990,01/31/1994
* Roy Gardner, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 01/31/1994
* USD 251,879.00

Common-pool resources are resources, either natural or man-made, where it is
costly to exclude potential beneficiaries from obtaining benefits from their
use. As a result of the work of numerous scholars, many presume that when
individuals jointly use such resources, each individual is driven by an
immutable logic to withdraw more of the resource units than is optimal from the
perspective of all users. Individuals are presumed to face a tragic situation in
which their individual rationality leads to an outcome that is not group
rational. There is considerable empirical evidence not consistent with this
presumption. Building on their prior research, the investigators are exploring
the extent to which the presence of suitable institutions allows individuals to
escape from common-pool resource dilemmas, so that these resources survive into
the future and are exploited efficiently. The project is multidisciplinary in
scope, comprising faculty from economics and political science. The project aims
to broaden our understanding of the role of institutions in the survival and
efficiency of common-pool resources using the techniques of institutional
analysis and game theory at the theoretical level, and field case studies,
coupled with controlled laboratory experiments, at the empirical level. The
attempt to rebuild and sharpen existing theory proceeds with the understanding
that the effort must retain the important theoretical insights already gained,
while revising the theory so that it can be used to generate different
predictions in different institutional settings, which are themselves integrated
into the theory. Instead of ad hoc explanations for why some common- pool
resources are destroyed and others are not, the investigators offer a body of
theory that tells under what conditions destruction does or does not take place.