* 8921756
* Development of Infrared Adaptive Optics Systems for Large   Telescopes
* MPS,AST
* 06/01/1990,01/31/1997
* Mark Hereld, University of Chicago
* Cooperative Agreement
* Wayne Van Citters
* 01/31/1997
* USD 3,565,932.00

The attainment of diffraction limited imaging is the most important challenge in
ground based astronomical instrumentation. It will allow the investigation of
qualitatively new astronomy and extend the sensitivity for detecting point
objects by more than 3 magnitudes using existing telescopes. The essential
requirements of astronomers are met, at least in the infrared, by an adaptive
optics system using a laser beam to produce an artificial star in the upper
atmosphere (LASTAR). This system will be able to access much of the sky and
carry out photometry over the 256 X 256 pixel areas of the new infrared arrays.
This award will support development of such a system for use on the 3.5 m
Astrophysical Research Consortium telescope on Apache Point. The telescope will
be modified to incorporate the laser, and the system can be mounted permanently
as a common-user instrument. Once the system is developed a vigorous scientific
program will be carried out to exploit its enormous potential which includes the
investigation of the kinematics of the cores of Active Galactic Nuclei and
normal galaxies, circumstellar disks, the morphology of distant galaxies, the
detection of brown dwarfs, and the detection of distant supernovae. The
development of this system is essential to maintain the U.S. lead in this field
and is a key technology driver both for the next generation of large telescopes
and, in the future, for interferometric arrays necessary for milliarcsecond
imaging.