* 8921116
* A Carbon-13 Isotope Analyzer Based on CO Emission           Spectroscopy
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/1990,02/28/1993
* Mark Zahniser, Aerodyne Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Roland T. Tibbetts
* 02/28/1993
* USD 225,415.00

Isotopic carbon analysis provides a valuable tool for studies of metabolic
pathways and for tracing carbon transformations in the environment. The PI
proposes to develop an optical technique for the convenient measurement of
carbon isotopic (13C/12C) ratios. The instrument will use a linear photodiode
array to image the spectra arising from plasm-emission of carbon-containing
molecules. Algorithms will be applied to remove spectral interferences and to
correct for isotopic ration shifts due to variations in sample pressure and
power coupling. Initial work demonstrated that an emission system could be used
to determine the 13C/12C ratio in CO2 samples up to a relative precision of 2.5%
which could be improved by a factor of 6. Mathematical methods were also
evaluated for data processing. Follow-on studies proposed in phase II will
involve adapting the emission method for determining 13C/12C ratios for CO2
eluant from a gas chromatograph. System refinements, including the design and
testing of an inlet system suitable for sampling at atmospheric pressure, may
lead to an automated sample processing system which will be coupled to a carbon-
nitrogen analyzer for on-line isotope ratio determinations of both 13C and 15N.
Successful accomplishment of the objectives of phase II should result in the
development of an inexpensive, reliable alternative to mass spectrometry for the
determination of the isotopic ratios of 13C and eventually 15N, and 18O from the
same sample. The instrument could be readily used for tracer studies, and with
further refinements may be useful for natural abundance analyses, in both
medical and environmental fields thereby making isotopic measurements more
accessible to a broader range of researchers.