* 8921560
* U.S.-Indonesia Cooperative Research in Boundary Element     Methods in Acoustics
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/1990,01/31/1993
* Andrew Seybert, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 01/31/1993
* USD 20,905.00

This proposal requests funds to permit Dr. Andrew F. Seybert, Department of
Mechanical Engineering, University of Kentucky, and Dr. Benjamin Soenarko,
Engineering Physics Department, Bandung Institute of Technology, Indonesia, to
pursue, for a period of 24 months, cooperative research on boundary element
methods (BEM) in acoustics (also known as integral equation methods). The PI's
will utilize BEM to formulate and solve several types of multi-domain and thin-
body problems in acoustics. For the multi-domain problem, the acoustic domain of
interest is interior to a closed surface of arbitrary shape, exterior to a
closed body, or coupled to another domain. For the thin-body problem, the
acoustic domain is exterior to a body whose smallest dimension is of the same
order or less than some numerical parameter such as element length. By using
BEM, three dimensional problems are solved on the two dimensional boundary of
the domain, thus, simplifying computations. The collaborators also will attempt
to determine how to utilize special matrix techniques to increase the
computational speed of the BEM. The development of methods for the solution of
multi-domain and thin-body acoustic problems will be beneficial to a wide range
of specific engineering problems. These include the prediction of sound pressure
and power radiated by industrial products such as engines, pumps, and
compressors when partially shrouded by an enclosure for noise control; design of
quiet interiors of vehicles and aircraft; understanding how multiple sources may
be used in active vibration/active noise control; and the design and
optimization of complex networks of acoustic passageways such as those that
occur in the interior of mufflers, induction systems of engines, and silencers
for fans. The researchers are highly respected engineers who have successfully
collaborated in the past. Dr. Soenarko is a skilled experimentalist who has
worked closely with the aircraft industry and understands the practical nature
of the research. Dr. Seybert's team will have the benefit of Dr. Soenarko's
experience in experimental methods and validation. This project adds an
international cooperative dimension to ongoing research under NSF Grant No.
MSM-8810909. This project is relevant to the objectives of the Science in
Developing Countries Program which seeks to increase the level of cooperation
between U.S. scientists and engineers and their counterparts in developing
countries through the exchange of scientific information, ideas, skills, and
techniques and through collaboration on problems of mutual benefit.