* 8921925
* Summer Workshop in Economics to be held at Northwestern     University, Evanston, IL, Summer of 1990-1992
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/1990,12/31/1992
* Nancy Stokey, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 12/31/1992
* USD 62,500.00

For the last six years, the J.L. Kellog Graduate School of Management at
Northwestern University has hosted a series of summer workshops on selected
topics in economics and management. Each of the four most recent workshops has
been fairly narrowly focused on an area of current research, bringing together
researchers working directly in the fields of emphasis. Each has been organized
around a program of formal seminars with a schedule that was sufficiently
flexible to leave ample time for informal discussion and interaction. Each
workshops has been one week long so that participants would be in attendance for
the entire conference. The 1990-1992 workshops will follow the same format used
in the last four years. The general theme of the workshop will vary across the
three years. In 1990, the workshop will be centered around topics in dynamic
economics. The sub- topics include dynamic models of international trade,
dynamic models of public finance, models of economic growth and its
determinants, and computation of equilibrium in dynamic models. The topics for
the second and third years of the workshop will be decided at a later date.
Possible topics include: Internal Organization of the Firm, Labor Markets and
Compensation, Strategic Interaction in Imperfectly Competitive Markets, Game
Theory, and Monetary Economics. This conference series should be supported
because of the productivity of its past conferences, the importance for the
advance of economic theory of generating more research on dynamic economic
models and the other topics for future conferences, the emphasis on assisting
promising young theorists early in their careers and the contributions of the
outstanding Northwestern faculty to the conference.