* 8921020
* Cell Proliferation in Developing Dentate Gyrus
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/1990,09/30/1993
* Richard Nowakowski, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey-RBHS-Robert Wood
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Platt
* 09/30/1993
* USD 255,641.00

The regulation of cell number and, more specifically, neuron number in the
developing CNS is a largely unexplored question. Investigators will examine this
issue in the developing dentate gyrus of the mouse. Within the dentate gyrus of
a single inbred strain of mice the number of granule cells is similar from
animal to animal (of the same sex), but this number varies markedly in different
inbred strains. This project has two specific aims. First, investigators will
examine changes in cell proliferation during the period of cell proliferation in
the normal mouse. Second, investigators will determine the relative contribution
of cell production and cell death to the variable numbers of granule cells in
two inbred stains which have significantly different numbers of granule cells in
the adult. Three aspects of cell production will be measured: 1) the period of
time during which neurons are produced, 2) the length of the cell cycle of the
proliferative population, 3) the proportion of cell that leave the proliferative
population during each cycle (i.e., leaving fraction). These measurements will
be used to estimate the size of the proliferative population at the beginning of
the period of neuron generation for the dentate gyrus granule cells. The major
methods to be used are bromodeoxyuridine immunohistochemistry and tritiated
thymidine autoradiography both alone and in a series of double labeling
experiments. In addition, the role of cell death in producing these differences
in cell numbers will be assessed using a silver degeneration method,
immunohistochemical detection of Alz-50 (a newly developed marker for naturally
occurring neuronal death) and analysis of differential and non-differential
survival of BUdR labeled cells.