* 8921409
* Issues in Implementation Theory
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/1990,05/31/1992
* Matthew Jackson, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 05/31/1992
* USD 51,330.00

This project improves implementation theory and in this way contributes to
research in the many areas of economics that rely on implementation theory.
Implementation theory helps the analyst answer two questions. First, suppose
that for each possible state of the environment, we have an allocation which we
wish to see achieved. Can we structure the interactions of individuals so that,
given their information, they choose actions which result in the desired
allocation? Second, if individuals possess information about the state of the
environment and interact through a given mechanism, what are the properties of
the resulting allocation as a function of the state? Although implementation
theory has been very successful in identifying desired (i.e., efficient or
equitable) outcomes which can be implemented in different informational
settings, a criticism of the theory is that the mechanisms used in the general
proofs require unrealistic assumptions. The contribution of this project comes
in relaxing restrictive assumptions about the way agents bargain and the ability
of agents to renegotiate agreements. This project examines two issues associated
with the decentralization of decision making. The first issue is designing a
mechanism to implement a desired set of social alternatives with mixed strategy
equilibria. More specifically, the current theory on Nash implementation
identifies only pure strategy Nash equilibria as the outcomes of a mechanism.
The project shows this to be inadequate and develops a framework for analyzing
the role of mixed strategy equilibria. The second issue concerns the
implementation question when the mechanism used for decentralization may not be
binding. If mechanisms are not binding, there may be instances in which agents
can gain from negotiating an alternative to the outcome suggested by the
mechanism. This feeds back to affect the initial actions of agents, since they
can account for the renegotiation process. The project develops a model for a
dynamic setting, where agents can repeatedly interact, and where there is a cost
associated with renegotiation. This model is used to analyze markets and other
economic institutions.