* 8921348
* Monoaminergic Modulation of Visual Information Processing
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/1990,11/30/1991
* Barry Jacobs, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Platt
* 11/30/1991
* USD 20,230.00

It is believed that visual perception occurs largely based on interactions of
nerve cells, or neurons, in the visual cortex of the brain. The visual cortex
itself is a structure composed of several layers of different classes on
neurons. These classes are distinguished by the shape of the cells, their
connections, their response to particular patterns of light stimulation or
motion or color, and by the chemicals called neurotransmitters that the neurons
secrete at their functional connections, called synapses. Two important
neurotransmitters of a group called mono-amines are known as NE (norepinephrine)
and 5-HT (5-hydroxy- tryptamine). The pathways for neurons in the brain to the
cells they innervate are fairly well known for both these compounds, and
monoamines are known to modulate activity in several neural systems. The
equipment provided will allow a new approach to understanding modulation of
cortical activity. The study is a preliminary effort to determine at the level
of single cells in the well-described layers of the primate visual cortex, how
information processing is modulated by the similarly layered and specifically
connected neurons secreting monoamines. Highly controlled visual stimuli will be
used to excite visual cortical cells, and when the responses are characterized,
highly localized pharmacological applications of monoamines will be made by
microelectrode. Changes in visual properties attributable to the monoamines
which are specific to a cell class, lamina, or cortical area may be described in
terms of their potential significance for perception and behavior. This work
will have impact on psychology of arousal and attention, as well as on visual
and sensory neuroscience, and provide a novel bridge between these communities.