* 8921596
* Analysis and Parameterization of Evolving Raindrop Size     Distributions
* GEO,AGS
* 04/15/1990,09/30/1992
* Philip Brown, Trinity College
* Continuing Grant
* Robert W. Taylor
* 09/30/1992
* USD 119,600.00

Precipitation is an important factor in the dynamics of clouds. For example,
evaporation of raindrops below cloud base cools the surrounding air and
influences cloud development. Since the rate of water evaporation depends on the
surface area of the drops, the drop size distribution plays an important role in
the cloud evolution. In order to model the dynamics of convective clouds, it
thus is necessary to include a realistic formulation of the raindrop size
distribution. Such models must take account of the interaction between the
small-scale microphysical process (such as water drop evaporation) and the
larger-scale microphysical processes (such as air motion). Since the two types
of processes operate on significantly different time and space scales, it is not
feasible from a computational standpoint to include in the models detailed
solution of the microphysical equations. Instead, such models must rely on the
use of simple formulas to approximate the evolution of the raindrop
distribution. Professor Brown's object in this research is twofold: to obtain a
better knowledge of the relevant microphysical processes through analysis of
model equations and observational data; and from this knowledge to develop
simple parameterization formulas describing the evolving raindrop size
distribution for use in convective cloud models. The analysis and
parameterization are to take account of the microphysical processes of drop
coalescence, breakup and evaporation.//