* 8921249
* Poverty, Spatial Inequality, and the Changing Economic      Status of Children
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/1990,11/30/1992
* David Eggebeen, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Robin A. Cantor
* 11/30/1992
* USD 44,961.00

Children represent one of the most impoverished groups in America today, with
roughly one fifth living in households with income below official poverty
guidelines. Less well appreciated is that poverty rates among rural children are
even higher. Unfortunately, poverty today is viewed as a fundamentally urban
problem, which is reinforced by media attention to a highly visible urban
"underclass" in the nation's cities. Our reliance on national statistics, which
are heavily weighted in favor of urban areas, often masks the extent and causes
of economic hardship in America's nonmetropolitan and rural areas. Drawing upon
a variety of census and survey data, the primary objective of this research is
to examine geographic variation or spatial inequality in the economic status of
American children over the 1959-88 period. Specifically, this research seeks to
identify the primary economic and demographic sources of area-to-area
differences in the poverty status of American children. Is the rise in child
poverty due to changing family structure and increases in female-headed
households? Or, is child poverty located primarily in the deteriorating
employment conditions experienced by children's parents? More important, how do
these sources of economic hardship and inequality among children vary over time
and geographic space? The common view that child poverty is located in changing
family structure may be inappropriate for rural areas, where children typically
live with both parents. In rural areas, the deteriorating economic status of
rural children may instead be rooted primarily in the income-generating
abilities of parents, which have been negatively affected during the 1980s by a
stagnating rural economy. Clearly, an accurate understanding of spatial
disparities in child poverty today requires some sensitivity to the
alternatively reinforcing and counterbalancing effects of changing family
structure and economic conditions in rural and urban areas.