* 8921151
* US-Sweden Cooperative Science:  Origin of Polygyny in a     Polyterritorial System
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1990,09/30/1991
* William Searcy, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 09/30/1991
* USD 10,725.00

This award will support collaborative research in avian behavioral ecology
between Dr. William Searcy, University of Pittsburgh and Dr. Arne Lundberg,
Department of Zoology, Uppsala University, Sweden. The objective of the proposed
research is the collection and analysis of critical field data on the well-
studied polyterritorial and polygynous pied flycatcher. The investigators
propose to examine the adaptive basis of polygyny in this species, in which
polygyny is closely associated with the defense of multiple territories by
single males (polyterritoriality). Female pied flycatchers pay a fitness cost if
they choose an already-mated male, and they are not compensated for this cost by
receiving a better territory or mate. One current hypothesis on why females
nevertheless do mate polygynously is that the polyterritorial system allows
males to deceive females about their mating status. A second hypothesis is that
females choose mated males despite being aware of the male's true mating status,
because of the high cost of continuing to search for an unmated male. The
investigators plan to test the first hypothesis by determining whether there are
reliable differences in behavior between mated and unmated males during periods
when unmated females are observing them. If such differences exist, females
ought to be able to determine male mating status. The second hypothesis will be
tested by determining whether females that ultimately settle with mated males
have previously encountered unmated males. Both tests will be performed by
following the mate search of individually marked females forced to search for
new mates by the removal of their previous mate and nestbox. The project will
benefit from the combined experimental expertise of Dr. Searcy and Dr.
Lundberg's record of productive field work with this species. The results of
this research will make an important contribution to the field of behavioral
ecology.