* 8921312
* Kinetics of Halogen, Hydrogen, Nitrogen, Sulfur and Oxygen  Containing Radicals in the 0.5 to 500 Torr Pressure Range   Between 180 and 400 K
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/1990,12/31/1993
* James Anderson, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Jarvis L. Moyers
* 12/31/1993
* USD 604,450.00

Research in atmospheric chemistry has the ultimate goal of simulating by
mathematical modeling any complex system of coupled chemical reactions in the
atmosphere. The result can be the capability of predicting any changes in the
composition of the atmosphere resulting from varying natural conditions or the
introduction of man-made contaminants. The resolution of important practical and
scientific problems requires the acquisition of the best possible values of the
reaction speeds (kinetic constants) of the may elementary steps that make up the
chemistry of the atmosphere. Among these problems are the stability of the
stratospheric ozone layer, the appearance in urban air of secondary pollutants
that were not present in the emissions of any contaminating source, and the
course of evolution of planetary atmospheres, including the atmosphere of our
own planet. This project attacks one of the most difficult, but necessary,
aspects of atmospheric chemistry - the measurement of the reaction rates for
chemical processes involving free radicals, most of which are unstable and
extremely reactive fragments of the stable molecules of the atmosphere. Because
they are so reactive, they occur in exceedingly low concentrations and are
therefore measurable only by highly sophisticated techniques. It is their high
reactivity, however, that makes them such active participants in the chemistry
of the air and can allow them to determine the fate of more abundant species,
such as hydrocarbons, sulfur dioxide, ozone, etc. The project will measure the
reaction rates for several key chemical processes involving radical-radical and
radical-molecule interactions in the sulfur, nitrogen, halogen, oxygen and
hydrogen systems. These systems are important elements in contemporary
approaches to the chemistries of clean and polluted air.