* 8921381
* Olefin Polymerization from the Gas Phase
* NONE,NONE
* 03/15/1990,02/28/1994
* Robert Laurence, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing grant
* Maria Burka
* 02/28/1994
* USD 313,570.00

The majority of olefin polymerization processes are cataytic, most often
involving a heterogeneous catalyst. The polymerization reaction occurs at some
active site on the catalyst either on its surface or within its pores. This
means that monomer has to contact the catalyst and that the polymer grows either
on the surface or within the pores of the catalyst. The transport processes
involved include monomer from the bulk phase diffusing through a polymer layer
to an acitve site and the heat of reaction(the reactions are exothermic)
diffusing out through this same polymer layer. The ractions are thus temperature
related and transport limited. The properties of the product polymer are
therefore controlled by the pore structure of the catalyst. As the reaction
proceeds, polymer created in the internal pores of the catalyst increasingly
blocks transport paths generating gradients in monomer concentration and
temperature. Polymerization rate decreases and the molecular weight of product
polymers vary greatly. The catalyst ultimately fragments, exposing more surface
area as well as more accesss to previoulsy inaccessible pores. New sites are
exposed, transport path length is reduced, and polymerization is then
accelerated. The facture occurs due to confined growth and expansion of polymer
chains in narrrow, friable channels of the catalysts and is an autocatalytic
phenomena. This fracture rate depends on the catalyst pore structure which is
thus of significant importance in the molecular weight distribution and yield of
polyolefins. Gas phase polymerization has the advantage that: (1) low capital
investment is required, (2) it is a solvent free process (i.e. distillation,
drying and solvent rcovery are not necessary), and (3) therefore operating costs
and energy consumption are low. The PIs plan to continue to experimentally study
the effects of thethree-dimensional pore structure on the gas-phase
polymerization of olefins. Pore structure will be characterized by physical
adsorption, X-ray tomography and porosimetry. Extended N2 adsorption and 129
XeNMR will be employed to charactized the microporosity of the catalyst/polymer
system and the rate by which the monomer diffuses to the active surface. X-ray
imaging in two and three demensions will be developed to determine the spatial
distribution of the catalyst within the growing polymer. The results should
yield a better fundamental understanding of the interaction of kinetics and
transport phenomena and the design of not only better catalysts, but whole
reactors as well.