* 8921537
* Collaborative Research in Experimental Studies of Auctions  and Markets with Asymmetric Information
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/1990,02/29/1992
* John Kagel, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 02/29/1992
* USD 45,588.00

This project extends and completes experimental investigations of English common
value auctions, common value auctions with asymmetric (insider) information, and
learning processes in experimental auction markets. The project also finishes a
case study of the bidding process in the Houston construction industry. Under
the previous NSF grant the investigators found conclusive evidence of a
"winner's curse" (winning bidders suffer losses) in English auctions. This is an
important result methodologically because it contradicts existing theories of
bidding and it is important substantively since the English common value auction
is a widely used mechanism for auctions. The experiments employed an English
clock procedure whereby prices start at the lowest possible value for the item
and increase steadily. Bidders are active until they signal their intention to
drop out of the auction, which decision is irrevocable for the sale of that
item. The last active bidder wins the item, paying the price at which the next
to last bidder dropped out. The experiments demonstrated that the dropout prices
of losing bidders reveal information to the other bidders and reduce but do not
eliminate the winner's curse. Further research should provide new and useful
insights into institutions and practices that mitigate or eliminate entirely the
winner's curse in auctions. The case study of the construction industry in
Houston is especially interesting. In order to determine the generalizability of
the auction market findings, the investigators conducted a series of low price,
common value offer auctions in comparing the performance of student subjects
with experienced professionals from the Houston construction industry.
Qualitatively similar behavior was found across subject pools as in both cases
bidders suffered from the winner's curse, losing money as a consequence of
winning the item, and increasing the number of bidders exacerbated the losses.
These results raised an important question: Why are business executives
successful in real world auctions and unsuccessful in laboratory auctions? The
case study identifies a number of real world institutional features and
practices that reduce the effects of the winner's curse.