* 8921603
* Distributed Decision Making:  A Multiparticipant Decision   Support Systems Framework
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/1990,02/28/1993
* Andrew Whinston, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Su-Shing Chen
* 02/28/1993
* USD 228,235.00

This research is motivated by the proposition that the tremendous successes of
computers in supporting individual decision making can be repeated for
distributed decision making. If this comes to pas, the positive implications for
organization effectiveness are likely to be as significant and far reaching as
those already witnessed for individual productivity. What is needed first is a
theory of how organizations represent and process knowledge. This project
involves the formulation and linguistic formalization of such a theory. The
theory aims to embody constructs and principles that can serve as a basis for
describing, studying, designing, testing and managing human/computer distributed
decision making systems from a knowledge oriented perspective. Development of
the theory necessarily draws on and integrated related research in organization
science, Computer science, and decision science. Efficacy of the theory and
language is tested on an experimental basis. Specific research topics addressed
within the prioritized research plan include the treatment of decision
instigation, goal-drive and goal- less processing, inter-role design, event-
triggered processing, concurrent problem processing, servers, entity
constitution, learning from experience, human interfaces, and participant
coordination.