* 8921023
* The Role of 5' ICR Sequences in Viral (+) RNA Replication
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1990,05/31/1994
* Timothy Hall, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Todd M. Martensen
* 05/31/1994
* USD 272,000.00

Most viral diseases, of man, his livestock, and crops are caused by viruses
having RNA genomes. Despite the obvious importance, remarkably little is known
about the molecular processes of RNA viral replication. Recombinant DNA
techniques have provided procedures for addressing the problem, one of these
being the ability to engineer cDNA copies of viral RNAs. Transcription of RNA in
vitro from cDNAs of wild-type viral sequences has, in several cases, yielded
infectious RNA. Mutagenesis at the cDNA level is relatively facile, and RNA
transcripts of such altered clones can serve as specific mutants at the RNA
level. Sequences with striking resemblance to the internal promoters of tRNA
genes, internal control regions (ICRs), also termed A and B boxes, have recently
been observed at the 5' termini of the genomic RNAs of brome mosaic virus
(BMV)and other viruses. The 5' terminal location, their partial homology to the
recently characterized core sequence f the subgenomic promoter, and the deletion
analysis of BMV genomic RNA3 provide strong circumstantial evidence that these
sequenced function as promoters of (+) strand replication. The Pi has used wild
type and mutant transcripts in combination with unique in vitro replication
procedures to define the promoters of genomic (-) strand synthesis and
subgenomic (+) strand synthesis. However, the promoters of (+) strand genomic
RNA synthesis are as yet undefined. In vivo viral RNA synthesis is usually
highly asymmetric with many times more (+) strand RNA being synthesized than (-)
strand.n tRNA gene transcription in eukaryotes, dependent on polymerase III and
associated transcription factors, is a nuclear process. The apparent homology to
promoters of tRNAs suggests involvement of host factors in viral (+) strand
synthesis, possibly pol III transcription factors are proposed. Experiments are
to define which elements within and surrounding the ICRs of BMV are essential
and functional in replication. Furthermore, the role of the ICRs in the
asymmetry of replication, and in determining the specific molar ratios of
genomic RNAs synthesized is addressed. Identification of the host factor(s)
involved in replication is essential in that they are the core of the host-
pathogen relationship.