* 8921715
* Econometric Analysis of Dynamic Economic Relationships:     Inferences and Control
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/1990,08/31/1992
* Marc Nerlove, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Paige Smith
* 08/31/1992
* USD 112,500.00

The research considers a variety of interrelated topics of current interest in
the econometric analysis of time series generated by dynamic economic
relationships. The first area of research concerns the development and
application of semiparametric and nonparametric methods for estimation,
inference and prediction in dynamic models. Some of the work in this area will
include extending existing models on business cycle duration dependence through
the estimation of underlying hazard functions nonparametrically. Applications of
nonparametric conditional mean estimation to the prediction of asset returns and
macroeconomic aggregates will be made. The second area of research deals with
the development of nonlinear filtering procedures for the analysis of economic
time series generated by a variety of nonlinear models. Many examples in
economics, such as dividend payout behavior by liquidity constrained firms and
estimation of information flow in financial markets, do not fit into the easily-
handled Gaussian framework. An optimal filter for such models will be developed
and compared to commonly used (but suboptimal) filters. Related work in
investigating the usefulness of such filters in predicting business cycle
turning points will also be performed. The final area of research is concerned
with the econometric implications of policy control of dynamic economic systems,
the parameters of which are known only with considerable uncertainty. The
integration of Bayesian inference and optimal control theory should provide
insights into the econometric implications of the tradeoff between optimizing
policy and estimation. Initially, this issue will be studied through an analysis
of the "Laffer Curve", which makes explicit the tradeoff between revenue
maximization in the near term and better information about the relation between
tax rates and revenue obtained.