* 8921148
* US-Iceland Workshop: The Jonsson Symposium; July 2-6, 1990; Laugarvatn, Iceland
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1990,12/31/1991
* George McNulty, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 12/31/1991
* USD 13,950.00

This award supports the participation of eleven U.S. mathematicians in a small
international symposium to be held in Iceland in July, 1990. The organizing
committee, chaired by George McNulty of the University of South Carolina, has
representatives from several countries. The local organizer is Professor Ragnar
Sigurdsson, President of the Icelandic Mathematical Society. The meeting is co-
sponsored by this Society as well as the University of Iceland and several U.S.
universities. The purpose of the symposium is to provide an international forum
for the exchange of ideas and results at the leading edge of mathematical
research in lattice theory, universal algebra and algebraic logic. The occasion
for the symposium is the seventieth birthday of Bjarni Jonsson, who was born in
Iceland in 1920, though his academic training and career were pursued in the
United States. His fundamental contributions in the above topics have made him a
leading figure for nearly forty years. The present day vitality of universal
algebra and of lattice theory can be traced, in large part, to new research
directions initiated by Professor Jonsson. The areas addressed by the "Jonsson
Symposium" are important mainstream fields of mathematics that have grown
enormously in the past forty years; the main researchers in these fields are
scattered around the world. Although these topics are addressed regularly at
small national or regional mathematics meetings, this will be the first
conference to bring together a substantial number of specialists from North
America to meet their colleagues from Western and Central Europe. The symposium
offers a strong program and a convenient central location that should attract
broad international participation and provide a strong stimulus to cooperative
research. NSF funding will be directed especially at the participation of young
U.S. mathematicians.