* 8921859
* Molecularly Engineered Layered Compounds: Their Synthesis,  Structure and Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 05/15/1990,11/30/1991
* Abraham Clearfield, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Jon F. Parcher
* 11/30/1991
* USD 60,000.00

This project in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry Program
is concerned with metal phosphorus compounds with layered structures containing
cavities which may be exploited for catalysis or in chemical separations. These
compounds are related structurally to the zeolites which are used extensively in
water purification and as industrial catalysts or catalyst supports. A variety
of metal organophosphates and phosphonates with layered structures will be
synthesized and characterized. Metals will be chosen with valences ranging from
2+ to 4+, and mixed valence compounds will be prepared also. Functionalized
derivatives in which the pendant organic groups contain amino, carboxlylic or
sulfonic acid groups, or with polyether or polyamine chains as pendant groups,
will be prepared. Bridging by polyether or polyamine chains is expected to yield
cryptand-like structures, whereas bridging by biphenyls is expected to yield
thermally stable structures. The organophosphonates will be decomposed thermally
in an attempt to produce novel inorganic layered phosphates, and will be
subjected to controlled hydrolysis to prepare new layered hydroxides and oxides.
Applications of the new materials in catalysis, ion exchange and specific
sorption will be examined. For example, the role of Lewis acid versus Bronsted
acid sites in acid catalyzed reactions will be assessed.