* 8921506
* Interactions Between Seasonal Cycles and Business Cycles
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/1990,01/31/1993
* Jeffrey Miron, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 01/31/1993
* USD 110,050.00

This research builds off a previous NSF grant which demonstrated that the
seasonal variation in macroeconomic activity in the U.S. and other economies
displays striking similarities to business cycle variations. It also shows that
those countries or industries that display the greatest amount of seasonal
variation are also the ones that display the greatest amount of business cycle
variation. A plausible explanation for these results is that the same
propagation mechanism is operative in producing seasonal and business cycle
variation, even if the ultimate sources of the two kinds of fluctuations are
quite different. The results from prior work thus suggests that it is important
to undertake an integrated analysis, including analysis of the welfare
implications of seasonal variation. The purpose of this project is to begin
developing such an analysis. The first part of the project will develop a model
of production and inventory decision-making at the level of the firm that can
account for the cross-sectional correlations between the amounts of seasonal and
cyclical variation found in the data. In the second part, the welfare
implications of the Federal Reserve's policy of ameliorating the seasonal
fluctuations in interest rates will be examined. The third part of the study
compares the welfare consequence of seasonal cycles and business cycles, and the
fourth part involves the construction of a new monthly, seasonally-unadjusted
index of industrial production for the period 1884 to 1940.