* 8921382
* Nonparametric and Semiparametric Econometrics Using         Artifical Neural Networks
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/1990,06/30/1993
* Halbert White, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 06/30/1993
* USD 112,278.00

Using methods recently developed in econometrics and mathematical statistics,
this project will investigate the theory of "learning" in a class of "artificial
neural network" models. Models are to be developed that will yield potentially
more efficient and powerful estimation and testing procedures. The research
falls into four interrelated ares: large-sample properties of nonparametric
estimation procedures based on neural network models, relative computational
properties of different methods for optimizing the network learning (estimation)
objective function, application of nonparametric network-based procedures to
construct semi-parametric estimators and perform specification tests, and
comparison of network-based procedures to standard nonparametric and semi-
parametric procedures based on kernel estimators and series estimators, among
others. The techniques developed in this field have been successfully used to
forecast in engineering and technology. Some specific applications have included
various industrial settings and in defense to accomplish tasks that had been
insoluble. Some examples include bomb detection in airports, distinguishing
between sonar signals generated from rocks and mines, vibration damping in
machinery, handwriting character recognition and robot coordination and control.
Further work in this area should continue to expand the fields of applications
beyond economics.