* 8921839
* CRB:  Methods of Genealogical and Genetic Analysis in       Conservation Biology
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/1990,01/31/1994
* Elizabeth Thompson, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 01/31/1994
* USD 164,000.00

From a genetic perspective, conservation biology requires the preservation of
genetic diversity or variability. Over long periods of time, mutation provides
the genetic variation upon which natural selection may act. However, in
populations constrained in size over several generations, much of the genetic
variation may be lost. Once lost, a very long time is required for mutation to
reestablish pre.existing levels of genetic diversity. Moreover, many species are
now subject to extreme and unnatural selection. It is therefore of practical
importance to study the maintenance of genetic variation in small populations.
Questions of gene survival in small populations have been well studied in recent
years, and new statistical methodology has found application in the assessment
of the genetic potential of small populations of endangered species, such as the
Andean condor and Przewalski's horse. This statistical research will be extended
in three projects by Dr. Elizabeth Thompson and her colleagues at the University
of Washington. There are three aspects of the analysis of the pedigree structure
of a small population, all of which are directly relevant to the genetic
management, and thence to the conservation biology of species. From the central
trio of pedigree, genetic model, and observational data, one can consider
inferences of pedigree structure, inferences of the genetic basis of an observed
trait, or computation of probabilities of gene survival or of specific
phenotypic events. The currently proposed focus is the extension of previous
methods and development of new approaches to these three areas, in the context
of complex genetic data such as DNA.fingerprint data. An understanding of the
genetic and genealogical structure of populations is fundamental to
conservation, where endangered species exist in limited numbers or fragmented
isolates. A study of the genetics alone cannot provide specific solutions.
However, all species have genes, all populations have pedigrees, and all genetic
isolates have a structure that will affect their maintenance and long.term
survival.