* 8921837
* Satisfaction and Optimization in Cognmitive Science and     Evolutionary Biology
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1990,08/31/1992
* Robert Richardson, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Ronald J. Overmann
* 08/31/1992
* USD 49,964.00

Appeals to optimality have a prominent role in philosophy, cognitive science,
and evolutionary biology. Optimizing procedures have been challenged as
excessively demanding, and Herbert Simon has proposed an alternative analysis in
terms of what he terms "satisficing." It has become common to view satisficing
as optimizing under additional constraints. Dr. Richardson is undertaking
research that challenges this reduction of satisficing to optimizing, and
examines the implications of this result of evolutionary ecology and cognitive
science. There are three components to the project. The first phase incorporates
a general characterization of satisficing models and the conditions under which
they differ procedurally from optimization models. Second, optimization models
purport to provide an independent measure of fitness, but have been criticized
on the grounds that the measure they provide is not both operational and
general. In light of the general characterization of satisficing models, the
problem in this second phase of the project is whether satisficing models are
likely to resolve methodological problems confronting optimality models in
evolutionary biology. The final phase is a preliminary examination of the merits
of non- optimizing models in cognitive science, and, in particular, their
implications for philosophy of science.