* 8921873
* Conference on Econometrics and Mathematical Economics,      1990-1991, Cambridge, Massachusetts
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/1990,09/30/1992
* Kenneth Arrow, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 09/30/1992
* USD 182,685.00

This grant continues the seminar program of the Conference on Econometrics and
Mathematical Economics (CEME). The purpose of this conference series is to
stimulate discussion and research on the frontiers of econometric and
mathematical economic theory and methodology. CEME also encourages the
application of advanced mathematical, statistical, and numerical analysis
techniques in empirical economic studies. The conference shortens the time lags
between the conception of ideas and their dissemination by inducing leading
scholars to cooperatively apply their talents to selected, unresolved issues
which they feel are currently receiving inadequate attention. This conference
series continues to make significant contributions to economic theory and
econometrics. Since its inception in 1970, seminar groups have produced more
than 700 working papers and have published many books and numerous articles in
professional journals. A total of 190 meetings have been held involving more
than 800 scholars. Currently there are active seminars on general equilibrium
models, comparisons of econometric models, applied general equilibrium
workshops, time series analysis, Bayesian inference in econometrics,
decentralized economic planning, and stochastic analysis. In addition CEME
publishes a "Call for Conference Proposals" annually as a mechanism for co-
funding small conferences in the area of econometrics. A new seminar group in
financial market theory and analysis will begin meeting in early 1990.