* 8921642
* Collaborative Research:  Nutrient Interactions Affecting    Cyanobacterial Dominance in Lakes
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/1990,02/28/1994
* Allan Konopka, Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 02/28/1994
* USD 78,500.00

Much of the uncertainty about the effects of nutrient loading on phytoplankton
composition stems from our inadequate understanding of how nuisance bloom-
formers such as cyanobacteria succeed in dominating plankton assemblages. In
enriched lakes, cyanobacteria appear to migrate from bottom and deepwater
habitats to occupy the upper layers of the open water, and as nutrient
conditions permit, cyanobacteria extend their use of the photic zone until, by
growth and migration, they monopolize lights in the heterogeneous environments
of stratified lakes as effectively as they do in the homogeneous environments of
shallow, mixed lakes. This research is a coordinated lake (mesocosm and whole-
lake) and laboratory (cyclostat) set of experiments to obtain a better
understanding of the ecological significance of surface blooms and their
consequences at consumer as well as producer levels. Our objectives are (1) to
determine the significance of the oxidation state nitrogen and (2) the relative
availability of carbon nitrogen and phosphorus to cyanobacterial buoyancy
regulation and bloom formation, (3) to evaluate the effects of C- N-P
interactions on dominance of the photic zone and the phytoplankton by
cyanobacteria and (4) to evaluate the effects of different degrees of
cyanobacterial success on trophic-level interactions. The project will
contribute to basic limnology, while providing valuable information which will
add to the knowledge base used in lake management.