* 8921226
* Conference on the Microbiologist &amp; Biological Defense       Research:  Ethical &amp; Social Issues, Spring 1991             Baltimore, Maryland
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/1990,11/30/1991
* Raymond Zilinskas, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Rachelle D. Hollander
* 11/30/1991
* USD 30,000.00

Ethics and Values Studies supports research and educational projects on ethical
and value aspects of the interaction between science, technology and society.
Projects examine the social values and mutual obligations and responsibilities
that arise in these interactions. One important area for examination concerns
new advances in the biosciences that may be applied to research and develop
efficacious biological warfare (BW) agents. This threat is so serious that the
Department of Defense (DoD) has increased its biological defense research
program. As a consequence, many scientists are given the opportunity to
undertake BW-related research. When considering this opportunity, scientists
face difficult questions related to personal values, professional ethics,
responsibilities stemming from international law, and duties towards their
country. It is the main objective of the proposed conference to clarify these
issues. A second objective draws scholars' attention to the availability of the
American Society for Microbiology's (ASM) archives for research on the history
of microbiology in the U. S. The conference, and its published proceedings, will
generate information that will help scientists decide whether to undertake DoD
funded research; it will delineate the roles of scientific societies in guiding
their members; and it will inform the public of these difficult questions so it
can make informed decisions. The ASM and other scientific organizations are co-
sponsors of the conference. The principal investigator, planning committee
members, and speakers for the conference are highly qualified; sponsorship is
appropriate; the issues are important; results will be appropriately
disseminated. The project is meritorious and recommended for award.