* 8921697
* Fertility Attitude-Behavior Consistency
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/1990,05/31/1993
* Richard Williams, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 05/31/1993
* USD 50,000.00

Although many people are successful in producing the number of children they
desire, many others fail. Understanding the reasons for the discrepancy between
family size desires and outcomes over the past half-century will yield several
benefits. The results will clarify couples' decision-making vis-a-vis child-
bearing and improve demographic predictions of fertility. In addition, they can
be used in designing programs to help those least likely to have the number of
children desired. This proposal contends that demographic theory and research,
combined with contemporary social psychological perspectives, provide the means
for achieving these research goals. Drawing on the work of Fishbein, the PI
develops a model of fertility attitude-behavior consistency. According to this
model, intentions are the strongest direct determinant of fertility behavior.
However, attitude-behavior consistency varies with social psychological
characteristics of individuals. These include experience, significant/other
conflict, resources, and psychological traits. In addition, factors besides
intentions, such as habits, "behavioral scripts," and attitudes about children
sometimes directly affect behavior. Building on the PI's previous work with the
1941 Indianapolis Fertility Survey, hypotheses will be tested using the
1987/1988 National Survey of Families and Households and the 1957-1967 Princeton
Fertility Studies. Parity progression, logistic regression, and proportional
hazards models are to be used in analyzing the data.