* 8921458
* A Second Generation Multi-Beam Echo-Sounding System for the Research Vessel BERNIER
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/1990,12/31/1990
* Jeffrey Weissel, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Richard W. West
* 12/31/1990
* USD 822,481.00

This project will provide shipboard scientific support equipment for the BERNIER
undergoing conversion to a research vessel to be operated by Columbia University
Lamont-Doherty Geological Observatory and dedicated to use in support of ocean
science research. The Shipboard Scientific Support Equipment Program provides
funds for ship equipment deemed essential to the proper and safe conduct of
ocean science research. This Program provides support for such items as deck
equipment including winch systems for the deployment and retrieval of scientific
instruments, navigational equipment such as radars, gyroscopes and earth
satellite receivers to pin point the location of research sites, communication
equipment including radio transceivers and satellite transceivers for voice and
scientific data communications and other equipment such as echo-sounders to
interrogate the sea bottom. The Project Directors, Dr. Jeffrey K. Weissel, Dr.
Dennis E. Hayes and Dr. William B. F. Ryan are fully qualified to direct this
project having had considerable experience in overseeing the acquisition and
installation of shipboard equipment. This project will allow the institution to
acquire and install a second generation multi-beam echo-sounding system to map
the ocean floor with nearly twice the spacial resolution of existing systems
installed on U.S academic research ships. This second generation system can
furthermore map a swath almost two and a half times as wide. the greater
efficiency of the broad swath mapping capability translates into substantial
cost savings for research vessel operations.