* 8921804
* Modeling of the Tropical Atmosphere-Ocean System
* GEO,AGS
* 04/15/1990,03/31/1994
* Mark Cane, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 03/31/1994
* USD 372,290.00

The PIs will continue, and expand upon, their previous modeling studies of the
tropical oceans and atmosphere. A major focus will be the development of an
improved atmospheric heating parameterization, taking into account the distinct
processes operating within and above the boundary layer. This will be aided by
existing and planned diagnostic studies based on observed (or analyzed) winds,
as well as GCM calculations. Their Pacific coupled model will be extended to the
Atlantic and Indian Ocean sectors, first individually, and finally as a coupled
model of the global tropics. This will include parameterizations of land-
atmosphere interactions that have thus far been ignored. They will seek to
identify the extent and nature of climate variability that arises from local
interactions within each oceanic sector, and the manner in which inter-basin
interactions modify or enhance that variability. The new parameterizations will
be incorporated into a multi- level, global atmospheric model. Both linear and
primitive equation versions will be developed. Explicit boundary layer physics
will permit a more realistic representation of the actual oceanic forcing, and
allow for a relatively inviscid free atmosphere, in contrast to their previous
model. Long-term coupled simulations with this model will be used to study the
mechanisms of low frequency climate change in the tropics. This research project
is important because it will shed more light on the role of the coupling between
global oceans and the atmosphere on climate variability.