* 8921936
* A History of Engineering Education in the United States
* BIO,DBI
* 07/15/1990,06/30/1993
* Terry Reynolds, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Ronald J. Overmann
* 06/30/1993
* USD 119,948.00

Drs. Reynolds and Seely are examining the history of American engineering
education from the early 19th century through the present. Although engineering
educators have studied the state of engineering education in particular eras
(indeed, hardly any profession has studied its educational apparatus as
frequently), no interpretive history of engineering education exists. Using
archival collections, interviews with engineering educators, and an enormous
secondary literature contained both in engineering periodicals and published
monographs, Drs. Reynolds and Seely are preparing a synthetic history of
engineering education. They see several common themes running through the
history of engineering education. Their examination of these continuities and
the different responses of engineering educators to them provide the basic
framework for the study. Examples of these continuities are the struggle to
train engineers within a four-year curriculum and the associated tensions
between practical and general education. Other continuities include debates over
the place of research and graduate programs, the role of industry, government,
and professional societies in engineering education, and the ways educational
institutions should respond to changing engineering "manpower" concerns.
Although technology and society have changed significantly over the past century
and a half, the similarities between the problems faced by contemporary
engineering educators and those of the past are such that an historical
perspective is important.