* 8921698
* Dynamic Buckle Propagation in Submarine Pipelines
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/1990,11/30/1992
* John Carney, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Ken Chong
* 11/30/1992
* USD 100,844.00

In the proposed research, the dynamics of buckle propagation and arrest in
submarine pipelines will be investigated using a combination of numerical,
experimental, and analytical approaches. The objectives of the research include
the advancement of the understanding of the buckle propagation and arrest
phenomena, and the development of relatively simple models which could be used
in practice to design safe and efficient pipeline systems. The research will
consist of three main tasks. In Task 1, pipeline buckle propagation and arrest
will be studied by means of a three-dimensional, highly accurate finite element
model which will account for the energies dissipated by both circumferential
deformations and longitudinal bending and shearing deformations. Task 2 will
involve the experimental testing of representative pipeline-arrestor systems
under dynamic conditions. Finally, Task 3 will deal with the development of
simplifies models which will represent with acceptable accuracy the effects and
relative importance of the major factors that influence the buckle propagation
and arrest phenomena. These simplifies models are primarily intended for
practical design purposes. This research will provide results that will lead to
the development of more economical and efficient designs of offshore pipeline
systems, thus enhancing the availability of a stable energy source.