* 8921803
* WISCNet - Wisconsin Higher Education Data Network
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/1990,03/31/1994
* Michael Dorl, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* George O. Strawn
* 03/31/1994
* USD 577,000.00

WISCNet, comprising all twenty-six institutions of the University of Wisconsin
System and eight private colleges and universities in Wisconsin (Beloit College,
Carroll College, Edgewood College, Lawrence University, Marquette University,
Medical College of Wisconsin, Ripon College, and St. Norbert College), will
develop a consistent UW System-wide and statewide architecture for national
network access and will provide a structure for general access to the Internet.
Additionally, a higher quality communications system will be fostered by
providing network-wide management and information services through the WISCNet
management enterprize. WISCNet as such, will minimize isolation of scholars at
Wisconsin instituions and allow these intitutions to attract quality faculty
accustomed to national electronic communication. It will also facilitate access
to national networks and their services, including supercomputing resources and
large database access. The grant will cover costs of gateway/routing equipment
for all the schools and partially defray the cost of communication lines for the
36 month duration of the project. The midlevel network, CICNET, will provide
high speed access to the midlevel and national backbone networks. The University
of Wisconsin, Madison will provide necessary support and technical expertise for
the operation and maintenance of the gateway nodes on all the campuses as well
as information services for the users at the member institutions.