* 8921265
* A Cross-Cultural Study of Political Participation and Peace
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/1990,04/30/1992
* Bruce Russett, Human Relations Area Files
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 04/30/1992
* USD 33,000.00

Increasing evidence suggests that democratic countries rarely fight wars with
other democratic countries. In a world where democracy seems to be becoming a
more common form of government, this evidence would further suggest that
international wars will become less common. Nevertheless, the evidence is not
conclusive: other influences, such as mutually high levels of income or
participation in an alliance, may also help to explain the absence of war
between many democratic countries. Moreover, the theoretical understanding of
why democracies may behave peacefully toward one another is not yet fully
persuasive. To understand this phenomenon better, this project examines patterns
of war and peace between very different kinds of units, namely, the usually
small ethnographic units that have been systematically studied by
anthropologists. The project will scale a representative sample of such
societies on a dimension ranging from hierarchical to participatory political
systems, and then inquire (with proper controls) whether participatory societies
have less internal war than do hierarchical ones, and whether in relations with
other societies participatory societies are less likely to fight other
participatory societies than hierarchical ones. By establishing these patterns,
and the social processes that promote them, the project should help in
understanding the basis of relations between larger units such as nation-states.
The project includes a Research Experience for Undergraduates component that
involves students in the coding and collection of data that will be used for
subsequent analysis. The two students should have an exciting and informative
educational experience working on this inter-disciplinary project under the
direct supervision of three outstanding scholars.