* 8921655
* Parameterization of Processes in Models for Medium-Range    Prediction and Global Climate Seminar, August 6-10, 1990 in Pune, India, Group Travel Award in U.S. & Indian Currenc
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/1990,02/28/1991
* David Randall, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 02/28/1991
* USD 84,796.00

Description: This project supports participation of 20 U.S. scientists in a
binational workshop on "Parameterization of Subgrid-Scale Processes in Dynamical
Model of Medium Range Prediction and Global Climate" to be held in Pune. India,
August 6 to 10, 1990. The Indian cooperating scientist is Dr. D.R. Sikka,
Director, Indian Institute of Tropical Meteorology (IITM), Pune, India. The
workshop is planned to discuss the following areas: convection (large scale and
cumulus scale), radiation, orography, boundary layer fluxes, hydrological cycle,
and biosphere processes. The parameterization of these physical processes will
be examined in global models for medium range forcasting (normally up to 10
days), and for global climate. Emphasis will be on the conditions in the tropics
where the interaction between the dynamical fields and the parameterized
convective, radiative and boundary layer processes is very rapid. It is expected
that better understanding of the controls of tropical climate will result,
leading to further improvements in medium range forcasting, and in our general
understanding of global climate change. The workshop will also seek to identify
areas for cooperative research. Workshop proceedings are scheduled to be
published. Scope: U.S.-Indian cooperation in atmoshperic research stretches back
to the 1970's and to the two year MONEX experiments in the winter of 1978 and
summer of 1979. Indian interest in predicting weather conditions, both long-term
and medium term forcasts, is well known. U.S. interest in the monsoon
circulation, itself a planetary scale feature, is also very strong. The IITM in
Pune has long history of tropical research. India also has recently established
a National Center for Medium Range Weather Forcasting (NCMRF) in Delhi which has
a newly acquired supercomputer. Thus both the U.S. and India have the strong
interest and resources to deal with research problems of the workshop topic.
Their collaboration is likely to benefit the two countries.