* 8921840
* Information and Monitoring in Repeated Agency of PartnershipProblems
* SBE,SES
* 01/15/1990,06/30/1992
* Ennio Stacchetti, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 06/30/1992
* USD 95,737.00

The past two decades have seen the development of a large and vital literature
on repeated games with discounting. Research in this area has been stimulated
both by a succession of theoretical breakthroughs and by a rich variety of
economic applications that have emerged, notably in industrial organization,
macroeconomics and international trade. Until recently, the models under study
shared the feature of "perfect monitoring": in each period, a player in the
repeated game knows precisely what actions were taken by other players in all
previous periods. Researchers investigating applied problems in different fields
became increasingly dissatisfied with the realism of the perfect monitoring
assumption and developed models with special kinds of imperfect monitoring. The
contribution of this project consists of developing more general and powerful
models of imperfect monitoring and confronting the methodological problems that
occur in these more realistic models. Traditional agency theory assumes that the
principal has no more information about the agent's actions than the enforcement
authorities have. This project explores various agency supergames that modify
this standard informational structure. In one such model the principal, but not
the enforcement agency, can observe the agent's actions. Results obtained by
assuming that the principal can only write one-period contracts are extended to
allow the principal at any time to freely write long-term contracts, which offer
the agent a salary in every future period depending on the publicly observed
outcomes. The contracts can be renegotiated at the end of every period. This
work provides the basis for extending agency theory to a dynamic setting. Such a
theory requires the analyst to solve problems of loss of recursive structure and
the negotiation of disequilibrium agreements.