* 8921241
* Modelling the Spatial Dynamics of the Urban Homeless
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/1990,01/31/1994
* Jennifer Wolch, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Brian Holly
* 01/31/1994
* USD 165,305.00

Despite considerable attention in the last decade by social scientists focusing
on problems of homeless persons in the United States, many significant questions
remain unanswered. Among these are questions related to how changes in the
levels and distributions of low-wage employment, housing, and services targeted
toward the homeless affect the location patterns and movement of people without
housing. This award will continue support from NSF for a project that is seeking
answers to these questions through an extensive analysis of the structural,
institutional, and individual factors that affect the number, character, and
locations of homeless persons in Los Angeles. Newly available data sources will
document how shifts in the provision of jobs and housing have affected the
abilities of certain households to find housing. The locational distribution of
homeless shelters and services will also be analyzed. This project will continue
a valuable line of inquiry into the location and dynamics of a segment of the
population that has been increasingly in the public attention. The empirical
research will be valuable to those seeking descriptions of the number and
circumstances of homeless populations, both in Los Angeles and elsewhere. The
project's real value lies in its development of a fuller and more articulate
theory of contemporary urban processes, with significant ramifications for
population, social, and economic systems. Because a number of graduate and
undergraduate students will be involved in this project (the latter because of a
Research Experiences for Undergraduates supplement), the project also will
provide a valuable opportunity for young scholars to involve themselves directly
in basic social scientific research.