* 8921805
* Strategy in a Clientelist and Populist Milieu:  The Dynamicsof Electoral Politics in Brazil, 1978-1990
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/1990,08/31/1991
* Barry Ames, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 08/31/1991
* USD 90,299.00

Brazil is currently completing a long transition away from military rule toward
a fully democratic system. For democratic rule to last, the legislature must
contribute to the solution of the country's critical social and economic
problems. There is increasing concern, however, that the congress is weakened
due to a number of factors: the absence of strong party identification on the
part of the electorate; the inability of deputies to coalesce along party lines
on national issues; the failure of party leaders to maintain party coalitions;
and, the focus of deputies on pork-barrel legislation and patronage. This
project attends to these issues by investigating congressional elections in
Brazil between 1978 and 1990. The problems in Brazil are in part the result of
the institutional structure of Brazilian elections. Brazil's electoral system is
proportional, with each state constituting an individual multi-member district.
Voters, however, cast ballots for individuals, not parties, and the order of
votes received by individual candidates determines winners. This institutional
structure, coupled with the clientelistic nature of Brazilian society,
encourages many deputies to restrict their campaigning to discrete sub-state
regions. A group of deputies may represent a single party, but their true
orientation is local or regional. Deputies may care a great deal about bringing
jobs and projects to the residents of their bailiwicks, while legislation on
national issues becomes unimportant to their reelection chances. Until recently,
the absence of election results below the state level made serious analysis
impossible, but recently released county-level results enable scholars to begin
to investigate the problem. In addition to undertaking a statistical analysis of
the results of the four elections between 1978 and 1990, the investigator will
interview congressmen, journalists and academics about campaign strategies and
tactics. In addition, voting records and committee tactics will be examined, as
well as the behavior of deputies in the Congress. The major objective of the
project is to understand how traditionalist clientelistic forms of societal
organization interact over time with political institutions and how this
interaction is affected by migration, the expansion of communications media, and
improved transportation. The researchers also investigate the strategies of
congressional candidates faced with certain institutional and societal
incentives and constraints. Finally, the project seeks to further understanding
of the impact of political institutions on the transition to democracy in Latin
America as a whole, especially in terms of the kinds of legislative behavior
institutions encourage.