* 8921463
* International Workshop on Molecular Approaches to           Development in Dictyostelium, Turin, Italy, Sept. 9-15,1990
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1990,03/31/1991
* William Loomis, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 03/31/1991
* USD 18,550.00

This award will support an international workshop on molecular approaches to
development in the amoebal organism Dictyostelium to be held in Turin, Italy
from September 9 to September 15, 1990. The meeting, organized by Prof. William
F. Loomis of the University of California-San Diego and Prof. Salvatore R.
Bozzaro of the University of Turin, will focus on three topics: (1) Signals and
signal transduction mechanisms that affect gene expression; (2) Transcriptional
and post-transcriptional control mechanisms; (3) Modifications of specific
proteins and their relations to cellular functions. The various applications of
advanced techniques to diverse aspects of the differentiations that occur in
Dictyostelium discoideum have been fruitful in gaining a global understanding of
the mechanisms by which a group of genetically and physiologically identical
cells can interact and diverge into specialized cell types. The advent of
powerful molecular genetic techniques applicable to this system has opened up
many new avenues that are leading to insights relevant not only to Dictyostelium
development but also to related processes that occur in all multicellular
organisms, especially during embryogenesis. Advances in the understanding of
complex processes in Dictyostelium have benefitted significantly from the
periodic exchange of techniques, results and points of view between laboratories
at international meetings. Hosting this meeting in Italy ensures the
participation of the most active Italian and Western Europe laboratories and
will facilitate the rapid dissemination of new data and foster international
collabora- tions.