* 8921589
* Summer Workshop in Theoretical Economics to be held at      Stanford University, Stanford CA Summer 1990-1992
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/1990,12/31/1993
* Paul Milgrom, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 12/31/1993
* USD 214,027.00

For the past two decades, Stanford has conducted a highly successful summer
workshop that has served as a gathering place for extended research interactions
among economic theorists. The intellectual and physical environment, extended
program format, experienced staff, and support from the University have combined
to make the Stanford program uniquely successful over many years. Stanford's
program extends over 6-8 weeks with many visitors in residence for the whole
period and most in residence for at least four weeks. During this period, there
are about 8-10 hours per week of scheduled seminars. The balance of the time
provides extensive opportunities for sustained interaction among a large number
of researchers. This format has proved to be especially valuable for younger
researchers, who have found the summer workshop a fertile environment for
developing their ideas and beginning collaborations. Support for this successful
series of workshops and seminars should be renewed because of its likely
contributions to economic theory. For 1990 Stanford's summer program centers on
three themes: New Keynesian Approaches to Macroeconoimcs, Economics with
Increasing Returns, and the Economics of Organizations. Each topic will begin
with a workshop and continue with a series of paper presentations organized
around the main theme. Some of these topics are likely to be continued into the
summers of 1991 and 1992, along with the topics of Dynamical Economic Systems
and the Theory of the Second Best.