* 8921146
* Nuclear Physics Research with Electrons, Photons, and       Antiprotons
* MPS,PHY
* 03/15/1990,08/31/1993
* Alan Nathan, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* John W. Lightbody, Jr.
* 08/31/1993
* USD 8,178,000.00

The Nuclear Physics Laboratory (NPL) of the University of Illinois conducts
fundamental research in nuclear science using an in-house superconducting
electron accelerator (MUSL-II) and a number of higher energy user facilities
located in the US, Canada, and Europe. The central thrust of NPL research is
electromagnetic nuclear physics (EMNP); i.e., electron scattering and
photoreactions. Smaller programs of anti-proton annihilation studies using CERN
facilities and of accelerator physics are also being conducted. MUSL-II provides
continuous wave electron beams at energies up to 100 MeV for use in electro-and
photo-induced coincidence reaction studies, primarily related to nuclear
structure. Following conclusion of MUSL-II research activities, a program of
full user mode EMNP research will be conducted, principally at the MIT/Bates,
University of Saskatchewan, and CEBAF electron accelerators, aimed generally at
sub-nuclear degrees of freedom (nucleons, mesons, and quarks). Instrumentation
development is an important function at the NPL. Large scale equipment
construction projects will be undertaken in support of the user program and
including detectors, electronics, spectrometers, specialized targets, polarized
electron sources, and related equipment. Graduate students are integrated into
all aspects of NPL research, including equipment development, and their training
is a prominent aspect of NPL activities. Approximately 16 graduate students in
residence will be supported by this grant.