* 8921159
* Laser Processing of Wide-Gap II-VI Compounds for Improved   Conductivity Control
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/1990,04/30/1994
* Gertrude Neumark, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Brian J. Clifton
* 04/30/1994
* USD 126,411.00

A long-standing problem for wide-band-gap semiconductors (band gap greater than
about 2 eV) is that of obtaining good bipolar conductivity, with resultant
problems of obtaining good (efficient) p-n- cunctions. This problem has been
particularly severe in the II-VI materials, which otherwise have a umber of
desirable properties. Recent work has shown that the basic difficulty resides in
a poor solubility of shallow dopants. Consequently, non-equilibrium impurity
incorporation is generally required. We propose to work with laser processing,
in view of its very rapid thermal quenching and its photolytic doping
capabilities. It will be checked whether such processing can give adequate
conductivity with use of just a single (primary) dopant, or whether a newly
suggested procedure , joint incorporation of both such a primary dopant and a
(mobile) compensating species, with subsequent removal of the latter, will be
required . We plan to focus on ZnSe, but with some work probably also on CdS,
and obtain well - conducting p-type, reproducible. This has not been previously
achieved. Good p-type would lead to good p-n junctions, since good n-type is
available, and resultant devices, such as light emitting diodes and diode lasers
in the green and higher spectral ranges, and better solar cells.