* 8921985
* Stereoselectivity in Metalloprotein Electron Transfer
* MPS,CHE
* 04/15/1990,03/31/1994
* Jack Pladziewicz, University of Wisconsin-Eau Claire
* Continuing Grant
* John Gilje
* 03/31/1994
* USD 89,440.00

With support from the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry
Program Dr. John R. Pladziewicz will investigate the extent to which electron-
transfer reactions of metalloproteins depend on the three-dimensional structure
of the other reactant. Rates of electron transfer will be compared for
metalloproteins reacting with optical isomers, i.e., molecules which contain the
same atoms connected in the same way, but which differ in their three-
dimensional structures so that they are non-superposable mirror images. The
results of the project may help explain the exquisite selectivity exhibited by
many biological electron-transfer reactions. The principal objectives of the
project are to: (1) Examine a series of electron-transfer reactions between
metalloproteins and chiral coordination compounds with the expectation of
identifying several reactions for which stereoselective electron transfer is
detectable. (2) Measure the extent of stereoselectivity in these reactions. (3)
Determine the extent to which stereoselective metalloprotein-coordination
compound ion pairing in the precursor complex contributes to any observed
electron-transfer stereoselectivity. (4) Determine the extent to which donor-
acceptor distance and orientaion play a role in observed stereoselectivity. (5)
Develop models based on available x-ray crystallographic data and observed
selectivity to advance understanding of the stereochemical control of biological
electron transfer.