* 8921248
* The Relationship Between State Law and Private              Justice
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/1990,05/31/1993
* Stuart Henry, Eastern Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Martin
* 05/31/1993
* USD 52,000.00

Existing research on law creation has been framed from within a variety of
divergent theoretical positions. Those taking the consensus perspective see law
as a reflection of the collective views and interests of the community or
general public. Those taking a conflict perspective see law as a reflection of
powerful interests which result in the creation of laws to maintain various
capitalist or ruling class interests. Pluralist theorists see law as the outcome
of conflict and compromise between a diversity of groups fighting for power.
These and other theoretical positions do not adequately account for the fact
that law is also actively constituted through social relations and modes of
discourse, including non-state normative orders. To date, there has been litte
systematic research focussing on how legal and social norms influence each
other. This project will address this issue through studying the construction of
the Uniform Employment Termination Act. The project is designed to examine the
ways that the philosophy and assumptions of private justice, in the form of
industrial discipline and discharge rules and procedures, enter into the
emergence and construction of law. Qualitative research methods will include
ethnographic fieldwork, interviews with and observations of the Uniform Law
Commissioners drafting committee, and analyses of all related documents used in
drafting the law. This study provides a unique opportunity to examine the
process of lawmaking as it occurs, rather than retrospectively reconstructing
that process. The results should have important implications for the way other
non-state social control forms, such as professional discipline, agency
regulation, private tribunals, and commissions of inquiry might similarly
penetrate the formation of other state law. Thus, the research has important
theoretical and practical implications. In so far as it illuminates how private
justice connects to state law, it will help inform policy considerations when
considering the impact of legal and social change.