* 8921744
* Studies of Highly Reactive Molecules and Intermediates
* MPS,CHE
* 01/15/1990,06/30/1995
* Scott Rychnovsky, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* George M. Rubottom
* 06/30/1995
* USD 1,000,459.00

The Organic Synthesis Program will support the continuation of the research of
Dr. Paul G. Gassman. Dr. Gassman will continue his productive studies on highly
strained systems and initiate work on the synthesis of ligands for transition
metals. These will be used to change the apparent oxidation state of the metal.
This increased control of the oxidation state will facilitate the synthesis of
the increasingly complex materials needed by our economy. Studies in the area of
organometallic chemistry will be centered on the use of X-ray photoelectron
spectroscopy (XPS) to understand the electronic influence of ligands on
complexed transition metals. New ligands will be prepared which are either more
electron withdrawing or electron donating than currently available ligands. It
is planned to prepare and study the properties of complexes which can serve as
either oxidants or reductants as a function of the attached ligands. Work will
continue on studies of trans-bicycloın.1.0!alkanes, strained paracyclophanes,
and electron transfer from strained rings. New synthetic applications of
electrochemical reductions will be explored. Improved excited state oxidants
will be sought in an approach to the development of synthetically useful
procedures for anti-Markovnikov addition of nucleophiles to simple olefins.
Studies of radicals, anion radicals, cation radicals and cations will be carried
out.