* 8921694
* "Structural and Performance Limitations of Ultra-Submicron  Gate-length Modulation-Doped FET's Based on InP Substrate   for MM-Wave Amplification"
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/1990,12/31/1992
* Mukunda Das, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Brian J. Clifton
* 12/31/1992
* USD 200,000.00

This research proposal is concerned with the design, realization, and
characterization of 100 nm and 150 nm gate-length modulation doped field-effect
transistors (MODFET's) based on lattice mateched A1InAs/InGaAs heterostructure
on InP substrate, and intended for low- noise and high-gain signal amplification
above 100GHz. The research efforts at Penn State will involve device structural
design and Electrical characterization of the completed test device. The task of
device fabrication will be undertaken by G.E. electronics Laboratory, Syracuse,
NY, and the test samples will be made available to the PI for studies at no
additional cost to NSF. The research will examine the electronic transport
properties of the lattice matched and pseudomorphic InGaAs, and the Schottky
barrier and buffer layer isolation quality of the A1InAs heterostructure layers
in the MODFET structure. The characterization efforts will be organized in four
different task areas involving d.c., small-signal, noise, and s-parameter
measurements. These task areas will examine the key issues of device I-V and
thermal stability, leakage current, breakdownvoltage, carrier concentration and
mobility, parasitic equivalent network elements, low frequency 1/f type and g-r
noise sources, HF intrinsic device noise sources, and extraction of the
fundamental transit delay and charging time constant associated with the
velocity saturated carrier transport in MODFET's. The proposed device structure
is expected to provide low-noise (1dB) and high gain (8dB) amplification at 100
GHz satisfying the future DoD and NSA communication and radar system
requirements.