* 8921385
* Collaborative Research on the Spatial Analysis of International Conflict and Cooperation
* NONE,NONE
* 02/15/1990,07/31/1992
* Luc Anselin, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Thomas J. Baerwald
* 07/31/1992
* USD 68,729.00

Recent studies of international relationships among nations have focused on
political aspects of interactions. This emphasis has produced a rich set of new
insights, but it has not been complemented by an equally productive set of
inquiries into the geographic dimensions of international conflict and
cooperation. Essentially unanswered have been a number of crucial questions,
such as How does the geographic context within which nations operate affect
their relationships?, To what extent do spatial attributes within nations affect
their relationships with other nations?, and How do the relative similarities
and differences among nations affect bilateral relationships and the collective
interactions of groups of nations within regions? This collaborative research
project will address these and related questions by applying new methods of
spatial analysis to a comprehensive database containing information about 120
nations between 1948 and 1988. Matrix-associative methods will be used to
develop dynamic measures of state attributes, spatial heterogeneity, and spatial
dependence; these measures will form the basis of a general model of post-World
War II international behavior. The model will be validated through analysis of
the development of regional alliances, identification of "shatterbelt" areas of
high international tension, examination of different forms of economic
interdependence, and investigation of regions of intense security-related
activity. This project will benefit geographers, political scientists, and other
scientists interested in the complex processes of international relationships in
two ways. Conceptual understandings will be enhanced because the research will
demonstrate the integral and complementary nature of spatial analysis as a means
of investigating conflict and cooperation among nations. The project's empirical
contribution will also be significant, because it will exhibit and expand the
use of a rich new database. The implications of both types of contributions for
persons directly involved in the development of international policies also will
be significant.