* 8921515
* US-UK Cooperative Science: Tectonostratigraphic Terrane Linkages in the Avalonian-Cadomian Belt
* NONE,NONE
* 04/15/1990,09/30/1991
* R. Damian Nance, Ohio University
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 09/30/1991
* USD 8,250.00

This award will support collaborative research between Dr. R. Damian Nance, Ohio
University and Dr. Robin Strachan, Department of Geology, Oxford Polytechnic
Institute, Oxford, England. The objective of the project is an examination and
evaluation of the nature and extent of terrane linkages between the Late
Precambrian Avalonian Belt of the Northern Appalachians and the
tectonostratigraphically similar Cadomian Belt of Britain and France. The Avalon
terrane forms a distinctive but enigmatic belt of rocks characterized by Late
Precambrian volcanic sedimentary successions and co-genetic granitoid plutons,
overlain by a Lower Paleozoic shallow-marine overstep sequence bearing Atlantic-
realm fauna. The presence of this fauna links the Avalon terrane to Europe
rather than to North America during the Early Paleozoic period and has
encouraged correlation with the Late Precambrian rocks of Britain's Midland
Platform and the Armorican Massif of France. Recent studies by Dr. Nance suggest
that the Avalonian-Cadomian Belt represents a single tectonic system whose
evolution may relate to the breakup of a late Precambrian supercontinent. In
this joint project, Dr. Nance proposes to combine his expertise in Avalonian
tectonostratigraphy with the complementary tectonic skills of Dr. Strachan and
his colleagues of the Cadomian Research Group at Oxford Polytechnic Institute in
order to undertake a detailed examination of terrane linkages within the
Avalonian Cadomian Belt, focusing in particular on the nature and kinematic
history of its terrane boundaries. The results of this survey will contribute to
a greater under- standing of the tectonic evolution of the Avalonian-Cadomian
Belt.