* 8921251
* Incentives in a Research Environment: Optimal Rules for     Allocating Research Funds
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/1991,01/31/1995
* Edward Lazear, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 01/31/1995
* USD 112,304.00

Funding agencies, both private and governmental, have recognized the need to
subsidize basic research. The product of this research is then in the public
domain and its use is unrestricted. The major problem with this approach is that
the replacement of market forces with committee decision making means that the
normal guidance that market forces provide, however imperfect in this context,
are unavailable. Substitute criteria must be established by which grants can be
made. This project examines rigorously, using economic theory and empirical
analysis, the incentive effects of various award schemes and their economic
efficiency. The subsidization of research by government agencies poses problems
not unlike those encountered by firms trying to motivate workers. This project
starts with theories of the incentive aspects of industrial relations which
relate to whether workers should be paid on input or output, which discuss how
often workers should be evaluated, and which are concerned with last period
problems and motivating older workers. These are applied to analyze the
incentive aspects of research funding criteria. The following are representative
of the types of important questions addressed by this project: 1. How much
weight should be placed on past performance versus the quality of the current
proposal? 2. How long a period should be funded without review? 3. At what stage
in the project should the funding review occur? 4. Should the criteria be
experience adjusted so that researchers compete only with cohorts? 5. How should
cost affect the probability of receiving an award? 6. Should many small awards
be granted or is it better to give a few large ones? 7. Who should judge the
proposals, peers or professional administrators? The analysis has implications
for other areas as well. For example, managers must assign projects to workers.
Should they use past performance as the main guide or the ex ante quality of a
worker's idea for performing the task? In politics, incumbency is a major
advantage. Is this efficient and, if so, under what circumstances? What are the
incentive effects of blind journal refereeing?