* 8921273
* Suburbanization Patterns of Racial and Ethnic Groups
* SBE,SES
* 01/15/1990,12/31/1992
* Richard Alba, SUNY at Albany
* Continuing Grant
* Paige Smith
* 12/31/1992
* USD 79,954.00

The United States continues to be a multiracial and multiethnic society,
standing out among industrial societies in the magnitude of continuing waves of
immigration and in the depth of concern over social relations among ethnic and
racial groups. In a pattern at variance with the past, racial and ethnic
minorities are increasingly found in the suburbs of metropolitan areas, rather
than their central cities. This project addresses the significance of this trend
by studying the suburbanization patterns for a wide range of racial/ethnic
groups in five major metropolitan areas. The study goes well beyond past
research on suburbanization by focusing on differences among the suburban places
to which different groups gain access. It also examines differences within major
racial/ethnic categories (for instance, between the Chinese and Japanese among
Asians). The analysis will investigate how minority-group members attain
residence in places with characteristics that affect positively the quality of
life and life chances of their residents. The investigators will estimate models
that view locational outcomes as a function of the socioeconomic, assimilation,
and life-cycle characteristics of individuals, and will test whether these
models vary by ethnic group and across metropolitan areas. Further, the
investigators will analyze the ability of individuals to "convert" their
socioeconomic and assimilation characteristics into favorable residenti
allocations.