* 8921277
* Enforcement and Compliance Decisions under OSHA             and EPA Regulation
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1990,12/31/1992
* Wayne Gray, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Martin
* 12/31/1992
* USD 48,142.00

Over the past several years, there have been numerous ethnographic or
qualitative case studies of regulatory enforcement processes. Although helpful,
such studies have not provided systematic, empirically-grounded analyses of the
relationship between regulatory enforcement practices and compliance. Moreover,
there are few wide-ranging quantitative studies indicating how measurable
political and economic variables affect enforcement techniques and compliance
levels. This study will amass valuable data relevant to these issues and provide
a useful mapping of statistical relationships among relevant factors. The
project will examine the compliance and enforcement decisions related to four
regulatory programs in two regulatory agencies: regulation of worker health and
worker safety by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration, and
regulation of water pollution and air pollution by the Environmental Protection
Agency. Two data sets of economic and regulatory variables will be created
covering the period from 1973 to 1986. The first dataset will contain 450
industries, covering the manufacturing sector. The second dataset will contain
company and plant-level data for three manufacturing industries. The analysis
will allow for simultaneous estimation of the agency's decision of how to
allocate its enforcement across firms and the firm's decision of whether or not
to comply with the agency's regulations. Both decisions will depend on observed
economic, political, and technological factors. The results of this research
should provide a significant contribution to our understanding of the
interaction between enforcement activities of regulators and compliance
decisions of the firms they regulate. Beyond contributing to theory on the
behavior and impact of regulatory agencies and legal compliance, the results may
indicate ways in which agencies can improve the efficiency of their enforcement
strategies, gaining greater compliance given their available resources, and,
ultimately, improving productivity. In addition, the databases to be prepared
will be a valuable tool for further research projects on similar topics.