* 8921529
* Constituency Democracy in the Progressive Era: Referenda and House Roll Call Votes
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/1990,08/31/1992
* Eileen McDonagh, Radcliffe College
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli Jr.
* 08/31/1992
* USD 86,488.00

In this investigation the researcher assesses how the modern, American
democratic state is founded at the beginning of the twentieth century on the
basis of legislative policies initiated at the state and federal levels of
government. Grass-root referenda votes are collected and used as a measure of
constituency issue positions and are examined in relation to subsequent roll
call voting by House members on the same or similar issues. The analysis of a
wide range of issues, including welfare, government management, and civil rights
policies, illustrates that House members' responses to the cues of their
constituents, mediated by partisan competition and conflict, do have the effect
of transferring progressive social policies first proposed and implemented at
the state-level to that of the federal-level. While many view the New Deal as
the beginning of the modern era, this research reveals how the rich multitude of
state-level legislation considered in the earlier part of this century provides
crucial precedents for modern, federal policy programs. Not only do we gain a
better understanding of how Congress operates in these decades, but the
centrality of legislative and representative processes for the establishment of
progressive policies is evident, balancing the more usual attention directed to
the role of courts and parties in this time period. In addition to integrating a
relatively neglected time period, the Progressive Era, into the study of
Congress and development of our modern state, this project also introduces a new
method for studying policy congruence in general between the state and federal
levels by means of grass.root referenda votes. As a result of this research, the
applicability of using referenda votes in studies of contemporary congresses
will be apparent, thereby opening up new perspectives for investigating policy
connections between state and federal levels.