* 8922053
* The Effects of Aging-In-Place on the Housing Quality of the U.S. Elderly
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/1990,04/30/1993
* Stephen Golant, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 04/30/1993
* USD 120,343.00

An extremely large cohort of the American population is moving into post-
retirement stages of the life cycle. This growth in the number of elderly people
has received considerable attention as scholars have addressed their current and
future social and economic needs, but relatively little scientific study has
been focused on the form and location of housing that will accommodate them. Of
special significance is the fact that a large segment of this group has occupied
the same dwelling units for very long periods, raising families and going
through "empty-nester" periods while household heads were still employed. The
impacts of the transition of this group into the different lifestyles and
economic conditions of retirement are not well understood, however. Are elderly
persons who continue to occupy their long-term residences more likely to renew
their temporal and financial investments in housing, thereby improving the
quality of dwellings and neighborhoods, or will they become more lax in their
maintenance and improvement efforts, thereby contributing to relative decline in
the quality of housing? This project will address this question by examining
data from the Annual Housing Survey, statistically seeking to determine (1) if a
linear relationship exists between the length of time that a household has
occupied a dwelling and housing quality, (2) the direct and indirect influences
of length of residence on housing quality when controlling for differences in
the characteristics of households and dwellings, (3) the magnitudes and
locations of elderly residents occupying poor-quality housing, and (4) how
patterns of housing for the elderly vary among different metropolitan areas. In
addition to identifying these relationships, this project will adapt the LISREL
VII model to analyze direct and indirect causal linkages between demographic and
housing factors. This project will provide valuable insights into the causes and
consequences of long-term occupation of residences by the elderly, thereby
enhancing basic scientific understandings of this important topic. The
conclusions of this research also will be very useful to analysts and decision
makers in the private and public sectors as they seek to determine what problems
may intensify in future years as the nation's elderly population continues to
expand.