* 8922199
* Late Wisconsin (Late Foxe) Glacial Extent in Pangnirtung    Fjord-Cumberland Sound Area, Baffin Island, Canada
* O/D,OPP
* 05/15/1990,10/31/1993
* P.Thompson Davis, Bentley University
* Continuing Grant
* Julie Palais
* 10/31/1993
* USD 128,168.00

Late Wisconsin ice extent on Baffin Island has important global implications for
ice sheet reconstruction, sea level change, and climate modeling of the late
Pleistocene. The purpose of this project is to test two hypotheses that ice
either: 1) flowed down Pangnirtung Fjord from a grounded position on the floor
of Cumberland Sound, or 2) flowed up the Pangnirtung Fjord from a grounded
position on the floor of the Cumberland Sound. In both scenarios, ice extended
far beyond previously mapped late Wisconsin margins. Field work will focus on
detailed mapping and accurate surveying of glacial abrasion limits and
depositional features. In particular, the Duval moraines will be mapped in
detail to determine the direction and age of the last ice flow in the area.
Analytical work will involve analysis of soils, including hornblende etching, to
determine relative ages. Sediment cores from strategically located lakes will be
retrieved to provide minimum-limiting radiocarbon ages for glacial erosional
limits and depositional features. Pollen analysis of lacustrine sediments will
be used to support the above dating techniques. Finally, ice profiles will be
reconstructed in an attempt to evaluate ice volume and dynamics in the
Pangnirtung area during the late Wisconsin.