* 8922461
* U.S.-Swedish Cooperative Research:  The Role of Alloy       Interfacial Layers on Passivity
* O/D,OISE
* 02/01/1990,01/31/1994
* Clive Clayton, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 01/31/1994
* USD 17,650.00

This award will support collaborative research in metallurgy between Dr. Clive
Clayton, State University of New York at Stony Brook and Professor Ingemar
Olefjord, Department of Engineering Metals, Chalmers University of Technology,
Gothenburg, Sweden. In previous studies carried out by these investigators, it
has been observed that hte composition of the alloy surface layers interfacing
the passive film is quite different from the bulk composition. The aim of the
proposed collaboration is to investigate what contribution, if any, the surface
modified allow plays in passivity. They propose to conduct electrochemical and
surface analytical studies on thin alloy films fabricated to simulate the
interfacial layers observed on a series of stainless steels. This study will
also evaluate the potential of this approach to the design of new highly
corrosion resistant alloys and protective coatings. Dr. Clayton and Professor
Oleford are two of the foremost surface analysts working on the complex topic of
passivity research and have made major contributions in this field. In addition,
Sweden, because of its stainless steel manufacturing tradition, is particularly
strong in new stainless steel research. The results of this research may lead to
an improved fundamental understanding of the processes that cause passive
behavior in alloys.