* 8922221
* Formal and Informal Mobility in Internal Labor Markets
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/1990,01/31/1993
* Brian Mittman, Rand Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 01/31/1993
* USD 85,000.00

Recent research on social inequality has focused attention on the role played by
organizational promotion policies in shaping career and income histories. While
much of this work assumes that promotion policies exert a significant influence
on these histories, little evidence exists to support this assumption. Thus,
this study addresses the structure of career mobility by looking at the
characteristics of jobs and workers that permit workers to move up job ladders
within a sample of organizations. Also, it examines the extent to which patterns
are guided by formal organizational policies. The study looks at the ways in
which social inequality is generated by career movements that are consistent or
inconsistent with organizational policies. The Principal Investigator draws on
the California State Civil Service data base to test various hypotheses about
the nature of career dynamics. The data base provides comprehensive information
on formal promotion policies and related Civil Service rules and procedures and
includes detailed personnel records describing the career histories of several
thousand civil servants during the period 1974 to 1985. The findings from this
study should contribute to our understanding of the causes and nature of social
inequality. The results will also provide a means by which to better understand
the effects of Affirmative Action programs and other interventions aimed at
improving opportunities by modifying promotion policies.