* 8922482
* US-UK Cooperative Science:  Metastability in the Incommen-  surate Charge Density Wave Material
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1990,05/31/1991
* Stephen Nagler, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 05/31/1991
* USD 15,620.00

This award will support collaborative research in materials between Dr. Stephen
Nagler, University of Florida and Professor Roger Cowley, Department of Physics,
University of Oxford. The objective of the project is an investigation of
metastable effects associated with incommensurate charge density waves in
potassium blue bronzes. Metastability associated with phase transitions is a
topic of broad current interest in statistical physics. The many related
problems include ordering kinetics near first order phase transitions, and
random field systems. Potassium blue bronze is a particularly interesting
material, exhibiting non-linear conductivity, slow structural changes in
response to applied fields, and defect induced irreversibility. The proposed
project is an investigation of potassium blue bronze, using time-resolved-x-ray
scattering. Questions to be addressed include the possible structural origins of
unusual time dependent resistivities in irradiated potassium blue bronze, and
the relationship of defects to the structural response to an applied electric
field. Two principal experiments will be performed. In the first experiment the
response of the system to an applied field at low temperatures will be examined
in samples with a wide range of induced effects. In the second experiment, the
same samples will be utilized to examine the possibility that the 90 K
hysteresis in the resistivity is coupled to a non-equilibrium wave- vector.
Measurements on a series of sample with different levels of defects induced by
irradiation should provide much important information on the true role of
defects and pinning in the field induced disordered state. This project will
benefit from the complementary expertise of the two investigators. Dr. Nagler
has extensive experience in the areas of phase transition, low dimensional non-
linear and non-equilibrium systems studies by x-ray and neutron scattering. Dr.
Cowley's background is in the application of neutron and x-ray scattering to the
study of condensed matter, especially phase transitions.