* 8922470
* US-Sweden Cooperative Research:  Building and Solving a     Bilevel Programming Transportation Model in a Mixed EconomicSystem
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/1990,12/31/1993
* Tschangho Kim, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 12/31/1993
* USD 15,150.00

This award will support collaborative research in urban and regional planning
between Dr. John Kim, University of Illinois at Urbana and Dr. Lars Lundqvist,
Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden. The proposed research will
address specific issues in building and applying a land-use transportation
planning model appropriate for Sweden, where a strong mixed economic system
prevails. The usual view in a mixed economy is that some goods and services are
produced privately, and some, such as transportation, are produced publicly.
Most existing transportation development planning models designed to shed light
on development policy in mixed economic systems miss this essential normative
issue, i.e., the interaction between the private and the public sectors. Because
of its mixed economy, Sweden provides an ideal environment for testing the
applicability of a transportation model with explicit provisions of public-
private interaction. Provisions for interaction between the public and private
sectors in planning models will shed light on the important issues necessary for
planning investment strategies. Private institutions, such as households and
entrepreneurs, produce and consume goods and services in pursuing their
parochial interests, while the public sector in a typical mixed economic system
attempts to broaden public interests. The importance of modelling public-private
interaction becomes particularly apparent when one deals with national issues,
such as investment priority for transportation development. The objectives of
the proposed project include evaluating how a land-use transportation planning
model with specific public-private policy issues, such as finding the optimum
investment amounts and setting investment priorities for providing
infrastructure in mixed economic systems, using Sweden as a case study site.
Results of this study will contribute to the fields of transportation, land use
and regional science by building a normative theory of how resources should be
allocated in mixed economic systems and how transportation and land resources
should be allocated efficiently.