* 8922921
* U.S.-New Zealand Cooperative Research:  Soil Reinforcement  by Vegetation Roots
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/1991,03/31/1993
* Tien Wu, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Alan Milsap
* 03/31/1993
* USD 9,614.00

This award will support collaborative research between Dr. Tien Wu of Ohio State
University and Dr. A. Watson of the New Zealand Forest Research Institute. The
principle objective of the project is to establish realistic models of root
geometry and soil-root interaction that can be used in analyses and evaluation
of vegetation roots as soil reinforcement for civil engineering construction
projects. Data collected by the New Zealand Forest Research Institute will be
used as the basis for the model. With this data, a two-dimensional soil- root
interaction model will be extended into three dimensions. In-situ tests on root
systems of Pinus radiata will be performed in New Zealand, and the results used
to verify the model. The stochastic nature of root geometry and soil-root
interaction will be accounted for in the model. The mean and variance of root
and soil properties, generated by the model, will be used to evaluate the mean
and variance of the estimated performance of the system in soil reinforcement.
The project represents excellent collaboration in combining the models developed
by Wu with the existing data base and expertise in field studies available at
the New Zealand Forest Research Institute. This is important fundamental work in
advancing soil-root interaction models, as well as havingpotential for
contributing to the solution of slope stability problems of major concern in
such civil engineering projects as watershed management and land use planning.