* 8922157
* RUI:  Systematic and Biological Studies of Balansieae       (Ascomycetes)
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1990,02/28/1994
* James White, Auburn University at Montgomery
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 02/28/1994
* USD 111,765.00

Several fungi of the ascomycete family Clavicipitaceae have been implicated as
causative agents in the poisoning of grazing animals, where the fungi live
within the tissues of grass plants and produce alkaloids toxic to animals but
not to the plant. Our knowledge of these fungi and of their growth on and within
various host plants is meager, however. Drs. James White and Gareth Morgan-Jones
of Auburn University are studying North American members of this group of fungi,
to improve delimitation of the species, identify normal host plants, analyze the
mode of infection by the fungus, and determine the life cycles of the fungus
through its various spore-producing stages. New characters from biochemical
analyses of fungal pigments and from electrophoresis of fungal proteins are
being sought, to add to traditional morphological characters in order to
circumscribe a meaningful species concept for this group of fungi. Their
classification is complicated by the fact that asexual, spore-forming stages,
which are commonly collected in nature, have their own system of scientific
names, independent of the sexually reproducing forms, which are often
transitory, poorly collected, and poorly known. Biochemical features shared in
common will help in linking the two stages of the life cycle, and make possible
the comparison of related species. In turn, such insight will help determine
whether taxonomically related fungi infect related groups of host plants or
whether disparate fungal groups have evolved the ability to live inside host
grasses.