* 8922022
* Autonomy and Power in the Neurosciences
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1990,02/28/1995
* Susan Cozzens, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing grant
* Rachelle D. Hollander
* 02/28/1995
* USD 150,900.00

Ethics and Values Studies in Science, Technology and Society supports research
that examines the intellectual and value contexts that govern the development
and use of science and technology. Through case studies in the neurosciences,
set against a background of quantitative information, this project will explore
the relationship between autonomy and power in the sciences. The research asks,
"How have the neurosciences managed to anchor themselves organizationally in the
world of science? How much autonomy have they achieved, and on what basis?" It
will explore the utility of the concepts of enrollment, trust, and legitimation
in accounting for the rapid institutional expansion of the neurosciences during
the period 1965-1985. This development can be seen as a movement, a broad, loose
coalition of researchers from a number of areas that has become increasingly
anchored in the organizations where science finds its resources -- professional
societies, designated funding programs, institutes and departments. The research
-- based on comparative case studies of the development of professional
societies, government funding programs, and successful and unsuccessful
departments -- will both document the evolution of the field and identify
political, economic and social factors contributing to that emergence. It will
also contribute to our understanding and assessment of theory underlying the
political sociology of science. Outcomes will include journal articles,
scholarly monographs or chapters, and presentations at professional society
meetings and in government agencies that support neuroscience research.
Questions of how goals get set and legitimated in the sciences are central to
research in science, technology and society studies. A highly qualified young
investigator at an appropriate institution proposes to address this question, by
studying developments in a fast moving and intrinsically interesting scientific
field. The research promises to contribute to our understanding of its
development and of scientific progress more broadly. The research methods are
appropriate; results are likely to be accessible and significant to a broad
audience. Support is highly recommended.