* 8922384
* Mathematical Sciences: Stability of Solutions of Nonlinear P.D.E.
* NONE,NONE
* 05/15/1990,10/31/1992
* Robert Gardner, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 10/31/1992
* USD 48,136.00

The primary concern of this mathematical research is the asymptotic stability of
solutions of nonlinear partial differential equations. Recently developed
geometric and topological tools will be exploited in the analysis of the
spectrum of differential operators. The central idea is that of linearizing
about a distinguished solution such as a steady state, a travelling wave or a
radially symmetric solution. Such solutions play a central role in formulating a
qualitative theory in that they can be thought of as asymptotic states for an
associated evolution problem. In this regard it is of fundamental importance to
develop methods for assessing their stability. This work based on abstract
semigroup theory, uses information about the spectrum of an operator, obtained
by linearizing about the solution in question, to predict its stability or
instability. The particular obstacle to be overcome in any particular
application is in accumulating sufficiently accurate estimates for the location
and multiplicity of the potentially unstable eigenvalues of the operator. The
stability analysis of several particular systems will be initiated. Applications
to be considered are the stability of travelling wave solutions of higher order
phase field models, and the stability of shock wave profiles on nonlinear
conservation laws. The latter problem raises new issues, namely the role played
by the continuous spectrum, but it is focused mainly on circumventing, rather
than understanding it. Much of this work derives from concrete problems in the
study of viscous profiles of shocks arising in isentropic gas dynamics and
nonadiabatic tubular reactors.