* 8922841
* A U.S.-New Zealand Collaborative Study of the Infrared      Properties of Crystals
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/1991,08/31/1995
* Albert Sievers, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Milsap
* 08/31/1995
* USD 8,500.00

This award supports a visit by Dr. A.J. Sievers of the Laboratory of Atomic
Physics &amp; Materials Science Center of Cornell University to the University
of Canterbury in Christchurch, New Zealand, to work with Dr. J.A. Campbell on a
study of the infrared properties of glassy crystals. Glass crystals represent a
new materials system in which the universal character of glass behavior in
solids can be probed. Although X-ray diffraction shows that crystal retains its
long range order in the glassy state, low temperature thermodynamic measurements
show that an additional low energy spectrum appears identical to that found in
glasses. Dr. Campbell proposes to grow and characterize glassy
Ba(1-x)La(x)F(2+x) crystals where x is varied from 0.001 to 0.46 so that the
glass parameter is altered in a systematic manner. Dr. Sievers proposes to carry
out persistent IR spectral hole burning measurements on these systems to compare
the concentration of low lying nonequilibrium states to the concentration of
thermodynamic glassy states. This proposed application of the persistent IR
spectral hole burning technique will provide a new methodology for investigating
and quantifying the physical characteristics of the low lying states in glasses.
These experiments may also lead to a new understanding of processes influencing
optical materials applications such as the relaxation behavior of optical
excitations in laser glasses and the permanence of high density optical storage
in glassy hosts.