* 8922316
* Issues in Local Chemical Process Optimization
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/1990,05/31/1994
* Angelo Lucia, Clarkson University
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Burka
* 05/31/1994
* USD 122,166.00

Theoretically sound and reasonably reliable and efficient computer tools for
finding local solutions to small chemical process optimization problems are
currently available. The selection of a suitable method is based on the problem
at hand, how it is formulated, the imposed constraints, etc. Successive
quadratic programming (SQP) is a good iterative method for solving small
nonlinearly constrained optimization problems. For large problems, use of SQP
requires either decomposition or clever exploitation of the problem structure.
In this project, the PI plans to develop generalizable techniques for using SQP
methods to solve large and small chemical process optimization problems with
nonlinear constraints (an example of such problems are separation units such as
distillation columns). The research will be divided into the following areas:
(1) The development of a new method for quadratic programming (QP) based on an
active set strategy and a symmetric, indefinite factorization. (2) The
development of asymmetric trust region methods for improving the reliability of
Newton-like methods. (3) The comparative evaluation of current methods for
approximating the Hessian matrix of the Lagrangian function, the development of
any new quasi-Newton methods for use in hybrid methods, and a study of the
impact of indefinite projected Hessian matrices. (4) The study of the
feasibility of automatically generating reliable initial estimates of the
unknown variables and multipliers using generic problem information, physical
insight, short cut techniques, analysis and/or simulation tools. (5) The
numerical implementation and thorough testing of above concepts on a wide
variety of relevant small and large- scale chemical process optimization
problems.