* 8922136
* US-Federal Republic of Germany Cooperative Research:  New   Models of the Inner Structure, Mantle Dynamics and Thermal  Evolution of Mars
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1990,07/31/1993
* Gerald Schubert, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 07/31/1993
* USD 14,420.00

This award supports Dr. Gerald Schubert of UCLA to collaborate in astronomy
research with Dr. Tilman Spohn of the Institute of Planetology of the University
of Muenster, Federal Republic of Germany. They are working to develop new models
of the inner structure, mantle dynamics and the thermal and chemical evolution
of Mars. Dr. Spohn has developed a program for the computation of self-
consistent planetary models, which include the pressure dependence of the
thermal expansion coefficient. Dr. Schubert has a three- dimensional convection
program applicable to Mars and access to Cray computers. Recent and planned
missions of the USA and USSR have moved Mars to the center of interest in
planetology. Current models of Mars are almost ten years old and no longer
reflect today's knowledge of the thermodynamics and high pressure physics of
terrestrial planetary material, the age of the Martian crust and core, and
tectonics. Preliminary calculations by the collaborators suggest significant
revisions to previous models. The models they are developing should be of
relevance to questions concerning the formation of Mars and its evolution, the
interpretation of magnetic field data from future missions to Mars, and
cosmogonic and cosmochemical considerations of the structure and evolution of
the solar system.