* 8922512
* Nanometer Tunneling and Coherent Wave Quantum Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/1990,06/30/1994
* Richard Higgins, Georgia Tech Research Corporation - GA Tech Research Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Brian J. Clifton
* 06/30/1994
* USD 205,000.00

This work represents a coordinated study of nanometer ballistic and quantum wave
devices grown, fabricated, and tested using the facilities available to us at
the Georgia Tech Microelectronics Research Center. Energy Loss and Other
Scattering Mechanisms in Tunneling Structures Our group has recently identified
key inelastic and non-k-conserving tunneling events that comprise the valley
current. We are proceeding with the study of those valley current components
with carefully prepared Coulomb and inelastic scattering centers, to identify
mechanisms that limit the performance of two and three terminal tunneling and
coherent-wave devices. Charging in Quantum Wells We will measure the charge and
potential distribution in stable and bistable quantum well devices in order to
evaluate their potential as ultra-fast switches, oscillators, and microwave
amplifiers. A closely-associated project will separately model and measure the
dynamics of astable behavior in the same devices. Electron Wave Optics Device
Demonstration Project We will carry out transport and magnetotransport
experiments in order to demonstrate and perfect a predicted energy-selective
bandpass filter based on electron wave optic principles. These new device ideas
emulate optical and microwave device structure but at length scales a thousand
times smaller.