* 8922266
* Theoretical and Experimental Studies of Run-Off Estimation  Based on Remote Sensing, Award in Indian Currency
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1990,03/31/1994
* M Srinivas, Indian Institute of Technology Bombay
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 03/31/1994
* USD 100,965.00

Description: This proposal supports a collaborative project by Drs. H.W. Hiser
and T.N. Veziroglu of the University of Miami, Coral Gables, Florida and Drs.
M.G. Srinivas, and G.T. Marathe of the Indian Institute of Technology of Bombay,
India. They plan to conduct a theroetical and experimental study of water run-
off estimations using data developed from remote sensing systems. The reliablity
of a water estimation study depends on the accuracy of estimates of rainfall and
the loss of water before it joins a main stream. Surface-based digitized radar
systems and geostationary satellite systems have the capability to provide more
complete and accurate data. A watershed model will be developed using digitized
radar systems at the University of Miami and geostationary satellite data
obtained from NOAA as the rainfall data to the model. Raingage data available in
Florida will be used for ground truth of the remote-sensed rainfall data. The
results will be tested in India. Data will be obtained from the radar system at
Madras, India. Landsat data will be available form both U.S. and Indian
geostationary satellites. Scope: The study seeks to: develop an improved model
for estimating the run-off water by taking into account precipitation,
evapotranspiration and infiltration, as well as the location, land cover, land
form and drainage form, as function of time, through utilizing remote sensing
data; verify the model calculations against observational data gathered in
India; refine the model and apply it to selected regions in India. The
development of reliable watershed run-off model based on testing and research in
the two countries under vastly different conditions should produce a model of
wider applicability leading to more efficient and safer water run-off management
around the world. Correct estimation of rain water run-off is of importance to
the United States, which has the highest per capita water consumption, and
India, which has one of the largest, and high density, populations in the world.
Funding: This project is being supported under two grants INT 8905173 to
University of Miami: FY90 US$23,003 plus $8,235 in Indian currency FY91
US$24,276 plus $9,118 in Indian currency FY92 US$25,235 plus $10,000 in Indian
currency INT8922266 to Indian Institute of Technology, Bombay: FY90 $100,965 in
Indian currency