* 8922582
* Jury Reactions to Verdict Consequences:                     Blindfolding and Channeling
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/1990,01/31/1993
* Jonathan Casper, American Bar Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Shelton White
* 01/31/1993
* USD 116,220.00

Early research portrayed the jury as a decision-maker generally responsive to
the evidence presented at trial. More recently, critics of the jury have raised
a variety of questions about jury competence, voicing doubts about the ability
of juries to analyze complex data logically and to return verdicts based on
evidence rather than irrelevant considerations. Critics have advocated a variety
of methods of reining in and controlling the jury, from a complexity exception
to the constitutional right to a jury trial to less drastic measures like
specially qualified juries and rules that limit the information juries receive
and are permitted to use in making their decisions. This approach neglects the
fact that the jury is an energetic information-processor who contribute as well
as responds to trial evidence. The proposed research seeks to examine the
effects of recognizing the jury as an active decision-maker. It is planned to
study jury responses to the anticipated consequences of their decisions in three
contexts: automatic trebling of jury awards in anti- trust cases; sentencing
alternatives in capital cases; and insurance status of the defendant in personal
injury cases. In each case, the response of juries to traditional and new
methods of channeling and controlling their consideration of verdict
consequences will be examined. In a set of sub-experiments, the researchers will
also assess reactions to expert testimony, looking at the way juror expectations
about dangerousness and preferences for concrete versus abstract evidence affect
their decisions. While there is a large body of research on the jury, much of it
fails to go beyond studying the production of a verdict to examine the jury as
an active information processor trying to make sense out of its task. The
proposed research explores how recognizing the jury's expectations and treating
the jury as a collaborator helping to develop a meaningful basis for decision,
rather than as a passive recipient simply accepting information and instruction,
can help us better to understand its decisions. It promises to improve both our
conceptual framework and to answer policy-relevant questions about the rules and
procedures that ought to govern the use of juries.