* 8922547
* Developing a High-Resolution Stratigraphic Framework for andPaleoenvironmental Interpretations of Arctic Ocean SedimentsUsing Paleomagnetic and Rock-Magnetic Methods
* O/D,OPP
* 06/01/1990,11/30/1992
* John King, University of Rhode Island
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Campbell
* 11/30/1992
* USD 106,430.00

Biostratigraphy and oxygen-isotope stratigraphy are of more limit use for dating
Arctic Ocean sediments from other regions because of the relative scarcity of
suitable fossil material. The existing chronostratigraphic framework for these
sediments is based primarily on a combination of lithostratigraphy and
magnetostratigraphy and is of limited resolution. This award supports the
construction of a significantly higher-resolution chronostratigraphic framework
for abyssal Arctic Ocean sediments using an approach that is based primarily on
rock-magnetic and polarity stratigraphy. Data indicate that paleoenvironmental
changes in the Milankovitch frequency band are recorded by rock-magnetic
parameters. Therefore, a combination of rock-magnetic, paleomagnetic, and other
studies (i.e., lithostratigraphy, biostratigraphy, and isotope stratigraphy) can
provide both a high-resolution stratigraphic framework and a data base for
paleoenvironmental interferences. Preliminary results from several sediment
cores from different regions of the Arctic indicate that this approach is
feasible. Study material includes a total of 15 sediment cores collected from
the T-3 ice island (4 cores), from ice station Alpha by the Coordinated Eastern
Arctic Experiment (CESAR) expedition (3 cores), from the Eurasian Basin Ark IV
expedition (4 cores), and the Northwind Ridge (4 cores).