* 8922483
* US-UK Cooperative Research:  Study of Intercalated Low      Dimensional Solids by X-Ray Absorption ESR and NMR          Spectroscopy
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/1990,08/31/1994
* Juana Acrivos, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 08/31/1994
* USD 14,144.00

This award will support collaborative research in solid state chemistry between
Dr. Juana Acrivos, San Jose State Univesity and Dr. Y. W. Liang, Director, IRC
Laboratory for Supercon- ductivity, Cambridge University, U.K. The project
involves the investigation of the effects that the composition (as varied by
intercalation) has on the properties of low dimensional solids. The objective of
the research is to prepare new materials with special properties. The products
obtained by interca- lation reactions are usually materials containing the same
element with multiple valence; this property is evident in electron spin
resonance (ESR), nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR), X-ray absorption spectroscopy
(XAS) measurements and electronic and vibrational spectra. For superconductors,
the investigators have developed a new technique of rf power dissipation
measurements. The systems under investigation include metal in ammonia solutions
near the metal to insulator transition and compounds containing the same element
in at least two different valence states. Of great interest today are the low
dimensional superconducting solids containing the same element in multiple
valence states, e.g., intercalated layer materials where there is partial charge
transfer from the host to the adduct, one dimensional organic conductors and
ceramic high temperature superconductors. All these materials are important in
the elucidation of the role that structure plays on oxidation-reduction
mechanisms. These materials are used for developing high duty batteries,
catalysts, solid lubricants and new types of conductors. The project will
benefit from the complementary expertise of the two investigators and well as
their past history of fruitful collaboration. Dr. Acrivos is considered one of
the world leaders in research on the chemistry and electronic properties of low-
dimensional solids.