* 8922155
* Investigation of Superconducting Quasiparticle Mixers for   Astronomical Receivers
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/1990,01/31/1994
* Robert Mattauch, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Wayne Van Citters
* 01/31/1994
* USD 233,400.00

Receivers based upon the superconductor-insulator-superconductor (SIS)
quasiparticle tunnel junction mixer have now surpassed conventional Schottky-
diode receivers in sensitivity, and are having an immediate impact on
millimeter-wavelength astronomy. Even so, much further research is needed before
this technology can reach its full potential. Therefore, an extensive
experimental study of SIS junctions as millimeter-and submillimeter-wave
detectors will be undertaken better analytical and intuitive understanding of
SIS mixers and related phenomena, relying on the quantum theory of mixing, with
special attention to noise phenomena, optimum mixer design parameters, tuning
structures, will be sort, as will the appropriate capacitance for SIS junctions.
Investigation of less widely accepted detection schemes, such as SIN mixers,
subharmonic pumping, and SIS direct detection will be Experimentally studied.
The Nb/AlO/Nb juctions made in laboratory, which have extraordinarily low
leakage currents, will be utilized in this work. These junctions will be made
available to the radio astronomy community for SIS receiver devleopment. This
investigation should greatly contribute to the design and ultimate sensitivity
of practical SIS receivers; and may lead to the development of other detectors
for millimeter and submillimeter wavelength astronomy.