* 8922067
* Photochemistry of Metal Complexes
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/1990,03/31/1994
* Harry Gray, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Margaret A. Cavanaugh
* 03/31/1994
* USD 430,000.00

In this project in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Program of
the Chemistry Division, Dr. Harry B. Gray of California Institute of Technology
will conduct systematic studies on long-range electron transfer between an
iridium core and pyridinium acceptors connected to the core by rigid spacers.
The spacers will be built from both saturated and unsaturated carbon units. The
work is expected to yield fundamental information that will be helpful in
developing molecular approaches to solar energy conversion and information
storage. Extensive measurements of electron transfer rates through various rigid
spacers will enable the relationships betweenelectronic coupling and spacer
length and electronic structure to be determined. The iridium core consists of
an Iridium (I) dimer, which serves as the electron donor. The acceptors are
N-alkylpyridinium groups bound to phosphinite ligands in the molecule selected
for study. The iridium atoms are bridged by 3,5-dimethylpyrazolyl and are also
bound to carbonyl ligands. This molecule contains a pronounced inverted region
so that singlet and triplet metal to ligand electron transfer and thermal ligand
to metal back transfer can be investigated. The results will be of interest to
chemists in a variety of fields, including spectroscopy, surface catalysis, and
chacterization of metalloproteins.