* 8922397
* US-Western Europe Workshop on Stereochemical Dynamics; SantaCruz, California; November 16 - 21, 1990
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1990,03/31/1991
* David Parker, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 03/31/1991
* USD 19,850.00

This award supports a group of U.S. chemists to participate in a small
international workshop on dynamical stereochemistry in molecular collision
processes, to be held in Santa Cruz, California, between November 16 and 21,
1990. The meeting is co-organized by Dr. David Parker of the University of
California, Santa Cruz and Dr. Steven Stolte of the Chemistry Department, the
Free University of Amsterdam. The conference will bring together key researchers
and several young scientists in the full range of disciplines in this rapidly
expanding field on the forefront of chemical physics. They will produce a
thorough assessment of the present state of knowledge and delineate the
directions and level of effort needed for promising future research. Both
theoretical and experimental progress will be addressed. The range and tools of
dynamical stereochemists have expanded dramatically in the past few years and
now include direct probes of the transition state and real-time measurements of
product appearance and polarization. A major theme of the meeting will be vector
properties in molecular scattering processes. The aim of this research is to
understand how chemical and physical change occur via collisions; the approach
is to measure correlations between the various directional properties involved.
The program also includes discussion of two very new areas of stereochemical
research: femtochemistry and steric models of solution dynamics. The proceedings
of the conference will be published as a special issue of the Journal of
Physical Chemistry.