* 8922521
* US-Federal Republic of Germany Cooperative Research:        (Computer Science) Rapid prototyping for Distributed        Applications
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/1990,02/28/1994
* Dr Luqi, Naval Postgraduate School
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 02/28/1994
* USD 9,060.00

This award supports Professors Qi Lu and Berzins of the Naval Postgraduate
School, plus a postdoctoral associate, for research visits to the Institute for
Systems Engineering of the German National Research Center for Computer Science
(GMD), where they will collaborate primarily with Dr. Bernd J. Kraemer. The
objective of their proposed research collaboration is to extend the rapid
prototyping language PSDL, which applies to hard, real-time systems, to include
specification concepts and implementation techniques suitable for distributed
applications. Several major components of the plan will be development of a
semantic model supporting both prototyping and available verification techniques
for distributed programs, scheduling and resource allocation issues related to
prototype execution on multiple processors in the presence of resource
contention, and a two level approach to prototype execution which uses both
executable specifications and reusable software components. The project plan
relies on partly complementary skills in language and tool design,
experimentation, and theoretical analysis of the cooperating parties to reduce
the use of resources in solving problems of common concern. Some of the best
work in this area in the world is being done in Germany, and the U.S. senior
investigators are highly regarded. Finding effective and efficient methods for
determining and validating the requirements for a software system is an
important unsolved problem in software engineering. Prototyping is an iterative
development and evolution process that promises to produce reliable and user-
accepted software. The emergence of multiprocessor systems poses new challenges
to software specifica- tion, design, and validation. Correctness checking and
deadlock detection become crucial because the nondeterminism and infinite
behaviors commonly found in distributed programs make it impossible to test them
sufficiently. The research proposed here will make a solid contribution to these
problems.