* 8922494
* Interactions Between Thermal Shock Waves and the Free       Surface or Material Interface
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1990,12/31/1992
* Robert Tzou, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* mary chen
* 12/31/1992
* USD 85,444.00

This research develops the theory of thermal shock phenomena induced by a
rapidly moving heat source or a propagating crack tip, (a moving origin) for a
two- and three-dimensional situations. The emphases are placed on the effects of
a free surface and an interface between dissimilar materials. A thermal Mach
number (M) weighing the ratio of the speed of the moving origin (v) to the heat
propagation speed (C) in the solid is introduced to characterize the thermal
shock phenomena. Mathematically, M = v/C. In the subsonic range with M < 1,
detailed comparisons with the classical diffusion theory will be made to reveal
the limitations of the Fourier's law in describing the thermal response of the
material under high rates. At the transonic stage with M = 1 and in the
supersonic range with M > 1, the salient features to be studied include the
formation of the thermal shock waves, evolution of the heat affected zone versus
the thermally undisturbed zone in the physical domain, discontinuous variations
of the thermodynamic quantities across the shock surfaces, reflection and
refraction patterns of the thermal shock waves when penetrating through the
material interface, and the swinging phenomena for the variations of the
temperature level around the moving origin with the thermal Mach number in
transition from the subsonic to the supersonic ranges. The theory also has
direct application to thermoelastic displacement potentials and to thermal
stress fields. Both temperature- and flux-formulations will be examined for the
proposed phenomena, and an analytical method involving the hypo-variable
transformations will be employed throughout the analysis.