* 8922372
* US-UK Cooperative Research:  Integration of Robotics        Software Modeling with Computer-Based Design and Management Information Systems for Architecture and Construction
* O/D,OISE
* 07/15/1990,12/31/1991
* Boyd Paulson, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 12/31/1991
* USD 15,250.00

This award will support collaborative research in civil engineering and computer
science between Dr. Boyd Paulson, Stanford University and Drs. George Fleming
and Ken McCallum, University of Strathclyde, Scotland. The aim of the project is
to better integrate robotics in the construction industry with current computer-
aided design management information and production systems. Since the early
1980's, researchers have sought to apply robotics in the construction industry.
However, no unifying theory and few guidelines exist for defining and
communicating knowledge about designs and field operations in a way that can be
effectively utilized by such machines. Thus far, most of the "robots" in actual
field applications have either been tele- operated machines remotely controlled
by humans, or have been so narrowly focused and highly specialized that
automation could be implemented only via procedural programs designed to
anticipate all of the robots' limited requirements. In this joint project, the
investigators will aim to design, assemble and develop a theoretical framework
and experimental software for a general core of "intelligence" common to diverse
types of autonomous machines. The research will consist of several interrelated
projects to simulate the cognitive behavior of robot agents and to build a
knowledge environment simulator in which to test prototype agent software as it
evolves. The project will benefit from the complementary expertise of the US and
British investi- gators in computer-aided design. The results of this research
will provide computer-based concepts to help integrate construc- tion field
processes into the other phases of the project life- cycle, such as planning,
design and operations. 8922441 GOULD This award will support collaborative
research in biophysics between Dr. Robert Gould, Middlebury College and Dr. W.
Terence Coakley, University of Wales, Cardiff. The objective of the project is
to exploit the use of ultrasound to segregate and isolate large particles of
biological interest. When an ultrasonic standing wave field exists in a liquid-
filled chamber, suspended particles of a given type will tend to collect at
positions in the chamber about a half wavelength apart. The ultrasonic phenomena
of radiation pressure and acoustic streaming associated with a standing wave
field produce forces and torques on objects in suspension. Strengths of the
forces and torques on a given particle depend mainly on the size and shape of
the particle and on the acoustical properties of compressibility and density of
the particle, relative to the corresponding properties of the suspending liquid.
Thus particles differing in acoustic properties will tend to collect in
different positions in the chamber. Methods for collecting particles in
suspension with which most biologists are familiar, such as centrifugation,
dielectrophoresis and application of magnetic fields, tend to cause particles to
migrate to one or two sites. Ultrasound offers a unique capability to
concentrate particles at many discrete locations in the suspending phase. This
project aims to utilize the differences in the forces and torques on different
types of particles to diverge them, one type from another, so they may be
harvested and studied separately. The results of this research will provide
important information regarding the applicability of ultrasound to a variety of
biological systems. The project will benefit from the complementary expertise of
the two investigators, as well as their past history of fruitful collaboration.