* 8922664
* US-UK Cooperative Research:  Strategies For Assessment and  Control of Parasitological Water Quality
* O/D,OISE
* 07/15/1990,06/30/1992
* Joan Rose, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 06/30/1992
* USD 19,070.00

This award will support collaborative research in environmental engineering
between Dr. Joan Rose, University of South Florida and Dr. Jeni Colbourne,
Thames Water Authority, New River Head Laboratories, London, England. The
objectives of the project are to develop strategies for assessing the occurence
and concentrations of enteric protozoa in potable water supplies, and then to
apply risk assessment models for the development of control approaches for water
engineers in the US and UK. Recently, two large waterborne outbreaks of
Cryptosporidium have occured in the US and the UK in water systems which treat
the water by coagulation, filtration and disinfection in the absence of any
violation of standards. The proposed research will evaluate protozoan
contamination (Cryptosporidium in particular) of the Thames Water Authority's
catchment basin, comparing gene probe technology to immunofluorescent
techniques. Specifically, the investigators will: 1) compare gene probes for
rapid detection of cysts to the immunofluorescent techniques currently used for
water samples collected during a survey of catchment basin, 2) evaluate the
capability of the various treatments to remove Cryptosporidium cysts and Giardia
cysts, and 3) apply a risk assessment model based on cyst concentrations in
source waters and potential treatment to define the health impact. The results
of this research will promote communication on a common problem facing the water
industry, assist in developing and standardizing procedures for assessing
environmental protozoan contamination and define appropriate treatment
approaches which will help eliminate waterborne Cryptosporidisis. The project
will benefir from the complementary expertise of the two, investigators: Dr.
Rose has had significant involvement with surveys for Cryptosporidium and
Giardia in water, as well as with the development of immunoflourescent
techniques. Dr. Colbourne has developed standardized procedures for parasite
recovery and detection.