* 8922156
* Judgments of Relative Importance in Decision Making and     Communication
* SBE,SES
* 06/15/1990,11/30/1991
* William Goldstein, National Opinion Research Center
* Standard Grant
* Shelton White
* 11/30/1991
* USD 41,614.00

This very ambitious proposal tackles the issue of what is meant by "relative
importance" in preference judgment, how it enters into decisions, and how it is
communicated to others. The concept of relative importance plays an unusual role
in current decision analyses. In standard utility theories, importance has no
meaningful interpretation. However, people who actually make decisions find it a
natural concept to use in thinking about preferences. The principal
investigators plan to evaluate a wide variety of ramifications of the relative
importance concept. The plan behind the proposed research is to take a two-
pronged approach involving both an examination of the technical aspects of
weighting coefficients and an empirical assessment of the psychological
processes involved. A particular focus will be on the interpersonal aspects,
i.e., the preferences of another person that one infers from information on
relative importance, or the weight judgments one infers from preferences for
another. Such inferences are commonly made and are basic to various collective
decision theories (especially agency theory). Yet, there has been almost no
previous analysis on how such inferences are formed. In all, the proposed
research will provide substantial new insights into the concept of relative
importance.