* 8922117
* Cautionary Paradigms for Engineering Design
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/1990,09/30/1993
* Henry Petroski, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Senior Program Assistant
* 09/30/1993
* USD 139,299.00

Human error has been identified as a major cause of failure in engineering
designs ranging from simple structures to complex systems. A model of how errors
are introduced into the design process will provide not only insight into an
often neglected aspect of design theory and methodology but also an
understanding of how errors may be reduced in future designs. Paradigms based on
classic examples of design error and error avoidance constitute a most effective
means of approaching the problem of failure due to human design error will be
developed. By basing paradigms on actual case studies, the human element can be
naturally incorporated and caveats made relevant to practicing designers. Since
the concept of failure provides a unifying theme for all components of the
design process, paradigms based on cogent case studies of failure and failure
avoidance also present a means of unifying the large mass of past design
experience into a coherent structure. Furthermore, by distilling design
principles from the paradigms, the lessons learned in one engineering domain
will be more easily transferrable to others. This will enable design theorists,
practitioners, and students alike to have access to a uniquely broad base of
experience and examples. The hypothesis that general design paradigms can be
based on specific case histories will be tested by demonstrating that a wide
variety of other case studies exhibit the same design error or error avoidance
principles. The supporting case studies will be drawn from several historical
periods to demonstrate that the design principles embodied in the paradigms are
truly timeless and independent of the state-of-the-art. The case studies will
also be drawn from a range of engineering domains to demonstrate the validity of
the hypothesis for design generally and thus to demonstrate the universal
applicability of the paradigms.