* 8922062
* Support for the 17th International Society for Photo-       grammetry and Remote Sensing Congress; Washington, DC;      August 1992
* SBE,BCS
* 12/01/1989,01/31/1994
* Lawrence W. Fritz, American Society for Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing
* Standard Grant
* Brian Holly
* 01/31/1994
* USD 427,000.00

Because research on photogrammetry, remote sensing, geographic information
systems, and related topics has been so dynamic in recent decades, the
quadrennial congresses sponsored by the International Society for Photogrammetry
and Remote Sensing (ISPRS) have become especially important settings at which
scholars from throughout the world come together to exchange the most current
results of their research and to plan future collaborative activities. The 17th
Congress of the ISPRS will be held in Washington, D.C., in early August 1992,
providing an excellent opportunity for American scientists to meet directly with
experts from throughout the rest of the world. This award provides support for
the 1992 ISPRS Congress in two ways. First it provides financial assistance to
offset costs of publication and distribution of proceedings within which about
600 papers will be reproduced. Second, it provides a means by which other
federal government agencies may choose to provide financial support through
interagency agreements that will fund supplements to the initial award. By
partially subsidizing the publication and distribution costs of the congress
proceedings, this valuable resource will be made available at reduced costs to
scientists unable to attend the congress, thereby expanding the beneficial
impacts of the congress. Further positive consequences of this grant will be
realized if NSF can assist in channelling contributions from other federal
agencies to this important activity.