* 8922003
* Development of Advanced Diagnostics and Their Application toJet Diffusion Flames
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/1990,07/31/1992
* Lea Chen, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* MILTON J LINEVSKY
* 07/31/1992
* USD 250,000.00

Laser diagnostics can provide accurate measurements with temporal and spatial
resolutions essential to establish a scientific base for understanding
fundamental combustion processes. It is proposed to conduct phase specific,
multiple-point and multiple-component measurements of a unique nondriven
periodic jet diffusion flame. The data obtained will provide insights into the
dynamic structure of such flames, including an assessment of the chaotic
aspects. Planar flow imaging including laser induced fluorescence, reactive Mie
scattering and soot Mie scattering will be employed to characterize the
relationship between the flow and flame. Multiple-point temperature measurements
using thin filament pyrometry and planar LIF thermometry will be developed and
applied to jet diffusion flames. Techniques for simultaneous imaging of the
temperature soot and multiple species will also be investigated as a means of
quantifying the interaction of the flame and flow vortices. This project brings
together specialties in laser diagnostics from industry and specialties in
combustion from a university. The project is a continuation of a research
program to study the dynamic structure of jet diffusion flames involving
scientists and engineers from the Air Force Wright Research and Development
Center, the National Institute of Standards and Technology and The University of
Iowa. Funding for the work is shared with the US Air Force.