* 8922231
* High Performance Internet Protocols
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/1990,09/30/1994
* Herbert Schorr, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* George O. Strawn
* 09/30/1994
* USD 621,526.00

ISI, in the person of Bob Braden, propose to develop and engineer transport
protocols to facilitate advanced applications over the Internet. One task is to
experiment with a wide-area multicast protocol using the facilities of a DARPA-
provided gateway. Multicast is not currently used in the Internet, but its
implementation could significantly reduce the traffic generated by such
applications as network news, bulletin boards, and mailing lists. A second early
task is to test the suitability of two new transport protocols (VMTP, due to
Cheriton, and Rx) in place of the customary TCP and UDP as support for higher
level transaction-based protocols. Availability of transaction protocols on the
Internet would allow atomic operations to be communicated over the Internet with
a sequence of datagrams. In the second year of the project, the interaction of
transport protocols and gateway dynamics (as affected by resource allocation
algorithms and queue disciplines) will be investigated. Subsidiary tasks include
bug fixes and maintenance releases of NNStat/statspy, a widely-used network
monitoring package originally developed by the PI (and others at ISI). Funds are
also provided for Braden to continue to act as Executive Director of the
Internet Activities Board (IAB), and to chair the End-to-End Task Force of the
IAB.