* 8922469
* US-Finland Cooperative Research on the Molecular Basis of   Embryonic Induction
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1990,08/31/1991
* Scott Gilbert, Swarthmore College
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 08/31/1991
* USD 10,765.00

This award provides partial support for a long term >(sabbatical) research visit
by Professor Scott F. Gilbert of Swarthmore College to the laboratory of
Professor Lauri Saxen of the Department of Pathology of the University of
Helsinki, Finland. They are interested in understanding the early events of
morphogenesis, and are attempting to establish which genes are being activated
by the inducer. Their approach is to construct cDNA libraries from uninduced and
from newly induced mesenchymal tissue in mouse kidney. By comparing those mRNA's
from induced and uninduced mesenchyme, they will be able to determine which
genes are activated by the inducer and establish a temporal and spatial sequence
of kidney induction. This is emerging as a powerful and ultasensitive techniques
for identifying early transcriptive events. The collaboration brings together
Dr. Saxen's world class expertise in embryonic kidney induction, differentiation
and morphogenesis with the experience and interest of Dr. Gilbert in molecular
biological methods for studying induction and tissue competence. One of the
greatest challenges of developmental biology concerns how the nuclear genome
instructs the morphogenesis of complex organs containing intricately coordinated
arrangements of tissues. Central to this issue is how cells respond to inductive
influences from neighboring cells during organogenesis. The induction of the
mammalian kidney has become a model for such organogenesis where reciprocal
interactions between two tissues create the rudiments of an organ. The proposed
collaborative effort will contribute to our understanding of the molecular basis
of morphogenesis.