* 8922574
* Preparation of Ultrafine Magnetic Particles Using Microemul-sions and Vesicles
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/1990,08/31/1992
* Dinesh Shah, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 08/31/1992
* USD 220,809.00

In recent years, there has been an increasing demand for the preparation of
ultrafine magnetic oxides of uniforms size which are mainly used in computer
data storage, audio and video recording, magnetic fluids and fabrication of
certain microwave devices. The difficulty of obtaining uniform-sized
nanoparticles of magnetic oxides stems from the fact that their preparations are
mostly done in bulk aqueous media in which uncontrolled nucleation and grain
growth cannot be prevented. Synthesis of these compounds (gamma-Fe2O3, Fe3O4,
CrO2, Cobalt doped Fe2O3 and barium ferrite) in constrained microreactors such
as the aqueous cores of water-in-oil microemulsions or the inner part of single-
compartment vesicles seems to be a promising alternative although these
techniques are still under development. In this project, methods are used to
optimize and control the ultralow size and the narrow particle size distribution
by proper modulation of certain physico-chemical conditions of the microemulsion
and vesicular systems. Further, the project examines how to make quantitative
correlations between the morphology (size, shape, and size-distribution) and
structure of the product microparticles and the physico-chemical properties of
the surfactant system. The results of the study delineate the similarities as
well as the differences between the two types of microreactors (microemulsions
and vesicles) in relation to chemical reactions in them. The solid precipitate
obtained from such microreactors may be different from that precipitated in a
large aqueous medium. Not only might these experiments lead to the production of
monodispersed ultrafine magnetic particles, but they might also provide a
greater fundamental understanding of interfacial chemistry in relation to
nucleation and crystal growth in microreactors. This project exploits the
expertise of two research groups (Rhode Island and University of Florida).