* 8922812
* Ship Operations
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/1990,06/30/1992
* James Ebert, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing grant
* Emma R. Dieter
* 06/30/1992
* USD 710,000.00

Johns Hopkins University, Cheaspeake Bay Institute will operate the R/V RIDGELY
WARFIELD during 1990 as a general oceanographic vessel in support of NSF-funded
research projects. The R/V RIDGELY WARFIELD is a 106' general research vessel
owned by the National Science Foundation. This vessel is part of a fleet used by
the National Science Foundation to support oceanographic research projects. Most
oceanographic research projects require highly specialized equipment and
extensive support from a ship's crew members. An increasing number of research
projects require equipment that must be permanently installed on a ship and for
which the ship must be specifically designed. Such equipment also requires
highly trained crew members for maintenance and operation. These vessels do not
operate in the same manner as general cargo or fishing vessels, and therefore,
NSF supports the operation of a variety of vessels specifically dedicated to
oceanographic research. These vessels are operated by universities and research
institutions around the country. R/V R. WARFIELD is a capable platform for these
operations. Constructed by JHU in 1967, this vessel's shallow draft and twin
hull design are well suited for its principal area of operations in the
Chesapeake Bay. The marine operations staff at JHU are fully capable of meeting
the requirements of this proposal. The program considers it important to
continue the operations of the R/V R. WARFIELD because it is the only research
vessel based in the Chesapeake Bay and because of its highly cost-effective
operation. The ship supports many cruises of short duration that would be much
more expensive to support and difficult to schedule using any other vessel in
the fleet.