* 8922853
* Eighth North American Conference on Mycorrhizae; September  4-8, 1990 in Jackson, Wyoming
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1990,02/28/1991
* Michael Allen, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Jethro Moorefield
* 02/28/1991
* USD 12,000.00

Mycorrhizae are the mutualistic associations between plant roots (or rhizoids)
and fungi. This symbiosis is found in virtually every terrestrial habitat on the
vast majority of plants, and is a vital part of natural and managed ecosystems.
This grant will provide travel support for the 8th North American Conference on
Mycorrhizae in Jackson Hole, Wyoming. The emphasis of this meeting will be
integrating the study of mycorrhizae with the Plant and Fungal Biology of the
1990's. The North American Conference on Mycorrhizae (NACOM), occurring
approximately every 3 years, has been the major source of interaction for
mycorrhizal researchers since its inception in 1969. It has become the premier
meeting for developing concepts and applications related to the study of
mycorrhizae. At the seventh NACOM (May 1987), in Gainesville Florida, 310
scientists from 31 countries attended and presented 253 papers. In keeping with
the theme of integration with Plant Sciences, the meeting will be organized
using a hierarchical structure that will permit interaction of all interested
groups. On Wednesday, the opening day, the major addresses will be on molecular-
cellular biology, Thursday will concentrate on organismal biology, Friday on
community interactions, and Saturday on ecosystem processes. Theoretical and
applied symposia will be interspersed throughout the week. Special attempts will
be made to integrate researchers who are actively involved with mycorrhizal
work. Therefore, for each day, the morning session has been built around an
integrative session devoted to understanding the major questions and approaches
at a single hierarchical level. Afternoons will be devoted to symposia organized
by the mycorrhizal community. In each case, evenings, have been reserved for
posters and informal discussions.