* 8922344
* U.S.-Federal Republic of Germany Cooperative Research in    High-Temperature Superconductivity
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/1990,09/30/1991
* Alan Portis, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 09/30/1991
* USD 2,650.00

This award supports Professor Alan M. Portis of the University of California at
Berkeley for collaborative research on high temperature superconductivity with
Professor Helmut Piel, Department of Physics, University of Wuppertal. They
share an interest in the development of high quality films and coatings of high
temperature superconductors for a variety of applications including particle
accelerator cavities operating at microwave frequency. The quality of these
materials deteriorates at high microwave power levels. Together with Dr. D. W.
Cooke of the Los Alamos National Laboratory, they are developing a detailed
theoretical model of microwave flux penetration and surface resistance and are
also undertaking careful measurements of both phenomena. The development of
microwave cavities for particle accelerators has largely been led by Dr. Piel
and his students. There is no comparable experience anywhere else. Dr. Portis
brings to the collaboration outstanding expertise in the microwave properties of
high temperature superconductors. Their goal is to identify the loss processes
and to work for their elimination, so as to obtain materials that maintain their
quality at high microwave power levels. Verification of a microwave critical
state in superconductors would have important scientific and technological
benefits. It would indicate that microwave processes in superconductors are much
faster than has been thought possible, requiring reexamination of some of our
ideas of flux penetration into type II superconductors. It would also improve
surface quality at high power by identifying the origin of the observed power
dependence in surface resistance in high temperature superconductors. If the
loss mechanism does persist into the microwave frequency range, there may well
be opportunities for using these materials for high frequency signal-
processing. Thus a mechanism that creates a problem for particle accelerators
may provide opportunities in an entirely different domain.