* 8922642
* U.S.-Federal Republic of Germany Cooperative Research:      Microscopic and Phenomenological Theories of Correlated     Fermi Systems
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1990,02/28/1994
* Peter Hirschfeld, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 02/28/1994
* USD 14,500.00

This award supports Professors P. J. Hirschfeld and K. A. Muttalib of the
University of Florida to maintain collaborative research links with Dr. Peter
Woelfle of the Institute for Condensed Matter Theory of the University of
Karlsruhe, Federal Republic of Germany. They plan to investigate
superconductivity and magnetism using the single band Hubbard model, which is
possibly relevant to materials with high superconducting transition temperatures
("high-Tc materials.") They will apply two new methods that they recently
developed: 1) a new functional integral approach, and 2) a conserving slave
boson diagrammatic expansion, to study several questions related to the
possibility of superconductivity in Hubbard-like systems, the stability of the
Fermi liquid state in the presence of strong correlations, and the stability of
incommensurate antiferro- magnetic phases. They will also study models of
unconventional superconductivity, with an emphasis on the question of how the
symmetry of an unconventional order parameter can be determined with external
probes, particularly electromagnetic ones. Although the mechanisms responsible
for pairing in the high temperature superconductors remain mysterious even after
two years of intense research since its discovery, there is accumulating
evidence that electronic correlations, rather than electron-phonon interaction
play a crucial role. Unfortunately, there is no adequate systematic and
controlled method available for dealing with such strongly correlated systems.
New methods such as those being used here are essential for the study of all
highly correlated Fermi systems, and should be generally applicable to any
similar model, including that appropriate for the high-Tc materials. These novel
methods originated as a result of extensive collaboration among these scientists
when Dr. Woelfle spent several years at the University of Florida. Continuing
the interaction should prove to be very productive and mutually beneficial.