* 8922454
* US-Federal Republic of Germany Cooperative Research:        Bombarding Energy Dependence of Multi-fragmentation
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1990,01/31/1992
* ManYee Tsang, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 01/31/1992
* USD 11,826.00

This award supports Drs. William G. Lynch, C. Konrad Gelbke and others of
Michigan State University to collaborate in physics research with Drs. Uli
Lynen, W. Trautmann and J. Pochodzalla of the University of Frankfurt and the
Gesellschaft fuer >Schwerionenforschung (GSI) at Darmstadt, FRG. They are
>investigating the properties of multifragment breakup mechanisms in order to
obtain information about the equation of state and liquid.gas phase transition
of dilute nuclear matter. MSU has a compact and highly granular intermediate
mass fragment detection array, the MINIBALL. Measurements with this device
require small halo.free Krypton beams at an energy level and quality not
available in the U.S. Such beams will be available in the near future at GSI,
which will be the best facility of its kind in the world; however, there is no
array similar to MINIBALL at GSI. The collaboration, therefore, is based on
transporting the array to Germany to bring these two complementary state of the
art devices together. Calculations suggest that multifragmentation may occur in
heavy ion reactions over a wide range of incident energies. Few measurements to
date have addressed the properties of collisions which lead to the production of
many intermediate mass fragments. MINIBALL was constructed to look for
intermediate mass fragments and provide information about highly excited and
dilute nuclear matter. In conjunction with the ALADIN spectrometer, it will be
possible to measure multifragmentation processes for Krypton induced reactions
over the energy range 50 to 1000 MeV. Studies in this range will complement the
ongoing research effort at MSU where reactions at lower energies are being
explored. The results of their initial survey of the Kr.Nb system will have a
significant impact on the directions of subsequent heavy ion experiments. Once
incident energies at which multifragment breakup mechanisms are dominant have
been identified, detailed comparisons to dynamical and statistical
multifragmentation models will be performed.