* 8922038
* Shipboard Scientific Support Equipment
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/1990,04/30/1994
* Robert Knox, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Richard W. West
* 04/30/1994
* USD 404,484.00

This project will supply shipboard scientific equipment for the research
vessels MELVILLE, NEW HORIZON, and R.G. SPROUL, operated by the Scripps
Institution of Oceanography, and dedicated to use in support of ocean science
research. The Shipboard Scientific Support Equipment Program provides funds for
ship equipment deemed essential to the proper and safe conduct of ocean science
research. This Program provides support for such items as deck equipment
including winch systems for the deployment and retrieval of scientific
instruments, navigational equipment such as radars, gyroscopes and earth
satellite receivers to pin point the location of research sites, communication
equipment including radio transceivers and satellite transceivers for voice and
scientific data communications and other equipment such as motorized workboats
for transporting scientists to and from data retrieval sites. The Project
Director, George G. Shor is fully qualified to direct this project having had
considerable experience in overseeing the acquisition and installation of
shipboard equipment. In contributing to the MELVILLE's overhaul/refit, this
project will allow the institution to complete the installation of the dynamic
positioning system, replace a radar, upgrade a GPS/LORAN navigation system,
install an uncontaminated seawater system, construct and install a storage
locker for science chemicals, and install gantry cranes, a J.frame and hoist
machinery on the MELVILLE. In addition, the NEW HORIZON's GPS/LORAN system and
bow thruster starting system will be updgraded, and the SPROUL's hydraulic
piping will be modified.