* 8922975
* CRB:  Breeding Behavior and Reproductive Seasonality of     Biparental Cichlid Fishes
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/1990,11/30/1993
* Kenneth McKaye, University of Maryland Center for Environmental Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Fred Stollnitz
* 11/30/1993
* USD 94,961.00

Determining the seasonal patterns of fish reproduction in tropical lakes, and
the processes that regulate mating and parental behavior, is fundamental to
understanding natural fish communities and to the management and conservation of
these diverse groups of animals. Dr. McKaye will observe the changing seasonal
behavioral patterns of cichlid fishes in Lake Jiloa, Nicaragua, through direct
underwater observations and use of remote video equipment. This study has five
main objectives: (1) Long-term continuous monitoring and quantification of
territory formation and breeding patterns of these fishes; (2) determining adult
fish movements and number of times they breed in a three-year period by means of
an intensive tagging program; (3) experimental manipulation of the community by
removing the presumed competitive dominant to determine if other species will
alter their breeding patterns in its absence; (4) quantifying the behavioral
patterns among species and sexes in the defense of young throughout the brooding
period; (5) determining the frequency of inter- and intra-species adoptions by
cichlid fishes and the behavior patterns causing these adoptions to occur. The
data collected, besides being important in answering behavioral questions about
reproductive seasonality, will play a major role in conserving one of the
world's most evolutionarily interesting groups of fishes.