* 8922849
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Geography and Regional    Science
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/1990,10/31/1991
* NONE NONE, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 10/31/1991
* USD 9,950.00

An important line of inquiry to shed light on changing environmental conditions
has been the reconstruction of past climatic histories through paleoecological
analyses. The loess deposits of the Lower Mississippi Valley offer a rich source
of material within which scientists have been analyzing the changing composition
of sediments, pollen, and fossilized plants and animals. One particularly
promising approach has been the isotopic analysis of fossil land snails.
Isotopic analysis of land snails in the Lower Mississippi Valley has focused so
far on one site in Mississippi. This doctoral dissertation research project will
broaden the analysis to include samples from six additional sites in Arkansas,
Louisiana, and Mississippi. Carefully selected bulk samples from each site will
be gathered; snails and carbonic concretions will be removed; the snails will be
cleaned, dried, and identified; and their shell fragments will be tested to
determine their ages. The information gathered in this manner then will be
correlated with information on the paleoecology of the region gathered from
other sources. This project will offer valuable insights on a number of fronts.
From a methodological perspective, it will provide a means of evaluating the
efficacy of sampling and evaluating fossil land snails from a number of sites.
The project also offers prospects of adding to our knowledge about climatic and
environmental conditions in the Lower Mississippi Valley during the latter
stages of the Pleistocene Epoch, and it will contribute to our improved
understanding of dynamic interactions among terrestrial, fluvial, oceanic,
eolian, and biological systems during a period of substantial environmental
change. It also will provide an excellent opportunity for a promising young
scholar to continue to develop independent research skills.