* 8922262
* Cooperation and Conflict in Anarchic International Systems
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/1990,01/31/1992
* Peter Ordeshook, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 01/31/1992
* USD 64,091.00

Much of the contemporary public debate over foreign policy reflects a more
academic debate over the sources of stability and security in international
affairs. Some persons contend that only a balance of power can ensure stability
and state sovereignty, whereas others see the complex interdependencies of
today's world economy and its associate international institutions as a
substitute for balance of power. Unfortunately, although the debate offers deep
insights and raises fundamental questions into the nature of international
systems, it also offers the confusion that accompanies imprecisely formulated
concepts and an imperfect application of subsidiary ideas. In this research the
investigators use a branch of the decision sciences called game theory to model
anarchic international systems and to resolve the debate by restating it in a
more explicit and deductive context. The researchers begin by arguing that the
traditional notion of collective security corresponds to the system envisioned
by neoliberals, and then use their model of the international system to
differentiate between balance of power and collective security in terms of the
strategies that characterize the foreign policies of countries. The
investigators then establish that both balance of power and collective security
can correspond to equilibiria in their model. Initial explorations of this model
reveal that a balance of power does not guarantee every country's security, so
in it countries must be vigilant about their relative share of resources. A
collective security equilibrium, on the other hand, ensures everyone's
sovereignty, and thereby allows absolute resource maximization. Unlike a balance
of power equilibrium, however, a collective security equilibrium is not strong
and is not necessarily stable or attractive. Thus, the institutional structures
facilitating the realization of mutual gains from the variety of cooperative
"subgames" characterizing the world economy play a critical role in the
survivability of a collective security arrangement. An additional feature of
this model is that it allows the researchers to explore the circumstances under
which states might voluntarily relinquish their sovereignty to a more-
encompassing authority. The classical example of this process is, in fact, the
formation of the American Republic, whereas a more contemporary example is the
evolving integration of Western Europe. Thus, the model developed by these
researchers allows an uncovering of the fundamental sources of stability in
international affairs and also allows them to generalize about the processes by
which states are formed.