* 8922408
* US-Federal Republic of Germany Cooperative Research:        Probabilistic Description of Creep Damage and Failure
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1990,01/31/1992
* Terry Delph, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 01/31/1992
* USD 14,300.00

This award supports Professor Terry J. Delph of Lehigh University for a long
term research visit to the Fraunhofer Institute for Material Mechanics in
Freiburg, West Germany, where he will work primarily with Dr. Hermann Riedel,
head of the High Temperature Materials Department. The goal of this research is
to extend a deterministic model for high-temperature creep damage and failure
recently developed by Dr. Riedel to include various probabilistic features. They
are interested in features such as random growth of creep damage and random
creep failure times. The principal avenues of approach include integration
techniques for stochastic differential equations and a general expression for
the distribution of failure times developed by Coleman. As the drive for
increased power and efficiency leads to higher operating temperatures for energy
conversion devices, structure failure modes which were either suppressed or not
apparant at lower temperatures become of greater importance. One of the most
significant high-temperature failure modes in energy conversion devices is creep
rupture. The proposed research will provide a description of the creep damage
process that is both physically and probabilistically based; that is, it will be
capable of predicting the probability of failure by a given time "t." This will
produce much more useful estimations of structural reliability than current
deterministic models.