* 8922735
* US-Federal Republic of Germany Cooperative Research on HeavyFermion Systems
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1990,07/31/1993
* Gregory Stewart, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 07/31/1993
* USD 7,618.00

This award supports Professor Gregory R. Stewart of the University of Florida to
collaborate in research on the physics of heavy fermion systems with Professor
Frank Steglich of the Institute for Nuclear Physics of the Technical University
of Darmstadt, Federal Republic of Germany. The collaborating laboratories bring
substantially complementary experimental expertise to the proposed study of
>superconductivity in fermions. Professor Steglich's group discovered the first
heavy fermion >superconductor. They have considerable expertise and collective
knowledge in specific heat, critical fields, thermal expansion, and thermopower
and in working with very low temperatures (0.050 Kelvin.) The University of
Florida group offers substantial strengths in Uranium.Beryllium13 (UBe.13)
sample preparation and studies of small mass.specific heat in high magnetic
fields. Heavy fermion systems display anomalously large specific heats at low
temperatures which, when coupled with their nearness to magnetic behavior, makes
the occurrence of superconductivity in these Cesium and Uranium based compounds
unexpected. The collaborating research groups will study the nature of the
superconducting pairing and the relationship between normal state properties and
superconductivity. They will build on their recent breakthrough in understanding
the source of the normal state high effective mass in UBe.13, in order to
explore possible implications for superconductivity. Advances in understanding
heavy fermion electron systems may have long term applications in magnetism and
superconductivity based on their unusual properties and their similarities in
some respects to high temperature superconductors.