* 8922855
* Use of Ammonia-Substituted Chromium Nucleotides for         Micromapping of Enzyme Active Sites
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/1990,10/31/1994
* William Cleland, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 10/31/1994
* USD 203,000.00

The purpose of this project is to tell which portion of the metal ion
coordination sphere faces the enzyme, and which faces the solvent when MgATP or
MgADP combine with an enzyme such as hexokinase. To permit such micromapping the
investigators will prepare and characterize inert chromium complexes of ATP and
ADP which contain one or two ammonias in the coordination sphere. Because
ammonia in the coordination sphere lowers affinity when the ammonia is in
contact with the protein, but should have little effect when it faces the
solvent, the dissociation constants of these complexes will tell which portion
of the metal ion coordination sphere contacts the enzyme, and which faces the
solvent. The complexes to be characterized are: 1) the 12 isomers of
monoamminechromium ATP and the expected corresponding isomers containing ADP. 2)
the apparent 10 isomers of cis- diamminechromium ATP, and the corresponding ADP
isomers,3) the two expected isomers of trans-diamminechromium ATP or ADP. As an
aid to characterizing these isomers, they will try to crystallize the two
isomers of monoamminechromium pyrophosphate,and prepare the corresponding
tripolyphosphate complexes. They will also try to crystallize one of the
enantiomers of cis-diamminechromium pyrophosphate (where water as well as
ammonia is cis) by use of a chiral anion or cation, or a chiral solvent.
Knowledge of the signs of the CD spectra of these isomers will help characterize
the cis-diamminechromium nucleotide complexes. These chromium complexes, once
characterized. will be used to map the active sites of hexokinase, pyruvate
kinase, adenylate kinase, and phosphofructokinase, all of which accept
tetraaquochromium ATP as a substrate.