* 8922448
* US-UK Cooperative Research:  Generation and Characterizationof Transgenic Plants Carrying the Maize Transposable        Elements Ac
* O/D,OISE
* 07/15/1990,12/31/1991
* Jeffrey Bennetzen, Purdue Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 12/31/1991
* USD 14,750.00

This award will support collaborative research in genetics between Dr. Jeffrey
Bennetzen, Purdue University, and two British plant biologists: Dr. Michael
Bevan, AFRC Institute of Plant Science Research, Cambridge, and Dr. Jonathan
Jones, Sainsbury Laboratory, Norwich. The maize transposable element Ac has been
introduced into tomato plants. These transgenic plants support subsequent
excision of the Ac element and its movement to new chromosomal sites within the
tomato genome. The Ac element introduced into the tomato plants interrupts an
antibiotic resistance gene, and plants with newly excised/transposed Ac elements
can be identified via their acquired antibiotic resistance. In collaboration
with Dr. Jonathan Jones' laboratory, whose researchers generated these
materials, the principal investigator will employ restriction fragment length
polymorphism (RFLP) technology to map original and transposed Ac elements in
transgenic tomatoes. These studies will determine the insertion specificity of
Ac in tomato and will establish a catalogue of lines with Ac elements at linked
and unlinked chromosomal sites. Depending upon the status of currently ongoing
studies in transformation of wheat and barley at Dr. Michael Bevan's laboratory
in Norwich and of maize, sorghum and millet in Dr. Bennetzen's laboratory, the
investigators also propose to introduce these engineered Ac elements into one or
more of these important crop species. The materials generated will allow future
research programs in transposon biology, mutagenesis and tagging in these plant
species. The proposed research is timely and very important for further
development of methods of isolating agronomically relevant genes from
economically important plants. The project will benefit from the complementary
expertise of the investigators in the area of gene expression in transgenic
plants.