* 8922597
* 3rd International Conference on Streptococcal Genetics,     Minneapolis, MN, June 6-9, 1990
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/1990,04/30/1991
* Larry McKay, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 04/30/1991
* USD 5,100.00

In the past ten years interest and advances in the molecular biology of
streptococci have increased dramatically. Although this broad group of bacteria
can have vastly different ecological niches and socio-economic implications,
they share unique mechanisms of genetic exchange and modes of gene regulation,
and present common technical difficulties to investigators. Based on the past
two conferences and a recent poll more than 150 scientists are expected to
attend the Third International Streptococcal Genetic Conference to be held in
Minneapolis, June 6-9, 1990. The conference will be arranged and administered by
the American Society for Microbiology. Its goal is to disseminate the most
recent discoveries which impact on the molecular genetics of streptococci
important to agriculture, food science and human disease. Speakers will
represent those who do the highest quality, most significant work in these
fields. Moreover, poster sessions are planned to give others the opportunity to
present more preliminary studies. Plans are to publish the proceedings through
the ASM Publications Office. Goals of the organizing committee are to create an
atmosphere conducive to the development of future collaboration and interaction
among the participants, and to expose young scientists, students and
postdoctoral trainees to the exciting scientific questions and future of this
field.