* 8922588
* U.S.-China Cooperative Research (Sociology):  Modeling the  Health Transition:  An Analysis of the Consequences of      Socioeconomic and Demographic Changes in China
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/1990,12/31/1992
* John Akin, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Jones Tsuchitani
* 12/31/1992
* USD 37,149.00

This is a two.year collaborative project between a group of scientists at the
University of North Carolina led by Gail E. Henderson, Barry M. Popkin, and John
Akin .. and Dr. Chen Xiaoshu, head of the Institute of Nutrition of the Chinese
Academy of Preventive Medicine in Beijing. It is a study of health status and
health behaviors in the context of dynamic social change in China, particularly
in the countryside. In this project, the investigators will survey people in
3,000 Chinese households in eight provinces that have significantly different
economic, demographic, and environmental conditions. They will work in
coordination with the Institute's established nutrition surveillance sites
throughout China. Information will be gathered at the community level on the
conditions of health facilities, availability of transportation to these
facilities, and types of public health programs. Information will be gathered
from households on preventive health behaviors, types of health services used,
and the cost and method of financing health care. The project is expected to be
highly beneficial to both American and Chinese researchers. The Chinese
investigators will gain valuable experience in gathering and analyzing
health.related information and the U.S. group will be able to further their
research agenda on the determinants of health and nutritional changes.