* 8922810
* Mathematical Sciences: Mapping Problems in Complex          Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1990,05/31/1994
* Steven Bell, Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 05/31/1994
* USD 132,271.00

Several important mathematical topics will be addressed in this project. Its
primary focus is the theory of several complex variables with emphasis on (a)
mappings between domains in spaces of the same or different dimensions, (b)
extension to the boundary of such maps and (c) the resulting regularity one can
expect. The basis for this work can be traced to the classical Riemann Mapping
Theorem in one complex variable which states that any two finite and simply
connected regions can be transformed into one another by univalent analytic
mappings. The same question in several variables has two formulations. This is
due to the observation that even elementary domains such as spheres and
polydiscs cannot be transformed analytically into one another. The work
considers those domains which can be analytically mapped onto one another in a
one-one fashion and those which effectively can be mapped onto one another in a
(more or less) finite-to-one-manner. The latter functions are called proper
mappings. The research is concerned with questions of the following type. If a
proper map transforms one domain into another, what conditions on the boundary
or the map ensure that the map can be extended to the boundary? If an extension
exists, what is its degree of smoothness? Considerable progress has been made on
these questions when the two domains have curved and very regular boundaries.
The object now is to reduce the assumptions on the boundaries and apply new
results of complex analysis, geometry and partial differential equations to
develop the theory to its fullest extent. The main problem to be addressed in
the near term is considerable in itself: one must show that a continuous map
between certain manifolds is actually infinitely differentiable. Results of this
type are already known, but not enough to suggest a path to the best possible
conclusions.