* 8922503
* US-Switzerland Cooperative Research:  Seismic Modeling of   Reflective Structures in the Alps and Implications for      Orogenic Structure
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1990,01/31/1993
* Larry Brown, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 01/31/1993
* USD 9,620.00

This award supports Professor Larry Brown and others of Cornell University to
collaborate in geophysics with Professor Jean-Jacques Wagner of the Laboratory
of Petrophysics, University of Geneva, and Professor Raymond Oliver, Institute
of Geophysics, University of Lausanne. The objective of their joint research is
to develop new, more detailed geologic models of orogenic structure by computer
modeling of deep seismic data recently collected across the Alps by the Swiss
researchers, with support from the Swiss National Science Foundation. The
combination of exposure, thorough mapping, availability of multiple seismic
lines, and tectonic history make the Alps perhaps the most promising starting
point for more quantitative comparative studies of deep structure of orogens as
revealed from reflection profiling. Later, the Swiss results will be compared
with similar deep structures in Paleozoic and Precambrian orogenic belts in the
U.S., which were surveyed under a multi-institutional deep seismic program
operated by Cornell University on behalf of COCORP (the Consortium for
Continental Reflection Profiling.) Deep seismic reflection profiling has become
a standard tool in the investigation of crustal structure. Yet debate persists
concerning the actual cause of deep reflectivity. An important development in
this field is the relatively recent acquisition of seismic surveys across young
mountain belts where a) structures are particularly well exposed and b)
reflection patterns can be traced to considerable depth. The Alpine system is
perhaps the best example of such a system. Preliminary three dimensional seismic
modeling by the Swiss of known Alpine structures, and their extrapolations to
depth have proven to be an effective interpretational tool in providing a
quantitative test of hypothesized structure in this active region. By analogy,
considerable light may be shed upon the crustal architecture of older mountain
belts where deep structural interpretations have been more cryptic. Thus this
work may make the Alps a prototype for intercontinental collisions and a
laboratory for calibration of deep seismic reflection data elsewhere.