* 8922632
* Fine Scale Remote Sensing of Clouds Using Millimeter Wave   Radars
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/1990,03/31/1994
* Gabor Vali, University of Wyoming
* Continuing Grant
* Robert W. Taylor
* 03/31/1994
* USD 443,350.00

This award is part of a collaborative project among Professor McIntosh of the
University of Massachusetts (Amherst), Professor Vali of the University of
Wyoming (Laramie), and Professor Gogineni of the University of Kansas
(Lawrence). The objective is to study fine-scale structure of clouds using
millimeter-wave radars. Historically, cloud structures and dynamics have been
probed at two widely separate resolutions. On the one hand, airborne
microphysical probes, such as the widely used laser optical probes, have volume
resolution of the order of 1.E-4 to 1.E-2 m3 for 1-second samples. On the other
hand, ground-based research radars at wavelengths greater than 1 cm typically
have volume resolution of the order of 1.E4 to 1.E7 m3. However, some important
processes in cloud evolution lie between these two resolution categories; these
include ice formation, entrainment, in-cloud mixing, and initiation of
coalescence. The development of depolyment of millimeter-wave radars supported
by this award will allow scientists to better understand these fine-scale
processes with appropriate tools. During the first half of this project, the
Principal Investigators will conduct ground-based experiments at the UWyoming
Elk Mountain Observatory and examine the radar backscatter data from ice
crystals of known shape, size and habitats at 35, 95 and 215 GHz. During the
second half of this project, the UMass fully polarimetric 95 GHz radar will be
installed in the NCAR King Air research aircraft; collaborating with NCAR
scientists, the Principal Investigators will investigate how such a facility can
serve the greater meteorology community.