* 8922168
* US-Federal Republic of Germany Cooperative Research:        Advanced Experimental Techniques and Turbulence Models for  Turbulent Separated Flows
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1990,07/31/1994
* Roger Simpson, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 07/31/1994
* USD 19,958.00

This award supports Professor Roger L. Simpson and others in his research group
at Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University (VPI) for collaboration
in engineering research with Professor Franz Durst and others of the Fluid
Mechanics Group at the University of Erlangen, Federal REpublic of Germany. The
objectives of their collaboration are to exchange advanced experimental
techniques for turbulent separated flows and to develop improved turbulence
models for separated flows based on their collective accumulation of data. Both
groups are leaders in research on the turbulent structure of separated flows and
in aspects of experimental techniques for separated flow. Their experience and
unique facilities are complementary. VPI concentrates on unsteady and three-
dimensional external separated flows and has developed rapidly scanning laser
anemometry and sensitive pressure fluctuation measuring techniques. The Erlangen
group concentrates on internal separated flows, such as in ducts and other flow
passages, and is a leader in developing advanced laser anemometry techniques.
The micro-LDV designs and developments in Erlangen will allow the VPI group to
build and mount units in dynamic wind tunnel models. VPI pressure fluctuation
techniques will be applied to internal separated flows in Erlangen. Separated
flow is well recognized as the limiting factor to the performance of aircraft
and sea vehicles, jet engines, ducted flow systems, and other practical devices.
Until the development of laser anemometry, little basic understanding of the
nature of separated flow was possible. In the last fifteen years, the VPI and
Erlangen groups have made a number of significant contributions to the basic
understanding of turbulent separated flow. Work on more complicated separation
problems will be continued by these groups under the proposed support.