* 8922490
* US-Austria Cooperative Research On Stabilization and Controlof Distributed Parameter Systems
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1990,07/31/1994
* John Burns, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 07/31/1994
* USD 17,680.00

This award supports John A. Burns and Robert Wheeler of Virginia Polytechnic and
State University (VPI) to collaborate in engineering systems research with
Wolfgang Desch and others of the Institute for Mathematics of the University of
Graz, Austria. Their collaboration focuses on two areas: stabilization of
viscoelastic systems, and preservation of system properties under approximation.
Their joint efforts benefit from expertise in different aspects of these
problems. The VPI group has considerable experience in applications, modelling
and computation (aerodynamics, large space structures, visco-elasticity and
large scale computing), as well as a strong background in complex analysis and
classical analysis. The researchers in Graz have a long history in semigroup
theory, control theory and approximation theory. By their very nature, numerical
analysis and control theory are interdisciplinary subjects; they require
interaction of several fields of mathematics and engineering. The complementary
expertise of the two research groups in modeling, computation and analysis
virtually assures more productivity than independent efforts. They are focusing
on several control systems of current interest for aerospace vehicles and other
systems.