* 8922435
* Classicism vs. Constructivism:  On the Indispensability     of Abstract Mathematics
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/1990,02/29/1992
* Geoffrey Hellman, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Ronald J. Overmann
* 02/29/1992
* USD 50,000.00

Within contemporary philosophy of mathematics, "classicism" in mathematics is
understood as standard mathematical practice as characterized by classical
logical reasoning. This practice is usually associated with a "platonist"
philosophical standpoint according to which axioms and theorems are viewed to be
objective truths about a mind- independent mathematical reality consisting of
abstract objects of the sort mathematical discourse appears to quantify over.
"Constructivism," on the other hand, covers those minority schools who reject as
illegitimate central components of classical practice and seek to develop
alternative practice based on constructivist principles. The particular
constructivist schools under examination in this project reject as illegitimate
the classical conception of objective mathematical truth on which classical
logic is based and they reject the ordinary notion of "existence" in context of
mathematics. In its place, they substitute principles of constructive object and
constructive proof. In this project, Professor Hellman is examining the
longstanding opposition between classical mathematical practice and leading
constructivist schools, emphasizing the importance of scientific applications of
mathematics. At the outset, he is examining the philosophical underpinnings of
the constructivist challenge in light of recent "modal-structural
interpretations," supporting classicism but avoiding certain problems of
standard platonism. He is then examining arguments that abstract mathematics is
"indispensable" for science and assessing the scope and force of these
arguments, especially in light of recent mathematical-logical work (predicative
reductions, reverse mathematics) which seems severely to limit the impact of
such arguments. Finally he is bringing to bear such arguments on the classicism-
constructivism controversy. The viability of constructivism for scientific
purposes is being assessed in light of recently uncovered obstacles to its
applicability, both generally, in circumstances of empirical uncertainty, and
specially, in the domain of quantum physics.