* 8922127
* Shipboard Scientific Support Equipment
* NONE,NONE
* 06/15/1990,11/30/1991
* Terry Whitledge, University of Texas Marine Science Institute of Port Aransas
* Standard Grant
* Richard W. West
* 11/30/1991
* USD 22,443.00

This project will support shipboard scientific support equipment for the
research vessel LONGHORN operated by University of Texas, Marine Science
Institute and dedicated to use in support of ocean science research. The
Shipboard Scientific Support Equipment Program provides funds for ship equipment
deemed essential to the proper and safe conduct of ocean science research. This
Program provides support for such items as deck equipment including winch
systems for the deployment and retrieval of scientific instruments, navigational
equipment such as radars, gyroscopes and earth satellite receivers to pin point
the location of research sites, communication equipment including radio
transceivers and satellite transceivers for voice and scientific data
communications and other equipment such as motorized workboats for transporting
scientists to and from data retrieval sites. The Project Director, Terry E.
Whitledge is fully qualified to direct this project having had considerable
experience in overseeing the acquisition and installation of shipboard
equipment. This project will allow the institution to acquire a block for
improved wire handling, two SSB radios, a cellular phone, and a satellite
communications unit, to upgrade communications between ship and shore stations,
an electronic gas detector to replace an antique flame safety lamp and a weather
station for the pilot house.