* 8922980
* Stratigraphy, Extent, and Paleoclimatic Implications of     Middle Pleistocene Glacial/Interglacial Conditions, Coastal NW Alaska
* O/D,OPP
* 05/15/1990,10/31/1993
* Julie Brigham-Grette, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Julie Palais
* 10/31/1993
* USD 127,244.00

The interbedded glaciogenic and marine sediments exposed in many places along
western Alaska comprise the best-known Arctic record of late-Cenozoic regional
climatic change and eustatic sea-level fluctuations. Western Alaska is one of
few areas in Arctic North America where both terrestrial and oceanic records can
be clearly resolved. Based upon regional stratigraphic work completed over the
last two years, it is now known that glaciation about 500,000 years ago
throughout western Alaska was an order of magnitude more extensive than any
subsequent glaciation. This award supports an investigation of the well exposed
stratigraphy sedimentology, and paleoecology of sediments representing this
interglacial/glacial transition to better understand the regional climatic
setting that culminated in the last extensive early to middle Pleistocence
glacial events in northwestern North America. Marine micro and macrofossils and
terrestrial pollen, beetles, and plant macrofossils collected from nearshore
prodeltaic deposits will be examined to reconstruct land-sea climatic conditions
during this transitional period. Data collected from this project will provide
proxy data for understanding regional paleoclimatic conditions with implications
for evaluating paleosnowlines, climatic gradients through the Bering Strait, and
changing paleogeography at a time of climatic transition.