* 8922205
* Glacial Geology of the Northern Labrador-Ungava Bay Region: Implications for Deglaciation of the Laurentide Ice Sheet
* O/D,OPP
* 06/01/1990,11/30/1992
* Peter Clark, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Campbell
* 11/30/1992
* USD 99,128.00

Despite a general consensus that Hudson Strait played a prominent role in
controlling the dynamics of the Late Wisconsinan Laurentide Ice Sheet, including
perhaps the tempo of deglaciation, comparatively little detailed field work has
been accomplished along its coastlines to identify what role it played.
Consequently, reconstructing the history of Late Wisconsinan events in Hudson
Strait has become a critical objective toward understanding the dynamics and
behavior of the Laurentide Ice Sheet. What information is now available from
field work along its coastlines indicates a more complex and dynamic sequence of
events than previously considered. The purpose of this research is to contribute
toward a better understanding of late Quaternary events in Hudson Strait as
recorded on northern Labrador, including the eastern coast of Ungava Bay. This
region occupies a critical are for examining (1) the interaction of Hudson
Strait ice with ice flowing through Ungava Bay, (2) the carbonate-drift belt
across northernmost Labrador, with its important indicator erratics to identify
provenance, and (3) deglaciation of outer Hudson Strait and Ungava Bay. Results
of this research will provide necessary information for reconstructing events in
outer Hudson Strait that ultimately affected a large part of the Laurentide Ice
Sheet.