* 8922402
* US-Sweden Cooperative Research:  Vegetative Compatibility   in Heterobasidion Annosum
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1990,02/29/1992
* Everett Hansen, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 02/29/1992
* USD 14,940.00

This award will support collaborative research in systematic biology between Dr.
Everett Hansen, Oregon State University and Drs. Jan Stelid and Martin
Johansson, Department of Forest Mycology and Pathology, Swedish University of
Agricultural Sciences, Uppsala, Sweden. The objective of the project is to study
the population genetics of root disease fungi of coniferous trees, and
particularly the mechanisms of vegetative P compatibility. Individuals of many
fungus species maintain their separate identity by a vegetative compatibility
(VC) system that prevents exchange of nuclei and cytoplasm. The phenomenon is
readily demonstrated in Heterobasidion annosum, cause of annosus root rot in
forest trees. VC reactions are used in studies of population genetics and the
introduction of debilitating viruses into fungus populations. Interpretation is
hampered, however, by lack of information on the physiology and genetic
regulation of the VC reaction. The main objectives of the proposed project are:
1) to describe the physiological and anatomical reactions of interacting
vegetatively compatible and incompatible dikaryotic mycelia of H.annosum; and 2)
to determine the system of genetic control of VC in this fungus. Interactions
between genetically defined mycelia will be observed in microculture chambers
and responses of cytoplasm, nuclei, and mitochondria will be visualized with
appropriate histological techniques. Exchange of nuclei and cytoplasm will be
monitored using isozyme and drug resistance markers. Protein products of the
interaction will be determined by electrophoresis. Genetic control of VC will be
assessed by pairing and backcrossing sib-composed heterkaryons, with the goal of
determining the number of genes that control this reaction. H.annosum is
presently causing tremendous damage, especially in Europe, and all indications
are that it will be more destructive in the future. Further understanding of its
biology will be of significant value to forest pathologists in both Europe and
North America.