* 8922154
* Mathematical Sciences: Nonlinear Approximation
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/1990,11/30/1992
* Ronald DeVore, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Continuing grant
* John V. Ryff
* 11/30/1992
* USD 44,265.00

Work on nonlinear approximation and its applications to numerical problems will
be undertaken in this project. This type of approximation has become
increasingly important since it may give much smaller errors than traditional
approximation methods. Emphasis will be placed on nonlinear methods in the
general setting of wavelet decompositions with particular attention paid to
applications to rational and spline approximations. Underlying this work is the
role played by nonlinear approximations in the theory of nonlinear partial
differential equations and in problems of image and surface compression. In
nonlinear approximation, one replaces a linear space of approximating functions
by a nonlinear manifold. Splines with free knots, rational functions and certain
types of adaptive approximation are among the most studied examples. The
advantage of nonlinear approximation, recognized for years, is that it allows
for better approximation of functions with singularities. The point of view
taken by researchers in this area is not to determine whether or not a given
function can be approximated by functions taken from some class. Rather, one
begins with the class and asks for a characterization of all functions which may
be approximated within a prescribed error. Recent work shows that it is possible
to identify these sets with known, identifiable, families of functions
(characterized, for example, by their average oscillation). Much of the best
work has been confined to one-dimesional approximation. This project will
consider a relatively new approach to multivariate approximation. The
traditional approach is one of breaking up the domain into suitable smaller
domains on which approximation can be established. A more promising approach,
using the wavelet concept, considers the partitioning function into more
manageable parts which lend themselves to good approximation.