* 8922644
* US-Netherlands Cooperative Research:  High Magnetic Field   Studies at Ultralow Temperatures
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/1990,07/31/1992
* Mark Meisel, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 07/31/1992
* USD 8,770.00

This award supports Mark W. Meisel and others of the Microkelvin Research
Laboratory of the University of Florida for an international research
collaboration in physics and cryogenic engineering with Giorgio Frossati,
Director, and others, of the High Magnetic Field/Low Temperature Laboratory of
the University of Leiden, The Netherlands. Their physics collaboration involves
the study of highly polarized normal liquid and superfluid Helium-3 and the
magnetic phase diagram of solid Helium-3. Meisel offers substantial ultrasonic
expertise to the study of polarized liquid Helium at Leiden. Both groups will
benefit from an exchange of experience as each team studies solid helium-3 under
slightly different conditions. Their cooperative work in cryogenic engineering
will benefit greatly from the pioneering work at Leiden. They will work jointly
on the design and construction of a high cooling power dilution refrigerator
(DR) that will encircle a nuclear demagnetization refrigerator (NDR.) Nesting
the DR/NDR system will shorten the length of the high magnetic field/low
temperature cryostats. This will reduce the intrinsic vibration problems
associated with five- meter-long cryostats and it will eliminate the need for
long, narrow neck dewars that are difficult to fabricate. The first prototype
will be built in Leiden and the second generation system will be constructed for
the University of Florida. It will be ideally suited for a low temperature
station at the new NSF High Magnetic Field Facility presently being planned.