* 8922269
* US-Netherlands Cooperative Research: Occupation Probabilities in the Middle of the s-d Shell (Physics)
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1990,01/31/1992
* Lawrence Fagg, Catholic University of America
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 01/31/1992
* USD 2,500.00

This award supports Professor Lawrence Fagg of the Catholic University of
America for two short term research visits to the National Institute for Nuclear
Physics and High Energy Physics (NIKHEF) in Amsterdam, the Netherlands, where he
is collaborating with Dr. C. W. deJager, group leader in the electron scattering
program. NIKHEF, the University of Virginia, Catholic University and the Free
University of Amsterdam are cooperating in a set of experiments to determine the
occupation probabilities for protons in the 2s-1/2 shell. Dr. Fagg's
contribution to the program has been supported to a very limited extent by the
NSF Physics division. Support for two more trips from the U.S.-Netherlands
Cooperative Science Program will enable him to complete the remaining phases of
the program. This involves constructing, transporting and mounting delicate
samples (targets) of Phosphorus- 31 and Sulfur-32 for exposure to the electron
beam of the accelerator. He will also participate in further elastic electron
scattering studies on these nuclei plus Silicon-30, acquiring the remaining
(e,e'p) data necessary to complete the analysis, and participating in the
analysis and interpretation of the data. The Independent Particle Shell Model
assumes the nucleus to consist of nucleons moving independently in a common
potential well. This model has enjoyed considerable success in explaining many
essential features of nuclear structure. One of the most definitive test of IPSM
is to observe the behavior of penetrating nucleon orbits in medium and heavy
nuclei. In a series of experiments performed at several accelerator
laboratories, it was determined that despite the relatively close spacing of
nucleons in nuclear matter, the wave function for the 3s-1/2 proton orbit in
such nuclei as Lead-206 and Lead-208 was clearly observable. Dr. Fagg is
collaborating with Dr. deJager in extending this work to the 2s-1/2 shell for
Silicon-30, Phosphorus-31, and Sulfur-32. Although the value of exclusive
electron scattering reactions for such studies, in particular the (e,e'p)
reactions, has long been known, it is only with the advent of high resolution,
higher-duty- factor accelerators such as those at Saclay and NIKHEF that this
reaction can now be adequately exploited. There are no facilities in the U.S.
with instrumentation of sufficient resolution to carry out the proposed
measurements. NIKHEF is contributing ninety hours of beamtime for the project.