* 8922655
* FASEB Research Conference:  Regulation of Gene Expression inHigher Animals; Copper Mountain, CO; July 8-13, 1990.
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/1990,11/30/1991
* Michael Karin, Federation of Amer Societies For Exper Biology
* Standard Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 11/30/1991
* USD 14,000.00

One of the major challenges facing molecular geneticists, developmental
biologists, and pathologists is understanding the mechanisms which control
tissue specific gene expression in higher animals. During the past few years, we
have seen extensive progress in this direction. A variety of novel in vivo and
in vitro in cell-type specific gene expression were identified and the genes
encoding such factors were isolated. The hormonal and developmental mechanisms
controlling the activity of these regulatory genes are subject to extensive
investigation as well as the alteration of these basic controls in various
disease states. This proposal requests funds to finance a summer FASEB
conference on the topic of Regulation of Tissue Specific Gene Expression in
Higher Animals. The purpose of this meeting is to congregate researchers
actively engaged in studying various aspects of tissue specific gene expression.
In addition to discussing the basic mechanisms of gene regulation, special
emphasis will be placed on discussion of both normal and aberrant gene
regulation in the following organ systems; liver and pancreas, muscle, blood and
the nervous system. We will also have special sessions dealing with the
regulation of development and embryogenesis. The emphasis will be on gene
regulation in vertebrates and especially in mammals, however, where appropriate,
we have invited leading investigators, studying gene regulation in lower
organisms, which are more amenable to genetic analysis. The conference will be
held at Copper Mountain, Colorado from July 8-13, 1990. The meeting is designed
to have formal slide presentations, informal poster sesions, a workshop, periods
of group discussions, and plenty of opportunity for individual interaction. The
conference will summarize the current understanding of tissue specific gene
expression and should lead to dissemination of new information and new
strategies for further research.