* 8922196
* Agricultural Colonization and Ecological Destruction
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/1990,10/31/1991
* Richard Bilsborrow, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 10/31/1991
* USD 28,525.00

One of the processes by which human activity has most dramatically altered
natural environmental conditions across the globe in recent decades has been the
destruction of large tracts of tropical rainforest. Millions of acres have been
cleared in the Amazon basin of South America. Considerable scholarly attention
has focused on the biological, atmospheric, and hydrological ramifications of
accelerated deforestation, but relatively little research has been conducted to
identify and understand the attitudes that residents of the Amazon have toward
the rainforests and the processes by which they clear land individually and as
members of groups. This project will consist of a pilot study to refine survey
instruments and will provide preliminary results to facilitate refinement of
hypotheses for a larger study of the attitudes and actions of rainforest
residents rainforest in the Sucumbios province of northeastern Ecuador. Surveys
will be tested in interviews with members of roughly 400 households. These tests
will determine the most effective means of gathering descriptive information
about the demographic and economic characteristics and the land- and resource-
use practices of settlers; they also will refine methods for effectively
eliciting information about household attitudes regarding current status and
future aspirations, the availability of resources, and the institutional and
societal factors affecting individual activities. In addition to refining data
gathering capabilities, results from the trial surveys will be used to improve a
model that relates social and ecological processes. The project will be
conducted in coordination with the Consejo Nacional de Desarrollo, an agency of
the Ecuador government. This project will significantly improve our knowledge of
the efficacy of specific surveying and interviewing approaches in settings like
northeastern Ecuador. More importantly, it will provide a means for gathering
valuable information about the characteristics of settlers who are clearing
large tracts of tropical rainforest and the perceptions and attitudes that lead
them to act in that way. The broader significance of this research therefore
will be felt both with respect to our general understandings of how people value
and use natural resourcesand also in our improved knowledge about of the ways in
which social and economic processes contribute to dramatic changes in the
natural environment.