* 8922410
* Reactive Polymer Blending
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/1990,01/31/1992
* Frank Bates, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 01/31/1992
* USD 90,702.00

An important trend in thermoplastics is the growth of products based on polymer-
polymer blends. They are called "engineered" thermoplastics because they have
high enough modulus, toughness and softening temperature to be used the same way
metals are used. Most of these blends are immiscible but stabilized in a highly
dispersed morphology by graft or block copolymers at the interface between the
phases. One way to make these copolymers is by coupling reactions during melt
blending. This research will focus on blends of two immiscible polymers, one
rigid (glass transition temperature greater than ambient temperature) the other
soft (glass transition temperature less than ambient temperature). Initially
both phases will be amorphous. The strategy will be to design several model
reactive polymer pairs and combine them in a small laboratory melt mixer which
duplicates the essential features of the industrial scale process. The PIs plan
to identify the major variables controlling the process by changes in
composition, chemistry, polymer architecture and chain length. Scanning and
transmission electron microscopy will be used as the major microstructural
characterization method. From image analysis on these micrographs and single
drop studies, the drop break up and coalescence process with interfacial
reaction will be modeled. This research should yield better methods for the
analysis of these polymer blends as well as a fundamental understanding of the
process and new blend compatibilizing methods and materials.