* 8922441
* US-UK Cooperative Research:  Manipulation and Separation of Biological Particles and Cells by Ultrasonic Forces and     Torques
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1990,01/31/1992
* Robert Gould, Middlebury College
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 01/31/1992
* USD 15,325.00

This award will support collaborative research in biophysics between Dr. Robert
Gould, Middlebury College and Dr. W. Terence Coakley, University of Wales,
Cardiff. The objective of the project is to exploit the use of ultrasound to
segregate and isolate large particles of biological interest. When an ultrasonic
standing wave field exists in a liquid-filled chamber, suspended particles of a
given type will tend to collect at positions in the chamber about a half
wavelength apart. The ultrasonic phenomena of radiation pressure and acoustic
streaming associated with a standing wave field produce forces and torques on
objects in suspension. Strengths of the forces and torques on a given particle
depend mainly on the size and shape of the particle and on the acoustical
properties of compressibility and density of the particle, relative to the
corresponding properties of the suspending liquid. Thus particles differing in
acoustic properties will tend to collect in different positions in the chamber.
Methods for collecting particles in suspension with which most biologists are
familiar, such as centrifugation, dielectrophoresis and application of magnetic
fields, tend to cause particles to migrate to one or two sites. Ultrasound
offers a unique capability to concentrate particles at many discrete locations
in the suspending phase. This project aims to utilize the differences in the
forces and torques on different types of particles to diverge them, one type
from another, so they may be harvested and studied separately. The results of
this research will provide important information regarding the applicability of
ultrasound to a variety of biological systems. The project will benefit from the
complementary expertise of the two investigators, as well as their past history
of fruitful collaboration.