* 8922460
* An Investigation of Behavior in Experiments with Sample     Bargaining Games
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1990,12/31/1992
* Nathan Eugene Savin, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 12/31/1992
* USD 67,586.00

The predictions of game theory are often contradicted in experiments with simple
bargaining games and several investigators. These results have been interpreted
as being due to players' concerns for fairness or spite. However, the widely
varying designs of the previous experiments and the lack of serious attempts to
replicate them make a precise interpretation impossible. This is of particular
importance since current experimental evidence suggests that the outcomes of
simple games may be very sensitive to the details of experimental procedure.
Moreover, it may be impossible to construct a direct test of game theoretic
models, even if procedural effects are understood. This is because current
models assume a known distribution of attitudes toward fairness and spite among
the players. This project conducts experiments that explore the effects of
experimental procedures and the influence of fairness and spite. The project
develops a theory-based, experimentally tested econometric model that provides
estimates of the distribution of fairness and spite in simple bargaining games.
Game theory is widely and increasingly used in economics, so more definitive
evidence on the validity of game theory in bargaining and new statistical tools
for correcting game theoretic models would be a major contribution. The project
conducts experiments with dictator and ultimatum games. In these experiments,
players divide a given amount of money (the pie) between themselves. An
ultimatum game consists of two stages in which the first player makes a single
take-it-or-leave-it offer (stage 1) and the second player must either accept or
reject (stage 2). Counter-offers are not possible. In a dictator game, the first
player makes an offer to which the second player cannot respond. The
conventional model predicts that in each game the first mover offers the second
player the smallest positive amount possible and, in the ultimatum game, that
the second player accepts this offer. It is regularly observed in experiments
that substantial fractions of first movers make non-trivial offers, even in the
dictator game where offers cannot be rejected. This behavior frequently is
attributed to concerns of fairness. However, the results of previous experiments
do not provide sufficient information to determine whether players are trying to
be fair, whether non-trivial offers are reflections of proposers' beliefs about
what their opponents are likely to accept, or whether other motivations
influence behavior. Also no two previous studies used the same experimental
procedures. The experiments conducted by this project will determine whether the
behavior is systematic and predictable.