* 8922409
* US-FRG Cooperative Research on the Development of Short     Wavelength Lasers Pumped by Heavy Ion Beams
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/1990,04/30/1993
* Daniel Murnick, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 04/30/1993
* USD 11,250.00

This award supports Dr. Daniel E. Murnick of Rutgers University to collaborate
in physics research with Dr. Andreas Ulrich of the Physics Department of the
Technical University of Munich. They will study the optical emission from matter
excited by heavy ion beams, with the goal of developing new short wavelength
lasers. New spectroscopy in the vacuum ultraviolet region, from heavy ion beam
pumped gases, will be studied with measureable gain possible on selected
transitions. Planning and experimental design will take place both in the U.S.
and West Germany. Experiments will be conducted at the GSI heavy ion accelerator
facility in Darmstadt, West Germany, which has unique capabilities for these
studies. Data analysis and evaluation will also be carried out in both
countries. Reciprocal visits will facilitate both the experimental and the
analytical phases of the project. Heavy ion beam pumping provides a laser
excitation technique which is potentially significant for producing short
wavelength high power lasers. The study of the physics of the excited state
formation and decay until now has been the most important area of current
research. Recent accelerator advances now allow the production of very
intensive, well focused beams which are useful both for heavy ion inertial
confinement fusion and short wavelength laser physics research. The proposed
collaboration will use a unique new heavy ion synchrotron, the SIS, just
completed in Darmstadt, West Germany, to probe exciting new potential short
wavelength laser physics and sources. The research should lead to important new
fundamental results, through the discovery and study of new physics of heavy ion
interactions in dense plasmas.