* 8922466
* US-UK Cooperative Science:  Stochastic and Deterministic    Components of Micro-organism Trajectories
* O/D,OISE
* 05/15/1990,10/31/1992
* John Kessler, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 10/31/1992
* USD 15,014.00

This award will support collaborative research between Dr. John Kessler,
University of Arizona and Professor T.J. Pedley, Department of Applied
Mathematics, University of Leeds, England. The objective of the proposed project
is an investigation of the molecular basis of actomyosin-based cell motility in
non-muscle cells. The investigators will focus on individual and collective
dynamics of swimming organisms, especially algal cells. The geometry of their
swimming paths is due to torque exerted by gravity and shear, which orient the
organisms' bodies. Cells also respond to the direction and intensity of
illumination and to random impulses. The physical parameters which couple
orientation to shear and gravity torques are not accurately known. Magnitudes
derived from theory are adequate to model the cooperative behavior of large
populations of micro-swimmers, but there are no direct measurements on
individual cell trajectories. Furthermore, essentially nothing is known about
sensory orientation and its quantitative competition with physical orienting
mechanisms. The chief object of this project is to develop an apparatus, from
design to prototype, for measuring the dependence of cell orientation on shear
rate on the direction of gravity, and of illumination. This apparatus will be
used to provide quantitative experimental values for insertion in the equations
which describe individual swimming trajectories and also the patterns which
develop as a result of the collective interactions of swimming organisms. This
cooperative effort will benefit from the complementary expertise of Dr. Kessler
in physics and the ecology of motile algae, and of Dr. Pedley in applied
mathematics and physiological flows. The results of this research will find
application in the theory of active suspensions, in microbial ecology, and in
the quantification of cellular sensory responses.