* 8922935
* Photophysiological Regulation of Spectral Quantum Yield and its Linkages to Bio-Optical Properties of Phytoplankton
* NONE,NONE
* 06/15/1990,08/31/1993
* Barbara Prezelin, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 08/31/1993
* USD 238,000.00

A bio-optical model was developed to predict phytoplankton production from field
measurements of spectral irrdiance and pigmentation combined with testable
assumptions regarding cell absorption and spectral quantum yield (0y).
Laboratory testing of the model will probe the spectral relationships between
photosynthetically absorbed radiation (Qphar), quantum yield )0,
production/Qphar) and rates of primary produtivity for different size classes
and spectral groups of phytoplankton. The model derives cell absorption from
spectral reconstructions based on chlorophyll and accessory pigment
concentrations. Spectral comparisons of reconstructed versus direct measurements
of absorbance provide means of distinguishing the wavelength- dependent
contribution of photosynthetic and/or photoprotective pigments to algal
absorption from those of cell packaging effects and non-algal matter in the
surrounding water. Errors in estimations of in vivo maximum (0max) and spectral
(0y) quantum yield are of greatest significant to accurate bio-optical
predictions of primary production. Dr. Prezelin will identify the sources and
magnitude of variability in phytoplankton spectral properties which determine
quantum yield. Results would provide insights into how different sized and
spectrally diverse phytoplankton utilize radiant energy, influence the spectral
characteristics of water-column optical properties, and regulate rates of
photosynthesis and photoinhibition. Results would improve current and future
field applications for this and similar bio-optical models intended to examine
and predict temporal/spatial variability in primary productivity in marine
environments.