* 8922286
* Monitoring Gene Changes Following Long-Term Seed Storage,   Award in U.S. and Indian Currencies
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1990,08/31/1992
* Joseph Kamalay, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 08/31/1992
* USD 16,765.00

Description: This project supports participation by an Indian scientist, Dr.
Swati Sen Mandi of the Botany Department, Bose Institute, Calcutta, in a
research project being carried out by Dr. Joseph C. Kamalay, of the Agronomy
Department, Ohio State University. In this research, investigation will be made
on the changes in the integrity of DNA sequences from soybean (Glycine max L.)
and frenchbean (Phaseolus vulgaris L.) seeds stored under ideal conditions for
prolonged periods. Nucleic acids have been isolated from single seeds using a
protocol to isolate DNA suitable for restriction endonuclease and genomic blot
analysis. Two lines of evidence revealed extensive single strand breaks in DNA
from 30 year seed when compared to DNA from 1 year seed. When DNAs were
separated under denaturing conditions, genomic blots showed that individual
genes within the 30 year seed were highly degraded. It is proposed to determine
whether the celluar processes which produce these strand scissions are random or
not. A detectable bias in the strand scissions would indicate the existence of
potential "hot spots" for mutation. It is desired to determine if such site-
specific changes occur during seed storage. Scope: This project deals with an
area of considerable interest to molecular biologists, and also to agronomists,
plant breeders, and to population biologists. Both the U.S. and the Indian
scientists have been active in seed research. Dr. Kamalay's training was in
molecular biology and his research focus has been in the structural integrity of
the DNA sequences in seeds which have been stored for periods representing
multiple generations. Dr. Mandi's work has been in the plant physiology and seed
deterioration. The collaboration is likely to be very helpful for the research
of both scientists, and should lead to broadening of the scope of the research
at both laboratories after the conclusion of this project. The applied benefits
of this collaboration are clear in helping maintain and develop germplasm for
crop improvements. These attributes of the project fit well with the objectives
of the Science in Development Countries program.