* 8922456
* U.S. - Sweden Cooperative Research:  Direct Measurement of  Forces Between Model Cellulose Surfaces
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1991,12/31/1992
* Ronald Neuman, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 12/31/1992
* USD 21,290.00

This award will support collaborative research between Dr. Ron Neuman, Auburn
University, and two Swedish researchers: Professor Per Stenius, Institute for
Surface Chemistry, and Professor Per Martin Claesson, Department of Physical
Chemistry, The Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm. The objective of the
project is to investigate the feasibility of employing a surface force apparatus
for studies of model papermaking systems. In particular, the forces between
model cellulose surfaces will be directly measured to identify and quantify the
fundamental interactions between cellulose surfaces and other surfaces of
intrinsic interest and technological importance to pulping and papermaking.
Technique development will include the preparation of model cellulose and lignin
surfaces on molecularly smooth mica substrates by the method of
Langmuir.Blodgett monolayer deposition. Preliminary monolayer experiments will
be initiated prior to the visit to ensure productive surface force
measur>ements. The facilities and experience in surface force measurements of
the Institute Surface Chemistry in Stockholm complement the expertise of the
principal investigator in surface and colloid chemistry of papermaking,
monomolecular films, and Langmuir.Blodgett monolayer deposition. The results of
this research are expected to have important applications in the pulp and paper
industries.