* 8922741
* CRB:  Reproductive Biology of the Cotton-Top Tamarin in     Colombia
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/1990,05/31/1993
* Anne Savage, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Kathie L. Olsen
* 05/31/1993
* USD 229,489.00

Cotton-top tamarins are one of the most endangered species and these
individuals are increasingly threatened by habitat destruction. Dr. Snowdon has
developed a successful collaboration with INDERENA, the flora and fauna
protection agency of Columbia, to study the behavior and biology of cotton- top
tamarins in their natural environment. Although a wealth of knowledge is
available about these small New World primates kept in captivity, little is
known about their existence in the wild and their survival in the future is
precarious at best. Since the utmost importance for the survival of any
endangered species is that of reproduction, Dr. Snowdon will first use non-
invasive techniques to obtain hormonal samples from animals in the native
habitat. These findings will be compared with data obtained from groups of wild-
caught tamarins housed in a captive, outdoor research facility to provide a
better understanding of reproductive cycles and the influence of food
distribution on seasonal breeding. Collaborating with a specialized team of
Colombian biologists, Dr. Snowdon will gather information on infant development
and examine where there are differences in development and infant care between
wild and captive groups. Such information on yearly reproductive output and
infant survival will be used in planning long-term conservation programs, in the
development of conservation education projection and for scientific information
that will generate new hypotheses and validate studies on tamarins raised in
captivity. It is only through an understanding of the biology and behavior of
this species, the establishment of protected reserves, effective conservation
education programs, and public support that the survival of cotton-top tamarins
will be guaranteed to have a future in the wild.