* 8922538
* Corrosion and Oxidation Studied by Valence Band             Photoemission and X-Ray Diffraction
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/1990,10/31/1994
* Peter M. Sherwood, Kansas State University
* Continuing Grant
* Henry N. Blount, III
* 10/31/1994
* USD 251,097.00

This grant is in the general field of analytical and surface chemistry and the
subfield of surface chemistry of metal corrosion and passivation. Professor
Peter Sherwood will combine theoretical calculations of valence band density of
states for estimations of spectral response with measurements of photoemission
from core and valence levels to study the structure of oxide formation at
polycrystalline metal surfaces and the structure of molecular species which
inhibit corrosion. Unique facilities to combine x-ray diffraction with these
measurements will allow in depth understanding of mechanisms of corrosion
resistance. From these data, molecular design of such systems can be used for
particular metal surfaces. X-alpha calculations of valence band density of
states have been uniquely developed by Professor Sherwood for direct comparison
to photoemission measurements. By using data from an in-situ electrochemical
cell the entire process of passivation or corrosion can be followed. X-alpha
calculations will be verified with other (e.g. ab initio) methods for simple
systems and combined for direct comparison to photoemission measurements.
Further verification of structure will be accomplished with thin film x-ray
diffraction. The systems to be studied are active polycrystalline metals (iron,
aluminum and nickel) in combination with specific organic corrosion inhibitors.