* 8922960
* U.S.-Brazil Cooperative Research on Internal Oxidation of   Nb Alloys Containing Hf, Zr, and Ti
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1990,08/31/1993
* David Douglass, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 08/31/1993
* USD 13,368.00

This U.S.-Brazil Cooperative Research award supports cooperative research in
high-temperature alloys between Dr. David Douglass of UCLA and Dr. Fernando
Rizzo of the Catholic University (PUC) in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. The purpose of
this research is to conduct a study of the internal oxidation of various Nb
alloys over the range of 1450-1900 C. Internal oxidation of Nb alloys occurs
during heat treatment in "vacuum" over a wide range of oxygen pressure, and may
occur also during high-temperature exposure of missile components at low oxygen
pressures. A program involving the internal oxidation of Nb alloys, both binary
and commercial alloys, is underway at UCLA under Professor Douglass. Some
interesting preliminary results have been obtained to date over the temperature
range of 1450-1950C and over a low oxygen-pressure range. This subject is an
ideal one for collaborative research with Professor Rizzo. He will use the
EDX/SEM method to measure these profiles. The data obtained will be analyzed in
Brazil with his computer program to assess agreement between the experimental
values and the calculated values. Douglass will fabricate ternary alloys of Nb-
Mo-Hf and Nb-Mo-Zr which will be internally oxidized. The study of such alloys
will enable control of internal oxidation to be shifted from the arrival and
adsorption of oxygen on the surface to diffusion of oxygen in the substrate.