* 8922153
* The Archaeology of Production:  Prehistoric Copper          Metallurgy in Central Thailand
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/1990,07/31/1996
* Vincent Pigott, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/1996
* USD 180,673.00

With support from the National Science Foundation, Dr. Vincent Pigott and his
colleagues will conduct three seasons of archaeological excavation at sites in
the Khao Wong Prachan Valley in central Thailand. Preliminary work by Dr. Pigott
and his Thai collaborator in this valley has shown that it contains an unusual
group of culturally and technologically related copper production and habitation
sites ranging in date from the mid-third millennium B.C. to the early first
millennium A.D. Among the largest prehistoric metal production sites known in
Asia, they offer a unique opportunity to study the technology and organization
of large-scale copper production -- as a continuum from mine to finished product
-- within its sociocultural context. During each year of the project one site
will be excavated. The data thus collected will permit the team to establish a
relative chronology which will then be fixed with radiocarbon dates. They will
also allow explication of the local settlement pattern as it developed over
time. Finally, excavation and laboratory analysis will permit reconstruction of
the local processes of copper production. This will be achieved in part through
metallurgical analysis and process replication in the laboratory. The central
Thailand sites are of archaeological interest because they are so unusual. Over
the last two decades considerable scholarly attention has focussed on the
origins and development of metallurgy across the Old World. This has indicated
that the introduction of bronze metallurgy is associated with a complex of
social, political, and economic developments which mark the rise of the state.
In Southeast Asia, however, the sociocultural context in which early copper and
bronze metallurgy developed does not appear to include evidence for urban
centers or a state- like political structure. It is in this light that Dr.
Pigott's research assumes its primary significance. This research is important
for several reasons. First, it will provide information on the interaction
between technology and the development of social complexity. It challenges
traditional ideas about the association between these variables. Secondly, it
will increase our knowledge about a part of the world which, from an
archaeological perspective, is relatively unknown.