* 8922496
* US-UK Cooperative Research:  Structure of Turbulence Near   Density Interfaces
* O/D,OISE
* 07/15/1990,06/30/1994
* Harindra Joseph Fernando, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 06/30/1994
* USD 14,470.00

This award will support collaborative research in mechanical engineering between
Dr. Harindra Fernando, Arizona State University and Dr. J.C.R. Hunt, Department
of Applied Mathematics and Theoretical Physics, University of Cambridge,
England. The objective of the proposed research is an investigation of the
structure of turbulence near density interfaces. The research will be mainly of
a theoretical/numerical nature (to be carried out at the University of
Cambridge), but complementary laboratory experiments (to be performed at Arizona
State University) are also proposed. The development of a clear understanding of
the physical processes associated with turbulent mixing across density
interfaces and the modelling of such phenomena continue to be challenging
problems in fluid mechanics. The proposed research will be based on a new
technique, the so-called "kinematic simulation of turbulence", which has been
developed by Dr. Hunt's group at Cambridge. This particular approach differs
from earlier ones in the sense that the effects of "small" turbulent eddies,
advected over the interface by randomly moving "large" eddies of different sizes
and frequencies, are explicitly considered. The internal-wave generation at the
interface is directly related to this advection. The analysis will be performed
for several flow configurations of geophysical and engineering interest, that
include density interfaces subjected to velocity shear and zero-mean-shear
turbulence. The theoretical predictions will be compared with the laboratory
measurements. The results of this study will contribute substantially to the
understanding of turbulent mixing across density interfaces. The project will
benefit from the extensive and complementary expertise of the two investigators
on the topic of turbulence in homogenous, stratified and rotating flows.