* 8922444
* US-Federal Republic of Germany Cooperative Research: Numerical methods for Structured Eigenvalue Problems and Control
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1990,01/31/1994
* Ralph Byers, University of Kansas Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 01/31/1994
* USD 5,050.00

This award supports Professor Ralph Byers of the University of Kansas for
collaborative research in mathematics with Professors Angelika Bunse-Gerstner
and Volker Mehrmann at the University of Bielefeld, Federal Republic of Germany.
They are working on numerical methods for structured eigenvalue problems and
control. The distance from a controllable pair to the nearest uncontrollable
pair is closely related to the conditioning of control problems. The
collaborators will design numerical methods to measure such distances. They will
study real, complex and structured perturba- tions. This work will help
engineers amd scientists to recognize ill-conditioned problems and to formulate
mathematical models hat avoid ill-conditioning. Structured eigenvalue problems
arise frequently in control and other engineering and scientific computations.
Progress in numerical mehtods has lagged behind progress in computer
architecture, so it is difficult to take advantage of the parallelism and
theoretical peak computation rate of advanced computers. The collaborators will
assemble a set of basic procedures for structured eigenvalue problems. By
designing computer algorithms that exploit the mathematical properties of
structured matrices, this work will help engineers and scientists solve large
computational problems.