* 8922033
* Lake Sediment and Pollen Records of Hurricane Disturbance   Along the Alabama Gulf Coast
* SBE,BCS
* 01/15/1990,06/30/1991
* Kam-biu Liu, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 06/30/1991
* USD 13,485.00

The prospect of significant changes in global climatic patterns has encouraged
scientists to evaluate the character of past changes. Not only have different
climatic regimes produced significant shifts in temperature and precipitation,
they also have altered the timing and location of storms and other major
meteorologic events. If the world's climate is changing again, we can expect the
patterns of cataclysmic events to change; retrospectively, we should be able to
trace past climatic changes in the historical and paleoecological records of
major storms. This project will analyze stratigraphic records from a freshwater
lake along the Alabama coast of the Gulf of Mexico. Radiographic methods will be
used to date sediments and pollen will be analyzed to identify the impacts of
Hurricane Frederick in 1979 on lake sediments; the resultant patterns then will
be used to identify the timing and impacts of earlier hurricanes affecting the
area. This project will serve as a pilot effort to refine and calibrate a new
technique for determining the timing and nature of calamitous storms.
Development of this technique will clarify the potential for the use of
limnological and sedimentological data in the reconstruction of environmental
records, which are crucial for effective testing of models of global climatic
change. The project also will provide significant new data on the environmental
history of this climatically active region of the U.S.