* 8922411
* U.S.-Federal Republic of Germany Cooperative Research:      Lattice Gauge Theory Simulations
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/1990,07/31/1991
* Bernd Berg, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 07/31/1991
* USD 14,950.00

This award supports Professor Bernd Berg of Florida State University and several
of his graduate students for >collaborative research visits to the Physics
Department of the University of Bielefeld, Federal Republic of Germany, where
they will work with Professor Bengt Petersson and others. They are working on a
variety of topics in lattice gauge theory and computation, including large scale
computer simulations of quantum field theories, in particular Quantum
Chromodynamics (QCD). The German group has been working mainly with a Cray
computer, and has free access to several supercomputer facilities at Bielefeld
and Juelich. Such experience will upgrade the capabilities of the U.S. group,
which has been working on Cyber and ETA supercomputers. QCD is the generally
accepted candidate for the theory of strong particle interactions. It is
typically relevant at scales which are smaller than 1 Fermi = 10 to the minus
12th centimeter. Experimentally such small distances are investigated with large
colliders; observations of relics from the very early universe also provide
information. There are severe technical difficulties in trying to calculate
actual numbers from QCD. Presently, the leading approach to overcome these
difficulties is by means of large scale computer simulations. Part of this
collaborative proposal is to exploit finite size scaling concepts to shed light
on many open QCD problems. Another aspect involves pioneering the use of
supercomputers as a new tool for investigating quantum gravity related problems.