* 8922610
* Topics in Game Theory
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/1990,05/31/1993
* Abraham Neyman, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 05/31/1993
* USD 371,942.00

The concept of Nash equilibrium is the basic analytic tool of non-cooperative
Game Theory. All applications of non-cooperative games, which include a sizable
fraction of the work in economic theory, invariably rely on Nash equilibria. A
typical application consists of modeling a competitive situation as a game and
then narrowing down the set of possible outcomes by applying the equilibrium
conditions. If the remaining properties all share a certain property, then that
property is viewed as a consequence of the analysis. This project is concerned
with two aspects of the above-described process. First, there is the issue of
equilibrium "refinement", i.e., the formulation of conditions which "sensible"
equilibria presumably must satisfy. Equilibrium refinements have been motivated
by two main ideas. One is "strategic stability" or robustness in the face of
logical calculations that the players may perform, and the other is
"evolutionary stability", or robustness in the face of a dynamic process of
"survival of the fittest". Second, there is the issue of the modeling itself:
Are the conclusions from equilibrium analysis distorted by the simplifications
required in real-life situations? If so, what should be done? Specifically, the
project reformulates the definition of strategic stability so that it can be
applied in a more direct manner; axiomatizes the solution concept; and derives
additional properties satisfied by the solution concept. It extends the
definition of evolutionary stability used by biologists to general games and
studies its relationship with strategic stability. As regards the problem of
modeling, the project examines ways of relaxing assumptions of common knowledge
and of unlimited complexity in players' strategies. Finally, the two themes - of
equilibrium refinement and of the sensitivity of equilibrium analysis to the
formulation of models - are combined in order to provide a practical analysis of
real competitive interactions. These are fundamental and extremely difficult
problems. The results of this research should provide new, powerful analytic
tools for economic theory.