* 8922345
* US-Austria Cooperative Research:  Impedance Studies of      Sol-Gel Materials
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1990,07/31/1994
* Bruce Dunn, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 07/31/1994
* USD 14,430.00

This award supports Bruce S. Dunn of UCLA for collaborative research with
Professor Manfred W. Breiter of the Institute of Technical Electrochemistry of
the Technical University of Vienna. The objective of their research is to learn
more about the dielectric properties of gels during their solution, gelation and
aging stages. They will apply impedance spectroscopy to provide information
about gel development and morphology and to gain a better understanding of
transport properties. The UCLA group will be responsible for synthesizing
various gels. The collaborating Austrian group offers unusual expertise and
specialized facilities for the spectroscopic measurement of complex impedance
and the development of analytical models. This arrangement provides a unique
opportunity to apply macroscopic and microscopic analytical techniques on the
same samples. Past studies of the electrical properties of sol-gel materials
have been largely restricted to investigations of dried and fired materials. The
proposed work will explore the transport processes of gels during the earlier
stages of solution and gelation. It is during these stages that dielectric
properties are subject to substantial change as mobile ions become impeded and
relaxation times are altered by structural rigidity. A better understanding of
the relationship between transport properties and gel micro- structure will help
them to develop gels that possess high impedance prior to their gelation stage.
The results will complement Dr. Dunn's current NSF-supported research which uses
luminescent spectroscopy to monitor local chemical and structural changes. That
research is aimed at the incorporation of organic molecules into sol-gel hosts,
in order to "engineer" new properties.