* 8922191
* The System Ag-S-Se:  Phase Relations, Electrical and Opticalperties, and Applications
* EHR,HRD
* 09/01/1990,08/31/1994
* Jean Robillard, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 08/31/1994
* USD 284,007.00

The system Ag-S-Se is of considerable interest in materials research due to the
optical, electrical, and thermo-electrical properties which typify these
elements in the solid state. Three compounds are generally recognized as
characterizing the system at room temperatures: Ag2S (monoclinic), Ag4SSe
(orthorhombic), and Ag2Se (orghorhombic). Recently we have synthesized a series
of intermediate compounds ranging in composition from the pure silver sulfide,
through the silver sulfo- selenide, to the pure silver selenide. The
compositional series appears to break into two solid solutions, one extending
from Ag2S to approximately Ag4SO.65Se1.35 and the other encompassing
Ag4SO.65Se1.35 to Ag2Se. In this project we hope to: 1.) Produce the phase
diagram for the system Ag-S-Se and confirm the crystallography of the two solid
solutions. 2.) Document the electrical, optical, and thermoelectric properties
of these compounds. 3.) Investigate the fabrication of these materials as thin
films. 4.) Determine possible commercial applications (e.g., dry cells, thermal
sensors, electrochromic displays, non-linear optoelectronic devices) of these
materials. This project represents the first look at the behaviors of new
materials that are likely to possess interesting electrical, optical, and
thermoelectric properties. Because the materials form solid solutions, their
behaviors should be continuously variable with composition, with the potential
for the creation of "designer properties" based on stoichiometry.