* 8922731
* Laser Flash Photolysis Studies of Alkyl and Dialkyl CarbenesU.S.-Turkey Cooperative Research--Science in Developing     Countries Program
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1990,08/31/1991
* Matthew Platz, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Edward Murdy
* 08/31/1991
* USD 14,250.00

ABSTRACT NARRATIVE Description: This proposal supports the collaboration of Dr.
Matthew S. Platz, Ohio State University and Dr. Sol Celebi Dokuz Eylul
University of Izmir, Turkey. The proposal funding is to support the travel of
Dr. Celibi to Ohio State Universityand her per diem expenses there during a ten
month period for her research in synthesizing various chemical substances
(diazines) and to study their photochemistry using the most recent developments
in spectroscopic and photochemical techniques. This research will be conducted
in conjunction with an NSF supported research effort directed by Dr. Platz
entitled "Kinetics, Spectroscopy and Mechanistic Studies of Carbenes, Biradicals
and Radicals." Dr. Celebi's research will be an international extension of Dr.
Platz's research at Ohio State. Scope: This proposal will be bring a Turkish
scientist experienced in the university classroom and in Turkey's research
laboratories to Ohio State University to conduct research in reactive
intermediate chemistry under the guidance and direction of one of the young
leading scientists in his field of study. The research experience gained and the
acquired scientific knowledge are all transferable to the university classrooms
and research laboratories of her university, the Dokoz Eylul University. These
two goals are the real motivating ideas behind this proposal--the international
exchange of scientific knowledge and the contribution to the scientific
capabilities of a developing country--Turkey. By reason of these goals, it is
considered that this proposal meets the objectives of the Science in Developing
Countries Program.