* 8922536
* US-Sweden Cooperative Research:  Numerical Modeling of Hot- Electron Effects as a Source of Excess Noise in Schottky-   Barrier Diodes
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1990,02/28/1993
* Ting-wei Tang, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 02/28/1993
* USD 8,650.00

This award will support collaborative research in electrical engineering between
Dr. Ting-Wei Tang, University of Massachusetts and Professor Erik Kollberg,
Department of Applied Electron Physics, Chalmers University of Technology,
Goteburg, Sweden. The project will focus on the study of excess noise in GaAS
Schottky-barrier diodes, designed for millimeter waves and mixers. Solid
experimental evidence on the existence of excess noise in millimeter wave diodes
related to hot electron effects has been collected by Chalmers research group.
This group has competence in both the fabrication of GaAs millimeter wave diodes
and noise measurements from frequencies of a few hundred MHz to about a hundred
GHz. However, a theoretical understanding of the diode noise characteristics
versus bias current is generally lacking. The University of Massachusetts group
is well-known for its numerical modeling of hot-electron and other effects in
semicon- ductor devices. The proposed research will aim at: l) a detailed
theoretical model (to be developed utilizing the numerical modeling expertise
available at the University of Massachusetts), and 2) an experimental
verification (using Swedish expertise on fabricating high quality Schottky
diodes). The results of this project are expected to lead to improved designs of
low-noise Schottky-barrier diodes for millimeter wave application.