* 8922977
* Crustal Block Rotation in a Migrating Transform Zone:       Oriented Piston Cores Study
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/1990,10/31/1991
* Martin Kleinrock, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Bilal U. Haq
* 10/31/1991
* USD 22,162.00

Much of Dr. Kleinrock's research has focused on mechanics ofthe now-classic
propagating spreading center at 95.9'W on the East Pacific Rise. An oddity of
this and all propagators is the ocean crust gets transferred from one
lithospheric plate to another as the "active" spreading axis advances into and
splits the "old" crust. Complex deformation patterns are known to develop
between the active and inactive spreading centers. Two theories exist to explain
this deformation: 1) the "deck of cards model" that predicts displacement is
accomodated along pervasive ridge-normal faults: and 2) the "bookshelf
tectonics" model that predicts deformation is taken up by crustal block rotation
about vertical axes. Dr. Kleinrock will test the latter by examining piston
cores for down-core rotation relative to the earth's magnetic field. During a
recent cruise, he supervised the acquisition of 6 piston cores within the
regions of suspected deformation at the 95.5'W system. Each was equipped with a
corehead camera to record obsolute orientation, rotation, and departures from
vertical that occured during the coring process. Dr. Lisa Tauxe at Scripps will
conduct full-core, pass-thorough cryogenic magnetometer measurements on these
cores. When split, subsamples will be analyzed for remnant magnetization,
Inclination and declination values derived from these analyses will be provided
to Dr. Kleinrock who will then incorporate the corehead information to remove
corring artifacts to construct a down-core history of absolute rotation for each
core. He estimates that at least 45' of block rotation has occurred in the
region, and the technique proposed here will be able to resolve rotations of
roughly 10'.