* 8922251
* US-Czechoslovak Research on Unified Theory and Structure of Subperiodic Subgroups of Crystallographic Space Groups      (Condensed Matter Theory)
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1990,01/31/1994
* Daniel Litvin, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 01/31/1994
* USD 10,086.00

The primary objective of this U.S.-Czechoslovakia research project between Dr.
Daniel Litvin of Pennsylvania State University and Dr. Vojtech Kopsky of the
Czechoslavok Institute of Physics is to develop a systematic, unified theory for
defining relationships among subperiodic subgroups of crystallographic space
groups. There exists a wide variety of nomenclature and notation for these
groups, i.e., Frieze groups, ribbon groups or line groups in two-dimensions, and
rod groups, linear space groups or one-dimensional (subper- iodic) groups in
three-dimensional space. But no complete standards exist for the subperiodic
groups in the International Tables for Crystallography. The researchers intend
to set the standards for the orientation of axes and origins of the subperiodic
subgroups of the space groups to replace the myriad of choices found in the
literature. Their efforts should yield a useful, standardized reference for
classifying and characterizing subperiodic groups by their irreducible
qualities. Such a work should be an important contribution to the infrastructure
of the research communities examining topics in condensed matter and materials
science. This project in condensed matter theory fulfills the program objective
of advancing scientific knowledge by enabling leading experts in the United
States and Eastern Europe to combine complementary talents and pool research
resources in areas of strong mutual interest and competence.