* 8922620
* Temporal Variation in Deep-Sea Benthic Boundary Layer       Communities:  Long Time-Series Measurements
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/1990,05/31/1993
* Kenneth Smith, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 05/31/1993
* USD 429,999.00

The importance of long time-series studies for examining temporal variation in
marine communities is widely accepted. Although seasonal sampling and
measurements have shed much light on the temporal variability of biological
processes in the deep sea, it has been difficult to understand many aspects of
the functioning of these communities without a "continuous" record of certain
biologically significant processes over longer time periods. This project will
conduct a long time-series monitoring program (&gt;2yrs) of a benthic boundary
layer community using time-lapse photography to monitor sea floor processes and
particulate flux measurements as an estimate of food supply entering the benthic
boundary layer. Such monitoring will provide a temporal framework for more
intensive seasonal measurements of benthic processes at a single deep bottom
station in the California Current upwelling system where strong seasonality in
primary production at the surface and in particulate organic matter (POM) flux
at deep bottom depths is well established. Dr. Smith will address two major
questions: 1) Is there a temporal relationship (that is a coupling) between the
flux of particulate organic matter (POM) entering the benthic boundary layer
(BBL) and the arrival and residence of detritus at the sediment water interface?
2) Is there a temporal relationship between the distribution, abundance,
movements, and nutritional state of large bottom dwelling organisms and the flux
of POM entering the BBL and/or the arrival and residence of detritus at the
sediment-water interface? This study will improve our understanding of the
functioning of deep-sea benthic boundary layer communities and their importance
in biogeochemical cycling over interannual time scales.