* 8922052
* Gender Differences in the Wage Determination Process in     Academia
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/1990,12/31/1993
* Sharon Levin, University of Missouri-Saint Louis
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 12/31/1993
* USD 43,714.00

It is well-recognized that women are underrepresented in science and engineering
careers. Their low representation is cause for concern not only because of what
it implies about differential access by gender to rewarding careers, but also
because of recent concern in the United States over the quality of the
scientific and engineering labor force. It is generally assumed that any
deficits will be made up through recruiting more able women and minorities in
the future. Factors contributing to the underrepresentation and underutilization
of women in science, such as discrimination in the operation of the reward
process, are of social and economic importance. One aspect of the problem of
recruitment and retention of women in science and engineering is whether they
receive monetary rewards comparable to those of men for their work. This study
seeks to determine whether discrimination exists in the reward process since it
would distort the reinforcement mechanism for the advancement of women in
academic science. The study will use two data sources (the Science Citation
Index and the Survey of Doctorate Recipients) to relate research output to
subsequent changes in wages. Further, using several dimensions of publishing
productivity that are available, the study examines how monetary rewards are
affected by authorship patterns and journal quality. The analysis will be
conducted for the fields of biochemistry, geology, physics, and physiology.