* 8923010
* Studies on Heat Transfer in Buoyancy-Affected Separated     Flows
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/1990,03/31/1993
* Ta-Shen Chen, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* mary chen
* 03/31/1993
* USD 187,828.00

The existence of a flow separation and a recirculating region has a significant
effect on heat transfer characteristics and heat transfer performance in
engineering devices, such as compact heat exchangers, electronic equipment,
digital computers, and gas turbines. In some cases these separated flow regions
are added to the design of heat transfer devices to enhance the heat transfer,
but their effectiveness has not been justified or verified experimentally for
buoyancy- affected laminar flows. In situations in which the temperature
difference is large, and the flow velocity is small, buoyancy force effects
become significant. The role the buoyancy force plays in such a complex flow
configuration involving flow separation and reattachment has been studied only
numerically in a limited scope by the authors recently, and has not been
explored experimentally at all. The proposed research, consisting of coordinated
experimental and numerical studies involving separated flows in stepped channels
and along stepped flat plates oriented in vertical, inclined, and horizontan
positions, is aimed at providing quantitative (measured and predicted) results
for the flow and heat transfer in the separated and reattached flow regions for
these flow configurations. Emphasis will be placed on the experimental study and
the flow and heat transfer results will be obtained for both buoyancy assisting
and opposing conditions under heating by uniform wall temperature or by uniform
surface heat flux. It is expected that, under the buoyancy assisting flow
conditions, the reattachment length will decrease with an increase in buoyancy
forces and that when the geometry is inclined or horizontal, a three-
dimensional unsteady vortex flow could occur. Experimental observations will
define the region and conditions where these characteristics develop in this
flow geometry. Both backward- facing and forward-facing steps with different
step heights will be treated in the proposed research. Results from the proposed
research will be correlated to provide the building blocks that are needed in
dealing with heat transfer in complex, buoyancy-affected separated flows that
are prevalent in many engineering devices.