* 8923026
* Doctoral Dissertation in Geography and Regional Science
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1990,02/29/1992
* Philip Porter, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 02/29/1992
* USD 7,500.00

Traditional development-related transportation planning starts from the
assumptions that lower rural transport costs will promote agricultural
production and that the surplus produced by agriculture will encourage the
development of domestic industry. Increases in national income associated with
this kind of development then allow improvements in education and health. In
contrast to traditional transportation planning, which is based on economic
cost-benefit analyses, access-based transportation planning focuses on the
direct social impacts of transportation investment on access to educational,
health, and other social facilities. This doctoral dissertation improvement
award will support research assessing whether transportation planning based
explicitly on social rather than on economic criteria will sigificantly improve
personal access to social facilities in rural areas. The study will focus on
Cote d'Ivoire, a nation with accurate, detailed, and complete records.
Operational measures of accessibility will be developed and validated and a
model of access planning will be tested to determine how rural access to
services has changed in recent decades and how resources could have been used to
maximize accessibility. The increased understanding of the nature of a theory of
transportation and development depends on this kind of study, which will focus
on the specific social impacts of spatial and structural variations in roads and
facilities. By studying the importance of social aspects of transportation
planning, this research will contribute to understanding of basic development
processes. This project also will provide an excellent opportunity for a
promising young scholar to continue to develop independent research skills.