* 8923014
* US-Sweden Cooperative Research:  Ion Beam Desorption of     Molecular Solids
* O/D,OISE
* 07/15/1990,07/30/1993
* John Boring, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 07/30/1993
* USD 15,250.00

This award will support cooperative research in solid state physics, involving
Drs. R.E. Johnson and J.W. Boring, University of Virginia and Dr. B.U.
Sundquist, Tandem Accelerator Laboratory, University of Uppsala, Sweden. The
objective of the project is to describe the common mechanisms for electrical-
induced desorption and modification of a variety of organic materials and
molecular insulators. The US investigators have been carrying out a theoretical
program on modeling the electronic and chemical processes which are initiated
when an ion penetrates insulating materials, as well as an experimental program
for electron and keV ion modification of such materials. A primary effort has
been the study of low- temperature, molecular condensed gases. Dr. Sundquist's
research group at Uppsala, using the tandem accelerator and recently acquired
lasers, has been studying MeV ion and laser-induced desorption of large
biological molecules from samples of condensed molecules as a unique means of
mass determination. They have also been studying modification of certain
electronic insulators with the tandem accelerator. In the next few years they
will have the ability to irradiate with very high energy particles using the new
accelerator which was built at Uppsala. The US and Swedish efforts have
concentrated on describing the principal energy ejection processes which occur
in the bulk; however, they have begun to describe the common energy transfer
processes occuring in molecular solids. In the proposed collaboration the two
groups will study organic solids; the experiments performed by the two groups
will be coordinated in order to expose the common aspects of the physical and
chemical mechanisms. The project will benefit from the recently-added
capabilities of the Uppsala group to study neutral biomolecule ejection and
laser desorption and of the ability of Virginia group to make complementary
measurements on chemically similar samples. Results of this research will be of
interest in a number of scientific areas, such as biophysics, astrophysics,
electronics and pharmaceuticals.