* 8943166
* Engineering Research Center for Compound Semiconductor      Microelectronics
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/1989,04/30/1998
* Stephen Bishop, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Cooperative Agreement
* Mary Poats
* 04/30/1998
* USD 20,714,027.00

The Engineering Research Center for Compound Semiconductor Microelectronics has
the goal of developing new concepts, materials, devices and systems that would
contribute to the elimination of the interconnection bottlenecks that are
limiting the performance of high speed digital systems. The demands for
increasing the performance of the interconnects and the development of efficient
very low threshold semiconductor lasers and hi-speed GaAs based electronics
combine to make the examination of optical interconnects for digital integrated
circuits very promising. To fully utilize optical interconnects it will be
necessary to combine high performance optical and electrical heterostructure
devices in integrated devices. The vision of the ERC is to develop the
engineering science base which will be needed to realize products based on
compound semiconductor optoelectronic chips. Research of this type spans a wide
range of topics--from fundamental studies on growth of the semiconductor
materials, to device physics, device design, chip- level system simulation and
test. The Research Program at the Illinois ERC has four thrusts which together
should have a significant impact on the development of optoelectronic integrated
circuits (OEIC). These research thrusts are optical waveguides; optical
transmitters; optical receivers; systems design and support services. The ERC
has been actively involved in impurity induced disordering which it has
exploited for laser structures and for guiding light around bends. A SPICE-like
simulator for optoelectronic circuits (iSMILE) has been developed along with a
laser CAD tool called MINILASE. These simulation tools will help in the design
of OEIC's and eliminate the need for actually fabricating some experimental
circuits. The center emphasizes educational activities to develop engineering
capability in this field.