* 8943962
* Core Support for the Polar Research Board
* O/D,OPP
* 04/15/1989,11/30/1992
* Sherburne Abbott, National Academy of Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas F. Forhan
* 11/30/1992
* USD 546,700.00

The Polar Research Board (PRB) is a standing committee of the National Academy
of Sciences. Under this continuing award the Foundation, with research programs
and assigned interagency leadership roles in both polar regions, partially funds
"Core Support" of the PRB under Master Agreement No. 86-18641. Core support
provides for maintenance of a support staff at the Academy, two annual meetings
of the full Board (currently 16 members) and some subgroup meetings, and
continuing PRB functions such as liaison with other scientific bodies,
preparation of annually recurring reports, and association with the Scientific
Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR). Beyond core support, the PRB is free to
identify additional projects and to ask the Foundation or any other entity to
support these projects. Some of these are discussed in the proposal, and others
are likely to be identified over the course of the project. Major activities for
which the Government is providing funds under this award follow: Scientific
Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR). This committee of the International
Council of Scientific Unions (ICSU) is charged with furthering the coordination
of scientific activity in Antarctica. The Academy is the U.S.-adhering body to
ICSU and thus to SCAR. Participation in SCAR furthers U.S. policy fostering
cooperative research in Antarctica. SCAR working groups and symposia, and typing
and printing of the U.S. Annual Report No. 30 to SCAR. Identification of
Research Needs. The PRB will continue work on, contribute to, or complete
studies on: U.S. research initiatives on global processes and change; U.S.
capability of support research in polar regions; the scientific potential of
U.S. Coast Guard (USCG) vessels and polar research ship requirements; polar ice
coring capabilities; arctic solid geoscience needs; Arctic social science needs
review of ARPA documents and plans; international arctic research developments,
and application of antarctic experience to space habitation. The PRB continues
to assure active participation of U.S. scientists in the work of the SCAR. The
PRB is uniquely suited to perform the proposed work. It is government-chartered
to provide advice to the government, and its stature assures access to qualified
scientists, engineers, and others who contribute their expertise and time to
approved studies. Accomplishments in 1988/1989 included publication of major
articles on polar science issues by PRB members; advice to the USCG and NSF on
polar class icebreakers; reports on priorities in arctic marine sciences, arctic
social science, physical and chemical oceanography of the Southern Ocean, and
biomedical research. The Program recommends support at $145K from NSF. The PRB
has succeeded in reducing its dependance on the NSF from 100% in 1978 to about
37% in 1987.