* 8950312
* Advances in Biology and Geology:  Evolutionary Perspectives
* EHR,DRL
* 06/15/1989,11/30/1991
* Jean Milani, BSCS Science Learning
* Continuing Grant
* Gerhard L. Salinger
* 11/30/1991
* USD 433,061.00

Recent progress in biology and geology has provided new insights into the
processes that have led to our earth as we find it today and to the existing
variety of life forms. This work affirms the view that the central for
understanding life on earth is evolution. However, high school earth science and
biology curricula do not adequately address the ways in which modern topics such
as plate tectonics or molecular biology inform our understanding of this
framework. The Biological Sciences Curriculum Study (BSCS), in cooperation with
the American Society of Zoologists and the Geological Society of American, will
design, develop, field test, and distribute print materials and an interactive
videodisc on advances in our understanding of evolution for use in high school
earth science and biology courses. The materials will be designed for
integration into biology and earth science curricula throughout the year rather
than as a separate unit; this approach will promote the incorporation of
evolutionary perspectives throughout the curriculum. The materials also will
acquaint students with "science as a way of knowing", by emphasizing such
concepts as hypothesis formation, data analysis, and the tentative nature of
scientific knowledge. Media Design Associates, Boulder, Colorado will produce
the videodisc and interactive software; VideoDiscovery, Seattle Washington, will
publish and market the completed program. Wards's Natural Science Establishment,
Rochester, New York, will provide laboratory equipment and materials for all
field-test schools and will be the official supplier of the materials when the
program reaches commercial distribution.