* 8950306
* Arkansas' Project MAST:  Mathematics and Science Together
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/1989,04/30/1995
* Kathy Briggs, University of Arkansas Little Rock
* Continuing grant
* Gerhard L. Salinger
* 04/30/1995
* USD 1,078,573.00

This project will introduce into grades two through six at fifteen sites in
Arkansas a program that integrates science and mathematics. Eighty students will
selected to participate in each of three phases (grades two-three, grades four-
five, grade six). A search will be undertaken for suitable, existing materials;
additional instructional materials will be developed as needed. The program will
emphasize critical thinking skills and will exploit the computer and other
educational technology when appropriate. An intensive teacher training effort
will coincide with the curriculum development activities. A pair of teachers
from each of the fifteen sites will attend a three-week program in order to
upgrade their knowledge of mathematics and science to the level demanded by the
integrated curriculum that is adopted, and to become familiar with the
instructional materials to be used. Such sessions will be held each summer for
four years, thereby bringing the number of trained teachers to 120. The first
year the focus will be on second and third grade teachers; in subsequent years
teachers in progressively higher grades will participate. In each summer, sixty
local elementary students will attend these sessions and help with tests of new
materials and teaching methods. The dissemination of this trial program to other
schools in Arkansas will occur within the frame work of Governor Clinton's
Restructured School Program. A precursor to the proposed new program, enrichment
in mathematics for gifted students, also benefited from input from the
Governor's Office, and has been declared a success, particularly by reducing the
performance gap between, minority and majority students. The faculty members
from the University of Arkansas at Little Rock who manage the older program will
also oversee the new one. In addition, leadership and advice will be provided by
a Board of Advisors and by expert consultants. This project will serve as a
model for university/school/statehouse collaboration on a statewide basis. The
cost sharing from state and local sources is forty-five percent of the NSF
contribution.