* 8950324
* Teacher Participation in the 2nd International Conference onSchool and Popular Meteorological Education
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/1989,03/31/1991
* Richard Hallgren, American Meteorological Society
* Standard Grant
* David Schindel
* 03/31/1991
* USD 120,500.00

This project provides for the participation of 100 grade K-12 teachers of
earth, oceanographic, and atmospheric sciences in the Second International
Conference on School and Meteorological Education. The three-day conference to
be held in the Washington, DC, area in July 1989, is hosted and organized by the
American Meteorological Society (AMS), with the co-sponsorship of the Royal
Meteorological Society (RMS) and the World Meteorological Organization (WMO).
Teachers targeted for selection are those who have demonstrated abilities to
successfullly incorporate the study of meteorology and/or oceanography into
their classroom programs, and to communicate noteworthy practices to other
teachers. Participation in the Conference will afford these leader-teachers the
opportunity to interact with teachers, researchers and other discipline
professionals from all over the world, including representatives from the ten
international training centers of the WMO. The U.S. teachers will take part in
workshops, poster sessions, invited state-of-the art lecture presentations,
"hands-on" laboratory activities, structured discussion sessions, as well as
informal exchanges with a full cross-section of the attendees. Participants will
produce written plans on how the content, materials, and techniques presented at
the Conference will be implemented in their classrooms and in required in-
service training sessions for other teachers. Each participant will receive
copies of the Conference proceedings, which by design will also serve as a
teacher reference for integrating weather- and ocean-related topics into the
classroom. As a result of the conference, the participants will form a cadre of
leader-teachers in the atmospheric and oceanographic sciences to network not
only among themselves but to additionally link with the professional
organizations of practitioners in these fields. The AMS is poised to provide
leadership from its members in this educational effort in which the Conference
is expected to serve as a catalyst. SEE Directorate funding is entirely for
direct participant support and selection. The GEO Directorate contribution to
costs of advertising, printing, and clerical assistance amounts to 14.5% of the
total recommended grant. No indirect costs are included in the grant; all other
administrative costs are borne by the AMS.