* 8950669
* Computer-Based Data Acquisition for the Physics Laboratory  in Rose-Hulman's Integrated Freshman Curriculum
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1989,01/31/1992
* Michael Moloney, Rose-Hulman Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 01/31/1992
* USD 23,105.00

Zenith IBM-compatible PCs and the Keithley System 570 (with ultrasonic ranging,
force transducers and voltage sensors) will be used to rapidly acquire physics
laboratory data in an innovative "integrated" curriculum for RHIT freshmen next
fall. With the computer helping record, analyze, and display lab information,
students can assess the results of a run almost immediately. New trials with
different conditions can be planned and carried out quickly. How does air drag
depend on air cart sail dimensions? Carry out trials with different sail areas.
Velocity? Run the same sail at different velocities. This is all possible in a
single lab period, perhaps in only a part of a lab period. Now students can
explore scaling properties in many different systems where force, voltage,
resistance, position, velocity, etc. are variables. If data needs further
manipulation, or is to be used for a pedagogical purpose outside the laboratory,
disk files can be produced on the spot. Homework assignments for mathematics and
physics will now regularly include relevant, real, lab-generated data on floppy
disk files which are formatted for spreadsheets, PCs, or a mainframe. The
Institute will match the award with an equal amount of funds.