* 8950114
* Conference on Triple Junction and Subduction Zone Tectonics for Undergraduate Geology Teachers
* EHR,DUE
* 02/01/1989,01/31/1991
* Raymond Burke, Humboldt State University
* Standard Grant
* William E. Haver
* 01/31/1991
* USD 39,229.00

Northcoastal California occupies a unique location for understanding plate
tectonic processes and present day seismic risks. Recorded here is an unusually
long period of deformation in a convergent margin setting; it is also the only
area in the United States adjacent to a triple junction. The Mendocino triple
junction marks the transition between the predominately strike-slip behavior of
the San Andreas system to the south and the convergent regime of the Cascadia
subduction zone to the north. The Cascadia subduction zone has the potential of
generating great earthquakes and has become a top seismic hazards research
priority of the US Geological Survey. A two day conference on the seismicity,
neotectonics and the geological framework of northwestern California is being
held for undergraduate teachers of geology. Approximately 100 participants are
attending overview talks, small group workshops and field trips, all oriented
towards using recent research results in undergraduate education. All
presentations are being conducted by faculty who have pioneered much of the work
in this area. Participants will be provided with detailed field trip notes,
workshop materials and slide sets to facilitate easy assimilation into their
undergraduate courses. The use of ongoing research in undergraduate education is
a philosophy of the Geology Department at Humboldt State University and is a
central theme of the conference. The university is also providing support for
the conference.