* 8950904
* Biotechnology Laboratory Series For Undergraduates
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/1990,08/31/1992
* Abigail Salyers, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Joanne G. Rodewald
* 08/31/1992
* USD 62,950.00

This award provides funds to the Department of Microbiology at the University of
Illinois, Urbana to equip a three-semester biotechnology laboratory series for
undergraduates who have had an introductory microbiology laboratory and are
interested in learning more advanced modern molecular biology and biochemical
techniques. The series would be aimed at students who want to work in industry
after graduation or who want to do graduate work in biotechnology and applied
microbiology. The series would consist of (i) a course in genetics and
biochemistry of industrially important microorganisms, primarily actinomycetes
and fungi, (ii) a course in genetics and biochemistry of pathogenic bacteria,
and (iii) a course in immunochemistry. These one semester courses could be taken
alone or as a series in any order. Although the main goal of these laboratory
courses is to teach modern molecular techniques, they are also designed to
develop problem solving and quantitative skills, and would give students
experience in written and oral presentation of data. Courses in all three areas
are currently offered in the department but only the immunochemistry course has
fully incorporated state-of-the-art modern techniques. The equipment purchased
through this award will allow the current industrial microbiology and pathogenic
microbiology courses to be updated. The updated courses will break new ground in
biotechnology instruction for undergraduates and should thus serve as prototypes
for such courses in other colleges and universities. The grantee is matching
this award with non-Federal sources.