* 8950970
* Chemical Analysis in Mineralogy, Petrology and Geochemistry Using Inductively - Coupled Plasma - Quadrupole Mass        Spectrometer
* EHR,DUE
* 06/15/1989,11/30/1991
* Kurt Hollocher, Union College
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 11/30/1991
* USD 50,250.00

The objective of this project is to introduce quantitative chemical analysis
into the undergraduate geology curriculum at an early stage, and where chemical
data collection and interpretation can significantly improve student
understanding of geologic material and processes. There will be a logical
sequence of analytical exercises of increasing sophistication as the students
proceed through the course. They start with analysis of simple materials
(minerals-in-Mineralogy) concentrating on major elements, proceed to more
complex systems (rocks - in Petrology), and continue with trace elements and
isotopic analysis in Geochemistry, where students also investigate geochemical
modeling. The essential item necessary for this program is an analytical tool
which is versatile, robust, and straight-forward in operation-an Inductively
Coupled Plasma - Quadrupole Mass Spectrometer (ICPQMS) which has these
characteristics. This instrument will be used for major and trace element to
courses in mineralogy, petrology, and geochemistry, the ICPQMS will be used in
undergraduate research projects by geology majors at Union, geology students
form other institutions (from our PEW cluster and others), and by students from
other departments (Civil Engineering, Chemistry, and Biology). The college will
contribute an amount equal to 330% of the award toward the purchase of the
equipment.