* 8950302
* A Model Project to Improve High School Mathematics          Achievement in Urban High School Districts
* EHR,DRL
* 08/15/1989,07/31/1994
* Gilbert Lopez, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Margaret B. Cozzens
* 07/31/1994
* USD 1,826,261.00

The underachievement of Black and Hispanic students in precollege mathematics
is seriously undermining the potential talent pool for the future challenges in
science and technology. This project is a comprehensive model effort to
demonstrate and further develop a system of mathematics instruction that gives
all students the opportunity to enroll in and achieve in the precollege
mathematics requisite for college study in science and engineering. The model
project is based on the action research and development of the Comprehensive
Math & Science Program (CMSP), a collaborative project effort which has created
curriculum and instructional models that have significantly increased the pool
of students at participant schools in New York City and Fulton County, Georgia
who enroll and achieve in precollge mathematics. The model project will be
demonstrated over a four-year period in six districts: New York City, Boston,
Washington, D.C., Seattle, Los Angeles and Fulton County in Georgia. Over 7,500
students from 30 high schools in the six school districts will participate in
the model project. All of the students will be selected at random and their
academic performance and persistence will be carefully monitored with
standardized tests; and comparisons will be made at city, state and national
levels. By virtue of substantially increased learning times, structured programs
and a greater reliance on students for their own learning, significant gains in
mathematics achievement are expected to occur. The CMSP's long collaboration
with a coalition of university-based precollege programs operating in urban
school districts will facilitate project implementation. The effectiveness of
the CMSP has been validated through the extensive data collection and analysis
done since its inception. CMSP students have consistently out performed non-CMSP
students, and have been more able to perform at grade level though high school.
During the 1983-84 academic year, CMSP looked at the number of students enrolled
in the CMSP program and at the non- CMSP students in six participating schools.
These students were again surveyed during the 1986-67 year when they would be
seniors. Of the CMSP students, 26% were still in school at grade level, while
only 18% of the non-CMSP students remained and were at grade level. When
students in tow of the schools took the New State Algebra Regents Examination,
the percentages for CMSP students passing the exam were 99% and 90%; the non-
CMSP students percentages were 80% and 66%. Clearly, this project has developed
an intervention strategy that is effective.