* 8950025
* Faculty Enhancement in the Chemical Sciences for the        Regional Universities of Mississippi
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/1989,12/31/1994
* David Wertz, University of Southern Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* William E. Haver
* 12/31/1994
* USD 162,372.00

Focusing on cooperation within the State, the Chemical Sciences Consortium is
conducting a three year project oriented towards enhancement of the chemical
science faculties at the Regional Universities of Mississippi. Because of their
strength in the Chemical Sciences, both in terms of educational and research
activities, the University of Southern Mississippi has been asked by the
Consortium to function as the lead University in this project. Two one week
Chemical Science Conferences are being conducted each of the three years of the
project under the supervision of the Consortium's Coordination Committee. Each
of the six week long conferences has been organized by co-chairs who are
recognized experts within the topical area of that conference. Each conference
emphasizes a nationally important new topic in the chemical sciences. Several of
the topics transverse the traditional boundaries of chemistry. Each of the
programs will feature several nationally renowned invited speakers who will
deliver lectures on vital new aspects concerning that conference's topic. These
lectures also will be open to general audiences. The remaining activities of
each program, i.e. demonstrations, topical discussions, laboratory experiments,
etc., will be available only to the participants. At least 30% of each
conference is being devoted to hands-on laboratory, using the specialized
equipment available at the host institution. The project also features a unique
on-site visit by each of the conference co- chairs to each of the participants
universities to aid their faculty in implementing inclusion of the new
information into their curricula and "return" visits by the participants and
selected students to the host university to use equipment not available on the
participant's campus. The host institution and The Institutions of Higher
Learning of Mississippi are contributing one-third of the cost of the project.