* 8950333
* Differentiation and Theory Change in Thermal Physics:  The  Role of Conceptual Models and Metaconceptual Understanding
* EDU,DRL
* 03/15/1990,12/31/1995
* Marianne Wiser, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Barbara Lovitts
* 12/31/1995
* USD 627,922.00

This research will explore the implications of the "naive theory" view for the
teaching of thermal physics. The main questions to be addressed concern how to
promote theory change. The investigator will focus on three factors: (1) making
the textbook theory intelligible in spite of students' misconceptions; (2)
providing students with metaconceptual understanding of the nature of scientific
knowledge; and (3) designing the curriculum taking into account the process of
differentiation itself. Given that the differentiation appears to proceed in
specific stages the curricular sequence should be chosen to optimize the
transition from one stage to the next. Two classroom studies (Studies 1 and 4)
explore the use of multiple computer-implemented, interactive, visual models in
making the textbook theory accessible to ninth graders by comparing a model-
based curriculum to a more standard one based on the laws from experimental and
problem-solving applying the newly learned laws. Study 4 also examines the
effect of metaconceptual knowledge on the reconceptualization at the content
level. Two studies (Studies 2 and 3) explore the process of differentiation
induced by a computer model in individual students over a one-month period. The
project will develop prototype teaching materials (software, curriculum and a
teacher guide) based on these models.