* 8950896
* Equipment for Curricular Improvement of Laboratory Courses  in Psychology
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/1989,10/31/1991
* James Gordon, CUNY Hunter College
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 10/31/1991
* USD 30,792.00

This project improves the undergraduate curriculum at all levels of instruction
by providing our students with experience and training in state of the art
techniques for several areas of psychological research. Experimental stations
are set up in the undergraduate laboratory at which students, working in pairs,
conduct experiments in learning, cognition, perception and psycholinguistics.
Each work station consists of a computer with a color monitor capable of
presenting good quality graphics, an interfacing unit that allows the students
to use the computer to control and sense events in the environment, and add-on
boards and devices that make it possible to present auditory and visual stimuli.
These experimental work stations enable the students to perform experiments on
the most current areas of psychological research. In addition, more advanced
undergraduate students are trained, not only to use the computer in conducting
experiments, but to program these experiments and use the peripheral devices. In
the current curriculum the experimental psychology course is, for many of our
psychology majors, their only laboratory experience. The improvements made
possible through this grant enable the expansion of laboratory facilities
enhancing the current experimental course as well as adding laboratory
components to undergraduate courses in Sensation and Perception, Learning, and
Psycholinguistics. Such revisions will increase students interests in, and
appreciation for, modern psychological science. The institution is matching the
NSF grant with an equal amount of funds.