* 8950416
* Automated Particle Size Analysis:  Addition of Detailed     Sediment Analysis to the Geology Curriculum
* EHR,DUE
* 05/15/1989,10/31/1991
* Michael Retelle, Bates College
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 10/31/1991
* USD 16,250.00

Bates will purchase automated sedimentology lab equipment: a Micromeritics
Sedigraph 5100 and IBM-compatible personal computer and software. This equipment
will be used in the analysis of fine-grained sediment samples recovered in
coordinated field/lab exercises in introductory geology, sedimentology, glacial
and Quaternary geology courses, and in independent student research. This
equipment allows rapid and detailed particle size analysis, data reduction and
graphic presentation of analytical results with a minimum of time expenditure
and sample preparation. Grain size distribution of sediments is often a function
of the basic energy imparted to materials by wind, water, or glaciers. Hence,
the analysis of grain size of sediment is a critical descriptive tool used by
sedimentary geologists to help to fingerprint depositional processes or
environments of deposition. Students in geology curriculum at Bates Collge are
introduced to these processes and environments through field work in
introductory and more advanced courses, intensive short term courses and senior
thesis research. Automated sediment analysis will enhance the existing
curriculum and facilities in the geology department. In addition, the new
facility will introduce students to modern sedimentological techniques and allow
them to conduct more detailed and accurate analyses of geologic materials. The
college is matching the grant with an equal amount of funds.