* 8950763
* A Quantum Tunneling Laboratory Module:  Scanning Tunneling  Microscope and SQUID
* EHR,DUE
* 07/15/1989,12/31/1991
* Jack Beal, Fairfield University
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 12/31/1991
* USD 26,750.00

Fairfield University will purchase new equipment to support a laboratory module
centered on quantum effects in tunnel diodes, Josephson junctions,
Superconducting Quantum Interferences Devices (SQUIDs), and the Scanning
Tunneling Microscope (STM). The general plan is to introduce electron and super-
pair tunneling phenomena as a unified laboratory experience. These phenomena are
increasingly important as a branch of modern physics, and have a strong
influence in basic physics research, in state-of-the-art research
instrumentation and in numerous areas of high technology. Student capabilities
will be developed such areas of science and technology as bio-magnetic
phenomena, surface physics and materials science. The incorporation of the
module into an existing two- semester Advanced Experimental Laboratory at
Fairfield University will allow the curriculum to keep pace additional skills in
the utilization of advanced laboratory instrumentation. As an additional
benefit, upper division students will be able to utilize the new equipment for
their required senior research projects, when appropriate to do so. Finally, the
experience gained by the students in this area of tunneling phenomena and in
utilizing the proposed equipment, will have an impact on collaborative efforts
between, the Physics Department and area high technology organizations. The
University will match the award with an equal amount of funds.