* 8950316
* Secondary School Teachers as Clinical Faculty:  Bringing theResources of a Successful Teacher Professional Network to a Mathematics Preparation Program
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/1989,05/31/1993
* C.Michael Lohr, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* David E. Jones
* 05/31/1993
* USD 244,437.00

The goal of this Virginia Commonwealth University (VCU) project is to use
Clinical Faculty support to ensure that all new teachers will continue to learn
new mathematics, view themselves as members of the broader mathematics
community, share with others their ideas and experiences concerning the teaching
of mathematics and become mathematics education professionals. The Clinical
Faculty who will work with these new teachers will be a cadre of twenty
exemplary teachers from the Richmond area school systems. They will have
demonstrated leadership through their activities in the Greater Richmond Area
Teacher Professional Network. As an extension of the collegial, collaborative
activities of this network, the group of outstanding mathematics teachers will
be prepared to play an ongoing role in all aspects of VCU's Mathematics Teacher
Preparation Program. They will work with VCU's mathematics and mathematics
education faculty in updating the structure of the teacher preparation program,
teach components of mathematics and mathematics education courses, serve as role
models for new teachers, and work with student teachers. The outcome of the
program will be evaluated and analyzed for potential effectiveness as a national
model for enhancing the teaching profession. The cost sharing for the project
will be fifty-eight percent of the National Science Foundation portion.