* 8950847
* Electromagnetic Wave Laboratory for Undergraduate Students  at a Community College
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/1989,02/01/1990
* Robert Fielding, Glendale Community College
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 02/01/1990
* USD 0.00

This project links properties of transversely vibrating mechanical systems with
electromagnetic waves at radio frequencies. Currently, there are few attempts in
lower division physics laboratories to demonstrate any of the properties of
electromagnetic waves at radio frequencies. In lower division laboratories,
electromagnetic waves are presented in terms of oscillations of current and
voltage in wires at audio frequencies which leaves the student with the
impression that electromagnetic waves in space are a topic entirely separate
from transverse mechanical waves, hidden from comprehension by a formidable
mathematical formalism. Understanding the similarities of electromagnetic waves
to transverse mechanical waves gives the students an appreciation of the
physical basis of electrical phenomena. Concepts like impedance, reflection
coefficient, and matching are seen as general properties of all transverse waves
and are not unique to electromagnetic waves. Understanding the differences
between electromagnetic waves and transverse mechanical waves leads the student
naturally into the modern theories of electrons and relativity. The major
instruments to be purchases are Wiltron Model 6409 RF Analyzer. The Wiltron
Analyzer will be used to investigate. A. Electromagnetic standing waves in
conductors', B. Attenuation of electromagnetic waves in systems driven beyond
cut-off, C. Electromagnetic modes of vibration in cavity resonators',
electromagnetic waves in space near conductors.