* 8950308
* Teaching for Conceptual Understanding and Self-Regulation   Through Collaborative Problem Solving in Science
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/1989,08/31/1993
* Annemarie Palincsar, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Barbara J. Hunter
* 08/31/1993
* USD 500,780.00

The project is a three year investigation of collaborative problem solving in
science for the purpose of developing accounts of learning and problem solving
by middle school students and developing instructional strategies and materials
that improve both students' conceptual understanding of science and their
capacities for self- regulation in complex problem solving situations. Year 1 is
an intervention study investigating the comparative effects of three
instructional conditions: a) mediated independent problem solving, b) group
problem solving, and c) mediated group problem solving. This investigation will
be conducted in eight classrooms as the students study a unit on the nature and
properties of matter. Analyses of Year 1 data will occur in Year 2 for the
purpose of: a) evaluating the success with which the desired outcomes were
achieved across the various conditions in terms of conceptual understanding,
self-regulatory abilities, and internalization of the social norms practiced
across the three conditions, b) evaluating the reasons for the outcomes,
principally through microanalysis of classroom interactions, and c) revising the
instructional procedures. In Year 3, we will investigate the implementation of
the revised instructional program in eight classrooms. The proposed study will
contribute both to research on problem solving and conceptual understanding in
science and to the improvement of educational practice, focusing on the
opportunities for teachers and students to work together in "learning
communities."