* 8950322
* Investigation of Conceptual Understanding in Classical and  Modern Physics with Application to Materials Development andInstruction of Precollege Teachers
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/1989,08/31/1995
* Lillian McDermott, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Raymond J. Hannapel
* 08/31/1995
* USD 1,667,978.00

This award provides support for a three-year project to be conducted by the
Physics Education Group in the Physics Department at the University of
Washington. The project consists of three interrelated components: 1) an
investigation of student understanding of key concepts in classical and modern
physics, 2) the application of research results to the development of
instructional materials for precollege teachers, and 3) an inservice teacher
education program for testing instructional materials and for preparing teachers
to teach physics and physical science. A version appropriate for elementary and
middle school teachers will also be developed. The inservice program is closely
coordinated with a preservice program supported by the university. The project
will be guided by a national advisory group with expertise salient to the
comprehensive nature of the work to be accomplished. The emphasis in the
research component will be on topics from classical physics necessary for
understanding modern physics, such as relative motion and frames of references,
waves and physical optics, and electricity and magnetism. These investigators
also plan to examine conceptual understanding in selected topics from twentieth
century physics, especially those that demonstrate the inadequacy of classical
ideas. The investigation will focus on precollege teachers and will also include
students from the various introductory courses offered by the Physics
Department. Results from this research will be used to guide the development of
instructional materials for strengthening the preparation of precollege
teachers. The materials will be in the form of printed instructional modules,
interactive computer programs, and accompanying instructor's guides for
university faculty conducting preservice and inservice courses. Design, testing,
and revision will take place in the context of the teacher education program
conducted by Physics Education group. As in previous projects, the development
process will include pilot-testing at other institutions. Joint support is being
provided by the Division of Teacher Preparation and Enhancement and the Division
of Materials Development, Research and Informal Science Education.