* 8950044
* Uses of Electronic Technology in Undergraduate Mathematics: A Workshop and Forum for College Faculty
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/1989,11/30/1990
* Benny Evans, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Nina P. Roscher
* 11/30/1990
* USD 88,044.00

Microcomputers have become increasingly commonplace in college mathematics
departments and it is generally agreed that they have a significant role to play
in enhancing the learning of mathematics. However, what this role is and how to
implement it are not clear. The two one-week regional workshops planned for the
Summer of 1989 are involving college mathematics faculty in learning to better
utilize electronic technology in undergraduate education. The workshops are also
serving as a forum for the exchange of ideas and information on this subject. A
Resource Manual is also being produced that is allowing for the dissemination
and enabling the participants to carry the results back to their home
institutions where they will field test the results during the Fall of 1989. The
host institution has a large state-of-the-art mathematics laboratory in which
many of the core undergraduate courses from Intermediate Algebra to Differential
Equations and Linear Algebra have been successfully integrated. The special
facility and the amount of time and effort given to designing novel ways to use
it, make the institution a natural site for the workshop. The participants will
be contributing part of the costs of their participation in the program. In
addition the host institution will contribute funds to help support the travel
of the participants.