* 8950072
* Interfacing Microcomputers to Chemical Instrumentation
* EHR,DUE
* 02/01/1989,07/31/1990
* Michael Schuyler, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Nina P. Roscher
* 07/31/1990
* USD 63,936.00

The project is introducing faculty in the physical and life sciences teaching at
two-and four-year colleges to the use of computers in experimental work. The
emphasis is on learning how computers can be interfaced to instruments and
experimental apparatus for the purpose of experimental control and data
acquisition. The activity involves both lecture and laboratory work over a four
week period. After an introduction to fundamentals of digital electronics,
signal conditioning, personal computer architecture, and programming,
participants are focussing on such applications as developing a digital
oscilloscope and interfacing personal computers to spectrometers and titration
apparatus. Topics include serial and parallel data transfer, analog sampling
principles, and integrated circuit timers. After the instructional phase of the
course, participants will select among a number of specific applicaltions for
further study. Included among these are interfaces to spectrometers, a flow
injection analysis application featuring computer-controlled valve manipulation,
and two undergraduate chemistry experiments which use computers to improve the
quality of the data being collected. Time is also being made available to
investigate applications of unique interest to each applicant. The program is
intended for faculty who wish to incorporate computer interfacing into their own
teaching of experimental science.