* 8951295
* New Directions in ChE Undergraduate Laboratory Experience
* ENG,EFMA
* 03/01/1990,02/28/1993
* Gintaras Reklaitis, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 02/28/1993
* USD 80,000.00

The processing of high quality chemical products requires accurate measurements
and control of chemical composition using on-line devices and computer-assisted
data logging and analysis techniques. Moreover, the chemical industry is now
expanding its efforts to compete in the new areas of biotechnology, electronics,
and advanced materials. Yet, the existing undergraduate laboratory experiments
emphasize classical fluid flow, heat transfer, and fluid phase separation
applications. They focus on direct measurements of temperature, pressure, and
flow using manual recording of data and equipment no longer current in
industrial practice. The extensive redesign of undergraduate laboratories to
include experiments involving on-line composition measurements using
spectroscopic and chromatographic techniques, and micro-computer based data
logging systems is undertaken. Each experiment is designed by faculty groups
active in research in the technologies involved. Six major experiments are
undertaken: two in the biochemical area, two in processing of electronic
materials, one in the polymer area and one involving a shape- selective zeolite
catlyst. The instruments are also used in eight shorter-term analysis
experiments. The two sets of experiments are integrated into our two course
chemical engineering laboratory sequence required of all undergraduates and thus
will impact 600 engineers laboratory over a five year period. Documentation and
experience will be disseminated to all chemical engineering departments in the
US.