* 8951042
* A Software Engineering Teaching Laboratory
* CSE,EIA
* 02/15/1990,07/31/1992
* Nelson Dinerstein, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Gerald L. Engel
* 07/31/1992
* USD 27,431.00

This project involves the development of a software engineering teaching
laboratory. The laboratory would significantly improve the curriculum of the
courses dealing with the design and development of quality software CS456
(Software Engineering), CS516 (System Analysis and Design), and CS530, CS531
(COMPILERS); and the course dealing with the Unix operating system (CS360). A
major problem facing the software industry is the generation of quality
software. A partial solution to this problem is improvement by Universities in
the teaching of software engineering. One of the tools used in industry to
assist in software design and Development is computer aided software engineering
or CASE tools. In order to adequately instruct students in the use of these
tools, it is necessary to give students hands-on experience. The CASE software
and hardware requested would enable the department to better instruct
undergraduates in the development of quality software. The tools would be used
for instruction in CS456 and CS516. In CS530 and CS531 students would apply
these tools to assist in the development of a significant software project. In
addition, since the requested work stations are Unix based, it would also be
possible to give lower division students adequate access, and hence experience
with, Unix based systems.