* 8951072
* Undergraduate Laboratory in Molecular Biology
* BIO,DBI
* 02/01/1990,07/31/1992
* Christopher Link, University of Denver
* Standard Grant
* Joanne G. Rodewald
* 07/31/1992
* USD 23,383.00

This award provides funds to enhance the training in molecular biology provided
for undergraduates in the Department of Biological Sciences at the University of
Denver. The Department has developed a junior/senior laboratory course that will
afford students both theoretical and practical "hands-on" experience with many
of the important genetic engineering techniques currently employed in
biotechnology. The focus is on laboratories which introduce the following
techniques: preparation and fractionation of DNA, in vitro labeling and
manipulation of genomic libraries. The uniqueness of the course is that it will
allow students to isolate and study a previously unidentified gene from a free-
living nematode. Instrumentation for the course includes centrifugation
equipment, a spectrophotometer, and the electrophoresis and blotting units
necessary for nucleic acid separation and identification. Most equipment will be
used in several different laboratory exercises, reflecting the integrated and
research-oriented nature of the course. The laboratory should materially improve
the preparation of undergraduates for work in all phases of molecular biology
and clearly extend their ability to design research projects and carry them out.
The laboratory will also result in a published set of laboratory sequences that
could be used at other universities. The grantee is match the award with non-
Federal sources.