* 8951321
* Ethnographic Data Processing Laboratory:  In Support of     Minority Ethrographic Science Education
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/1989,12/31/1991
* Robert Trotter, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 12/31/1991
* USD 14,345.00

There has been a florescence in ethnographic research methodologies, based on
the development of computer programs for enhanced ethnographic data collection,
storage, retrieval, and analysis. This project integrates these innovations into
the curriculum through the creation of a six work station ethnographic data
processing laboratory. The laboratory becomes a center piece for an expanded
science training program in cultural anthropology at NAU. The undergraduate
program is focused in two directions. One is the traditional undergraduate
curriculum. The other is a new emphasis on minority undergraduate science
education. In line with the latter, the U.S. Department of Education has awarded
a grant to bring in 20 minority undergraduate students for a summer field
research program at Wupatki National Monument. The project focus for this grant
is to provide training for the minority students in the context of an
ethnographic assessment of visitor behavior at Wupatki National Monument (29
miles from Flagstaff). The project melds computer assisted cognitive
anthropology data collection, with ethnographic participant observation of
procedures, to determine the expectations and the preferences of visitors, and
provides policy information about historic preservation to the National Park
Service. This project will continue for at least five years. The institution is
matching the NSF grant with an equal amount of funds.