* 8951815
* Equipping a Cognitive Studies Microcomputer Laboratory for Undergraduate Instruction
* NONE,NONE
* 04/15/1989,03/31/1992
* Roger Kirchner, Carleton College
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 03/31/1992
* USD 63,284.00

The application of formal and empirical methods to the study of cognition, often
called cognitive science or cognitive studies, has been rapidly gaining
recognition as a valuable addition to undergraduate liberal arts education.
Carleton College first began to build a program in cognitive studies four years
ago. Last year, funds from the Ford Foundation have become available to the
College to support faculty and student research and curriculum development in
this area. A concentration (a formal program of interdisciplinary study) in
cognitive studies has been added to the College curriculum this year as well. We
therefore are developing a cognitive studies microcomputer laboratory that (1)
meets the equipment needs of courses and student research in cognitive studies;
(2) fosters the development of a cognitive studies community that encourages the
exchange of ideas, methods, and questions across traditional disciplinary lines;
and (3) emphasizes the usefulness of computers and computer models for
illuminating all aspects of cognition. The laboratory consists of seven
workstations and a printer linked to a large central file server that stores
course exercises and demonstrations as well as student research projects for the
entire cognitive studies program. We also have peripheral hardware and software
to encourage use by students at all levels of the program. The institution is
matching the NSF grant with an equal amount of funds.