* 8951840
* Instrumentation and Laboratory Improvement - Course in      Polymer Chemistry
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/1989,11/30/1991
* Guy Mattson, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 11/30/1991
* USD 68,180.00

The primary objective of the proposal funds the purchase of laboratory equipment
which is used in a lecture-laboratory course in polymer chemistry: materials
development. The development of this course was assisted by an advisory
committee of polymer scientists and educators. The lecture portion of the course
generally follows the course content recommended by the A.C.S. Joint Polymer
Committee. Each laboratory experiment contains two parts: a synthesis component
and a testing component. The synthesis component provides students with
experience in common polymerization procedures and is used to prepare samples
for use in the testing component. The synthesis procedures studied include step
and chain growth polymerizations, radical and ionic initiators, linear and cross
linked polymers, and alternating, random, and block polymers. The testing
component includes the use of standardized test procedures and test instruments
currently found in the modern polymer laboratory, computer interfaced test
equipment for data collection, and the use of spreadsheet software for data
manipulation and presentation. The equipment used includes a gel permeation
chromatograph, a differential scanning calorimeter/thermogravimetric analyzer, a
vapor pressure osmometer, viscometer, and a stress/strain tester. The
institution is matching the award with an equal amount of funds.