* 8951439
* Image Processing and Geographic Information Systems in the  Undergraduate Program
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/1989,08/31/1991
* Richard Hill-Rowley, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 08/31/1991
* USD 24,281.00

Students in the fields of environmental planning and resource management are
increasingly faced with the need to become familiar with techniques of image
processing and geographic information systems. It is important to strengthen and
expand undergraduate coursework in these areas by improving student training in
remote sensing, geographic information systems and environmental planning. An
integrated computer-based hardware and software system (ERDAS) is used to meet
these needs, through expanding the content of three upper level courses,
offering broader opportunities for independent student research and
supplementing the content of two other upper level courses and a large
enrollment lower level course. Students in Remote Sensing courses are learning a
range of digital image processing techniques through the development of test
area classifications. In two related courses, Analytic Methods and Environmental
Planning, students develop and manipulate digital data bases using geographic
information system capabilities and evaluate the cartographic and statistical
output. The ERDAS system requested also allows students to understand the links
between the two technologies and expand their abilities to respond to problems
in the professional environment. The institution is matching the NSF grant with
an equal amount of funds.