* 8952059
* Computer Graphics and Scientific Visualization
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/1989,06/30/1992
* Lanny Mullens, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 06/30/1992
* USD 100,000.00

This grant supports the enhancement and development of the computer graphics
component of the computer science and engineering curriculum and provides the
resources for the interdisciplinary interaction of computer science and the
visual communications with the sciences for scientific visualization. The
equipment includes graphics workstations for the development of visualization
software and display of scientific-oriented imagery, input devices for
digitizing 3-D models and images, and output devices for recording and
disseminating results. The primary goal of this project is to use the tools of
scientific visualization in the science curricula. This is done using an
interdisciplinary approach including computer science for development of the
graphics software, visual communications for composition and presentation, and
physics, chemistry, mathematics, forestry, geography, geology, and biology for
development of the problems. The College is also developing a program in visual
communication skills which takes advantage of the visual skills of the Native
American students. These special efforts may help retain and graduate more
Native American students. These special efforts may help retain and graduate
more Native American students. The institution is providing matching funds in an
amount equal to or greater than the funds provided by the Foundation.