* 8952419
* Instrumentation for Undergraduate Psychophysiological       Program Improvements
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/1989,10/31/1991
* Roger Ray, Rollins College
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 10/31/1991
* USD 48,867.00

This project updates and enhances equipment supporting the psychophysiology
program at Rollins College. A recently modified curriculum and a new state-of-
the-art facility, were severely threatened by increasingly unreliable, outdated,
or dead equipment systems. Most effected were electrophysiological recording and
analysis systems. This project acquires and applies a single and highly
integrated Computer Aided Sleep Analysis and Mass Data Storage System for data
acquisition/analysis. The system allows for integrated on-line amplification,
A/D conversion, digital frequency filtering, and optical disc storage of up to
24 simultaneous channels of various data types (e.g., EEG, EKG, EMG, EOG, etc.).
On-line analyses and computerized color graphics are also available. The system
is broadly applicable, including sleep experiments and evaluation of such
comparative cognitive tasks as mental arithmetic. Proposed instrumentation
improves the curriculum: (1) by increasing students' hands-on laboratory
experiences with psychophysiological principles and preparations, recording
procedures, issues involving methodology, and analysis techniques; (2) by
allowing a larger number of students to be involved due to advanced automation
and data-processing efficiency; (3) by offering physiological laboratories in a
wider variety of lower-division courses; and (4) by eliminating restrictive
upper-division enrollment limits imposed by lack of adequate laboratory
equipment. The institution is matching the NSF grant with an equal amount of
funds.