* 8952231
* Improvement of the Microscope Facilities at Wake Forest University by the Acquisition of a Scanning Electron Microscope
* NONE,NONE
* 02/15/1990,07/31/1992
* Carole Browne, Wake Forest University
* Standard Grant
* Joanne G. Rodewald
* 07/31/1992
* USD 32,250.00

This award provides funds to the Biology Department at Wake Forest University to
purchase a Scanning Electron Microscope. Two components of the Biology
curriculum will be directly affected by this award. These include the laboratory
components of several upper division courses, and Research in Biology, the
mechanism by which undergraduates do independent or directed study projects in
research laboratories. The Biology Department has been very successful at
encouraging students to undertake research projects as part of their
undergraduate experience, often leading to presentations at statewide or
national meetings, and occasionally, publications. In addition, through the
Department's outreach programs, secondary school biology teachers, high school
students, and students from other colleges and universities have the opportunity
to participate in the research program. Microscopy is one of the strengths of
the Biology Department. The Department is well-equipped with sophisticated light
microscopy and video image analysis capability, which is available to
undergraduates doing research projects or taking specific courses. Over the
years, a large number of students have used the transmission electron microscope
as a tool to study cellular and tissue organization in the electron microscope
course and in independent research. A scanning electron microscope will allow
correlative light, transmission and scanning microscopy, and will extend the
uses of electron microscopy to a number of laboratory courses and research
projects where it is not presently feasible. The grantee is matching this award
with non-Federal sources.