* 8953479
* Interdisciplinary Teacher Enhancement Program Utilizing     Science Fiction Films
* EHR,DRL
* 08/01/1989,02/28/1991
* Leroy Dubeck, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Herbert E. Wylen
* 02/28/1991
* USD 38,707.00

Interdisciplinary Teacher Enhancement Program Utilizing Science Fiction Films
The purpose of this proposal is to improve the appeal of science to students by
training pre-college science teachers in a more cost-effective manner to use
science fiction films to teach science and its relationships to technology and
society. A further purpose is to motivate junior high school and high school
students to study science. Three recent NSF grants funded the preparation of a
teacher's manual, Science in Cinema, recently published by Teachers College
Press, describing the scientific principles illustrated or violated in a number
of science fiction films and the techniques needed to use these films in pre-
college science courses. A model teacher training program involving 24 pre-
college science teachers was also conducted. The 13 test classes of students
demonstrated an improvement in attitude toward science, in understanding of
science as a discovery process, and in cognitive development that was
statistically significantly better than the control classes. The teachers
participated in a ten-day summer institute and received a six follow-up days of
instruction throughout the year. This grant is to test the effectiveness of a
much shorter, three-day institute, to be conducted during the school year by
project staff utilizing the now-tested teaching materials. Teachers will meet
for two additional group self-help sessions under the supervision of a master
high school science teacher. This will serve as the model format of future
workshops that may be held around the country in which outside experts will
train local teachers for three days, who will then implement this technique with
self-help sessions. There will be extensive pre- and post-testing of the
effectiveness of this shorter format on the students of the participating
teachers. Dissemination of the results will be via national publications. The
project will also initiate use of the home VCR as an educational tool since over
two- thirds of American homes now have a VCR. An amount equivalent to 43% of the
NSF award is being contributed by Temple University as cost-sharing.