* 8953463
* Science Workshops for Elementary Teachers:  A Partnership
* NONE,NONE
* 11/01/1989,04/30/1991
* Charles Leming, Henderson State University
* Standard Grant
* Ethel Schultz
* 04/30/1991
* USD 59,052.00

This project is a continuation and extension of a partnership which has
developed between Henderson State University of Arkansas, the Mid-American
Museum and Arkansas Power and Light Company. The partnership has developed,
through private funding, a number of different topically oriented science kits
which fit appropriately with the curriculum framework of the state. The project
will be conducted during the summer of 1990 using laboratory and classroom
facilities of Henderson State University and the interactive exhibits of the
museum to provide a two-week workshop for two master teachers from each of the
sixteen educational cooperatives which cover the whole state of Arkansas. The
lead teachers will be using these kits which will be further enhanced and
adapted from the existing activity based materials. The participants under the
supervision and guidance of the project staff will conduct in- service workshops
in their local areas with the cooperation of their local education cooperative.
These state-administered cooperatives will facilitate the inservice efforts in
the schools within their regions. Needs assessment and field experience has
demonstrated the need for this inservice training. The immediate goal is to
established a cadre of well-prepared elementary science teachers, but the long
range goal is to upgrade the skills of large number of elementary teachers and
to provide a model for other university-museum- industry partnerships. Because
of the comprehensive nature of the project, the potential for change in the
direction of an activity-based elementary science program, as a result of this
grant, is far-reaching. The Museum is contributing it facilities, expertise and
the actual kit development, while the Power Company is contributing the cost of
all the materials for the workshop which will then be returned to the schools.
The total cost-sharing by three partners is equivalent to 28% of the NSF grant
request.