* 8953434
* Advances in Biological Science
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1989,07/31/1993
* Steven Oppenheimer, California State University-Northridge
* Continuing grant
* Lowell J. Bethel
* 07/31/1993
* USD 158,685.00

Advances in Biological Science has provided 160 high school, junior high and
fifth and sixth grade science teachers in Los Angeles with lectures,
discussions, laboratories, lesson planning and implementation guidance in
forefront biology over the past three years. Documented evidence is provided
that indicates that many program lessons have been incorporated by the
participating teachers in their classrooms and that components of the program
have been locally disseminated by teacher in-service programs and workshops and
nationally through conferences and five articles appearing in The Science
Teacher and the American Biology Teacher. Portions of the program have been
included in the Curriculum Course Outlines for Biology AB and Life Science AB of
the Los Angeles Unified School District that reach thousands of teachers and
eventually millions of students. The proposed renewal is based upon formative
evaluations over the past three years and consists of lecture discussions,
lesson planning and laboratories in forefront areas of biology including
recombinant DNA technology, cell biology, cancer biology, human ecology,
developmental biology, evolutionary biology, human genetics, immunochemistry,
plant biotechnology, other aspects of genetic engineering human physiology,
marine biology and neurobiology. The scientists who work with the teachers in
the program include Nobel laureate Francis Crick and others who are leaders in
their fields and are known for outstanding teaching. Completely new aspects of
the renewal program include: 11 new workshops, including one on cooperative
learning of science and one on alternative frameworks in the teaching of
science; recruitment of seven outstanding women, Black and Hispanic scientists
to help serve as role models for the increasing numbers of minority teachers in
the program; a four part new evaluation plan to document impact of the program
on teachers and student learning; a documented plan for continuation of program
efforts when NSF funding ceases; national dissemination of program products; and
cost sharing programs estimated at about $276,265.