* 8953433
* Experiencing Science
* EDU,DRL
* 07/15/1990,12/31/1992
* Jeffrey Bonner, St Louis Science Center
* Standard Grant
* Hyman H. Field
* 12/31/1992
* USD 251,686.00

The St. Louis Science Center, originating in the Academy of Science of St.
Louis, founded in 1856, is today a major American science center attracting more
than 670,000 visitors each year. A 34 million dollar facility expansion will
open in late 1991. As part of that expansion, the science center will develop
two unique sets of interactive science exhibitions that will encourage visitor
interaction with concepts and ideas through "multiple-outcome participatory
exhibits." These experimental exhibitions will be developed in two clusters
totalling 2,000 to 3,000 square feet of exhibits that will be integral parts of
larger, themed galleries. In the first cluster visitors will explore
misconceptions and personal assumptions about science, using exhibit modules
that address popular myths about science. Exhibits will demonstrate experimental
phenomena contrary to naive views and allow visitors to replace existing ideas
with more general and more powerful scientific principles. Approximately 15
exhibits on misconceptions in newtonian mechanics and classical optics as well
as other areas will be developed. The second of the two clusters will allow
free, open exploration by visitors of a variety of scientific phenomena and
principles of explanation. Visitors will measure as well as observe, using
modern laboratory instrumentation that can be successfully operated by visitors
with minimal supervision. The topics of light, motion, sound, energy, and
physiology will be covered with six lab stations in each. These experimental
exhibit units will be developed with the assistance of outside advisors and
consultants, will involve prototyping and formative evaluation of visitor
response to trial units, and will include formal evaluation at the conclusion of
the project. A unique cooperative agreement with the Science Museum of Minnesota
will allow exchange of audience research data, staff exchanges, and frequent
consultation between the two groups. This project will explore new modes of
exhibit based learning and the potential in exhibit research partnerships. Cost
sharing equal to the award will be provided by the St. Louis Science Center. The
resulting exhibits will be seen by more than a million visitors each year in the
new science center facilities.