* 8953425
* Reading Rainbow
* EHR,DRL
* 06/01/1990,05/31/1994
* Lee Rockwell, Nebraskans for Public Television Inc (NPTV)
* Standard Grant
* Hyman H. Field
* 05/31/1994
* USD 903,000.00

READING RAINBOW, produced by Nebraskans for Public television/Great Plains
National ITV Library, is a fifty part continuing PBS children's television
series which entices children ages five through eight to read good books. The
present project seeks to integrate quality science books into their nationally
successful PBS series, thus encouraging children's interest in science and
making science books more visible. Six science programs have been produced with
prior NSF support; this award will support the production of nine additional
half hour READING RAINBOW programs with scientific themes that will become an
integral part of the on-going series. A special promotional effort will also be
funded to reach early elementary teachers who have not yet discovered Reading
Rainbow programs. Targeted at five to eight years olds, READING RAINBOW receives
heavy in- school use as well as at-home viewing. It is carried by virtually all
PBS affiliates, reaching 95% of the nation's households and 8 million series
viewers. In addition to receiving all major children's television awards,
READING RAINBOW has demonstrated both increased summer reading and increased
requests by title for the books reviewed. The opportunity for increasing
attention to science books for early readers is outstanding. NSF support is 31%
of the total budgeted; the remainder will be provided by the Kellog Company, the
Corporation for Public Broadcasting, and by PBS station.