* 8953446
* Reform Up Close:  A Classroom Analysis
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/1989,12/31/1993
* Susan Fuhrman, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Herbert E. Wylen
* 12/31/1993
* USD 943,529.00

The Center for Policy Research in Education (CPRE) and the Center for Research
on the Context of Secondary School Teaching (CRC) propose a three and one half-
year study of the content and effects of post-reform secondary school math and
science. The overall goals of this study are (1) to provide answers to the next
generation of questions that local, state, and national policymakers will ask
about the effects of reform and (2) to increase policymakers' understanding of
the factors that affect curriculum decisions and student achievement in response
to increase academic requirements. The specific objectives of the study are (1)
to fill a gap in existing research on curriculum regulation and student
standards by conducting an intensive empirical study of actual content and its
effects, (2) provide the policy community with a complete picture of the effects
of curriculum standards as they are actually implemented in classrooms and
schools and (3) to suggest how the design of state and local indicator systems
can be modified and augmented to fill current gaps in understanding about
student course-taking and achievement. The project will be conducted under the
guidance of Susan Fuhrman (Rutgers), CPRE's director. Michael Kirst (CPRE-CRC,
Stanford University) and Andrew Porter (CPRE-Wisconsin) will be co-principal
investigators. William Clune will serve as senior researcher. Two project
managers and several research assistants will participate in the research.
Thomas Romberg (Center for the Center Learning and Teaching of Mathematics),
Senta Raizen (National Center for the Improvement of Science Education) and
Brian DeLany (CRC-Michigan State) will consult with the project. Milbrey
McLaughlin (Stanford), CRC's director, will assure coordination with CRC
research. Other consultants include university and practitioner experts in math
and science. The study extends and builds on current CPRE and CRC research. The
up-close, classroom-level look at reform comprises a critical but otherwise
unaffordable element of the mission of both centers. Conversely, without the
existing research on district- and school-level effects of curriculum and
student standards reforms at the two centers, the proposed study could not be
efficiently mounted.