* 8953457
* Field Involvement - Research by Science Teachers
* EHR,DRL
* 12/15/1989,11/30/1993
* Meredith Ostrom, Wisconsin Academy of Sciences Arts & Letters
* Standard Grant
* Lowell J. Bethel
* 11/30/1993
* USD 466,452.00

Twenty Wisconsin teachers of earth and life science will be selected for
involvement in each year of a three year project designed to increase content
background and understanding of the nature of science through research
experience. Each teacher will participate in sessions with field research
scientists to select a research project. Seminars and formal class work will
provide content relative to the geology or life science area of their research.
During the academic year, the participants will complete library research
related to their selected problem. Participants will attend seminars at which
they will present their literature findings, interact with master teachers to
discuss techniques for involving students in research, and discuss how to
incorporate personal research into a curriculum. During the summer and fall, the
participants will conduct field research under the direction of a scientist.
Local university, college museum, or industrial scientists will provide
technical consulting as needed. A master high school teacher will provide
general coordination. During the second academic year participants will
concentrate on writing reports and presenting findings at seminars. The
participants will present papers at the Annual Conference of the Wisconsin
Academy of Sciences, Arts and Letters, and other appropriate professional
associations. An amount equivalent to 60.1% of the NSF award is being
contributed as cost-sharing.