* 8953443
* Bottle Biology
* EHR,DRL
* 08/01/1989,07/31/1993
* Paul Williams, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Alice Moses
* 07/31/1993
* USD 540,515.00

Bottle Biology is and exciting concept which turns disposable nonbiodegradable
plastic soft drink bottles and other throw away containers into miniature
ecosystems, scientific equipment and science models for teaching the full range
of life sciences in grades K-12. Activities will be developed through
interaction among research scientists in industry and education with the project
staff and K-12 teachers. Materials will focus broadly on the exploration of the
natural, human and agricultural ecology and biotechnology, with emphasis on the
integration of mathematics, physics and chemistry. Three categories of materials
are envisioned: 1) Basic Bottle Biology: single or multi/interdependent
container systems used to create local or exotic ecosystems (students collect
materials and organisms and construct systems), 2) Impact of Science and
Technology on Human Ecology: explorations using the bottle systems in
biotechnology, bioprocessing, waste and resource management, 3)Modeling
Microscopic and Molecular Worlds: model building and computer-aided modeling.
Bottle Biology will be implemented by the Wisconsin Fast Plants program through
the newly formed Center for Biology Education on the UW-Madison campus. The
bottle biology concept strongly impacts science education because it is
unlimited and inexpensive, is scientifically valid and educationally sound,
provides full technical support to teachers and utilizes research scientists in
the creation of instructional materials. Outreach to scientists for materials
creation will lead to their involvement in local school districts and to greater
public awareness and support for science education.