* 8953368
* Creating a Science, Mathematics, and Technology Network     Involving Private Industry, High Education, and a School    System
* EHR,DRL
* 08/01/1989,01/31/1992
* Jacquelyn Lendsey, Board of Education of Prince George's County
* Continuing Grant
* Erica Uhlmann, Nat. Biosysems, Inc.
* 01/31/1992
* USD 228,953.00

The Prince George's County Public Schools, the 15th largest district in the
country, will collaborate with the Prince George's County Economic Development
Corporation, Capitol College, and the Prince George's Chamber of Commerce to
form a Science, Mathematics, and Technology Network. This network will carry out
a two-year program for elementary and middle school teachers designed to improve
their knowledge and understanding of current science and mathematics
applications and to increase their creativity in teaching these subjects. In
this district with a 70% minority student population, the long term goal is to
motivate more minority and female students to pursue science and mathematics
careers. The first phase will consist of four components: (1) a one-week Summer
Science and Technology Institute, (2) a fall semester Science and Technology
Institute Applications course, (3) a spring semester Shadowing/Visiting
Scientists-in-the-Classroom program, and (4) a summer internship in business or
industry. Each teacher successfully completing Phase One will move into a second
phase with two components: (1) networking and (2) an alliance. In Phase Two,
Phase One participants will train colleagues and coordinate the development for
more stimulating and motivating approaches to science and mathematics. By the
end of two years this effort will have forged an interdisciplinary alliance of
400 teachers dedicated to strengthening the teaching of science and motivating
student interest. Cost sharing by the partners will total more than 100% of the
NSF funding.