* 8953382
* Biotech-Reep Partnership
* EHR,DRL
* 08/15/1989,01/31/1994
* Jack Chirikjian, National Association of Biology Teachers
* Continuing Grant
* Lowell J. Bethel
* 01/31/1994
* USD 495,021.00

The National Association of Biology Teachers, Georgetown University, and
Edvotek, Incorporation, have formed a partnership to make the introduction of
modern molecular biology experiments into high school courses feasible for all
schools. Workshops will be used to introduce high school teachers to appropriate
experiments and they will then be able to obtain the necessary materials and
equipment from Edvotek, which has developed an inexpensive line of laboratory
equipment specifically designed for high school use. For only $90, about half
the actual cost of consumables and shipping, a school will be able to obtain a
kit containing all the necessary materials, equipment, and instructions.
Equipment must be returned within four weeks to Edvotek, where the kits will be
replenished and prepared for reshipping. Schools will have to furnish a purchase
order for $1000, the cost of the kit, when ordering the kit, but this will be
returned when the reusable equipment is returned. The experiments were designed
and the equipment developed in conjunction with National Science Foundation-
funded teacher workshops conducted at Georgetown University and other locations
in recent years. They have been tested by the teachers who have taken the
workshops both in the summer workshops and in their own classes back at school.
Cost sharing by the partners will total 120% of the National Science Foundation
funding.