* 8953366
* Community-Based Computer Technology for Minorities
* EDU,DRL
* 06/01/1989,11/30/1992
* Melva McShan, Madison Children's Museum
* Continuing Grant
* Wayne Sukow
* 11/30/1992
* USD 201,416.00

The Madison Children's Museum has organized a partnership with business,
industry, and community people and organizations to encourage minority youths
and their caregivers to develop computer literacy and to learn to use the
computer as a tool in business, science and technology. A complete, interactive
instructional system of 12 Apple computers will be installed in a community
center in a neighborhood of minority and disadvantaged households. The program
will use a broad-based intervention model with cross-age tutoring and parent
participation. Professionals on loan from industry, schools and the University
of Wisconsin will be instructors and role models, serving to make the industrial
and university environments more accessible to an underrepresented population.
The partnership will involve corporations, professional societies, the
metropolitan school district, a children's museum, a community center, and a
state university. Computer clubs, science fairs, museum in-house and outreach
activities, and teacher in-service workshops will be integral parts of the
program and will serve to enhance the study of computer applications in the
physical, life, and health sciences, engineering and mathematics. Field trips
will expose students to the real world of the technology- driven work place ---
data processing in business offices, computer aided design applications in
engineering firms, and research facilities in industry and the university. Cost
sharing by the partners will total 97% of the National Science Foundation
funding.