* 8954625
* Project Earth Science:  Development of an In-Service        Education Model
* EHR,DRL
* 08/01/1989,07/31/1992
* Iris Weiss, Horizon Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Wayne Sukow
* 07/31/1992
* USD 530,011.00

Horizon Research Inc. and faculty from the University of North Carolina (UNC)
will develop and implement a teacher enhancement model for middle school earth
science teachers. A "Topics In Earth Science Course" will be developed for use
in the in-service workshops. Materials for the course will be drawn from the
many excellent though widely dispersed curriculum materials available. The
course will have a total of 90 hours of earth science instruction so that in-
service leaders will be able to select those components that best match the
needs and interests of a particular group of teachers. These leader team in-
service programs will also emphasize and use instructional methodologies which
research has shown enables students to learn most effectively. Course materials
will be field tested in local districts. Topics will be included from geology,
astronomy, oceanography and meteorology. Initially, nine two-person leader teams
participate in an intensive two-week workshop at UNC. One member is a middle
school earth science teacher the other a science supervisor with experience in
in-service education delivery. Then these leader teams will polish their skills
delivering 2 two-week sessions, each with 18 underprepared teachers at UNC.
Finally, each team will provide in-service workshops on-site, customized to
local needs, for 30 teachers in groups of 10. Throughout the workshops leader
teams continue to receive support from project staff. The leader team workshops
begin July, 1990 following development of the topics course in September, 1989.
All project activities will be guided by a National Advisory Panel of
distinguished scientists and educators. Key features of the in-service model
are: the ability to customize the on-site in-service workshop based on local
needs, the continued support provided to the leadership teachers and the model's
resulting transportability. Area districts have made commitments to provide
leader teams and funding support for the on-site workshops. I strongly recommend
a standard award for 24 months in the amount of $483,968. There is cost sharing
in the amount of $151,578 which is equal to 31% of the NSF award.