* 8954609
* Refresher and Enrichment for High School Chemistry Teachers in Rural Midwestern U.S.
* NONE,NONE
* 02/01/1990,12/31/1993
* Vernon Thielmann, Missouri State University
* Standard Grant
* David E. Jones
* 12/31/1993
* USD 201,141.00

This project is designed to strengthen the background and preparation of high
school chemistry teachers from rural Midwestern United States. Twenty-five
secondary school teachers from this region who are assigned to teach chemistry
but who have less than a minor of formal preparation in chemistry, will be
selected as Phase I participants. These teachers will spend four weeks during
the first summer (1990) in an intensively scheduled laboratory and lecture
workshop during which topics applicable to high school chemistry will be
emphasized along with appropriate laboratory and demonstration activities. The
participants will work closely with mentor teachers, in a ratio of five
participants/mentor, who are considered to be the area's strong chemistry
teachers as well as with the project staff. Two Friday/Saturday sessions are
planned for the academic year following the summer workshop. Dr. Vernon
Thielmann of SMSU and the mentor teachers will conduct extensive follow-up
visits with these teachers in their classrooms. During the second year of the
project, Phase II will commence in which at least fifteen of the Phase I
teachers will continue their study of chemistry and further enhance their
strategies for teaching high school chemistry. This four-week summer will
include several theoretical topics, more training in organic, biochemistry,
environmental chemistry and computer-aided instruction and simulation.
Additional teachers who have been identified as having at least a minor in
chemistry will be selected in order to bring the number of Phase II teachers to
twenty-five. This renewal project is the culmination of a previously successful
effort to enhance the background and teaching strategies of high school
chemistry teachers. This project will have reached a large number of the
secondary chemistry teachers in the rural areas of the Central Midwest states of
Arkansas, Iowa, Kansas, Missouri, Nebraska and Oklahoma. Teachers in rural areas
tend to be among the most isolated and the least interactive with their peers.
This project not only addresses the content and teaching strategies issues, but
establishes a network of colleagues, mentors and University staff. The small
cost-sharing of about 3% of the grant request is indicative of the relatively
poor financial status in the area, not the willingness to share expertise and
facilities.