* 8954753
* Designing Case Studies to Teach Complex Problem Solving:    Capitalizing on Advanced Technologies
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/1989,08/31/1993
* Marcia Linn, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Nora Sabelli
* 08/31/1993
* USD 784,318.00

The goal of this project is to teach students in introductory programming
classes to solve complex programming problems in an important domain--social
science. Complexity in these problems will be dealt with by designing and
evaluating case studies that address valid programming problems from social
science. How programmers store and reuse knowledge will be communicated by
creating a "library" of programming knowledge in hypermedia. The case studies
will illustrate how programmers combine principles from the knowledge domain of
social science and constraints of the programming environment and describe how
the library of this knowledge can be used to design solutions to complex
problems. To accomplish these goals and take full advantage of the technologies
of the of the 1990s, specially we plan to (a) examine how experts attain and use
knowledge of programming to solve complex problems in social science, (b) use
hypermedia to create a library of model problem solutions accessible to
students, (c) use principles from apprenticeship learning to devise case studies
usable in real settings that teach students skills to use the library to design
solutions to complex social science problems, (d) teach students to solve
complex social science problems using a non-procedural language well-suited to
the problem demands, and (e) meet the needs of students underrepresented in
programming classes including women.