* 8954567
* Baltimore Elementary Science Teaching Project
* EDU,DRL
* 05/01/1990,10/31/1996
* Leon Ukens, Towson University
* Continuing Grant
* Susan P. Snyder
* 10/31/1996
* USD 2,087,900.00

Towson State University in collaboration with the Baltimore City Public Schools
(BCPS) and the National Urban Coalition (NUC) will provide a teacher enhancement
program that will reinforce the newly adopted hands-on science curriculum for
all of the 124 elementary schools in the city of Baltimore. This is part of
Baltimore's "Operation Turnaround". This five-year teacher enhancement project
will provide teacher training opportunities for 2000 elementary teachers (grades
K- 5) to help them implement and phase in this new curriculum. Meaningful
involvement by the principals as well as the community will reinforce the
teachers' efforts. Twelve science educators, sixteen teachers and two
principals, members of the BCPS science supervisory staff, the project director
and associate project director, a total of 36 people, will become leader-
coaches. This group will provide continued direct support to the school during
the summer and school years. Two teachers from each school will be involved in
leadership training as well as content and instructional updating to provide
continuity and resources at the home sites. Teachers from eight schools in year
one and twenty-nine schools in each of the next four years (total of 124
schools) will participate in a five-day intensive summer workshop held in one of
the Baltimore County Public Schools and taught by selected members of the
leader-coach team. In addition, teachers will elect to take up to four content
courses at the University to update their science backgrounds. Specific
activities for parents and community members are included in the project. A "Say
Yes to Science" Communications Kit for active community members, the use of
"Family Math" and "Family Science" (from EQUALS and NUC) in parents workshops,
field trips to the Maryland Science Center, the National Aquarium and the
Baltimore Zoo are components of the school support program. A workshop for
principals will ensure the understanding and support of the administration at
each school. The Baltimore City Public Schools will cost-share an amount
equivalent to 38% of the NSF request with an additional 2% coming from other
sources. This large commitment by BCPS is indicative of their sincerity in the
improvement of elementary science education. //