* 8954745
* Use of a Tutoring Architecture for Programming to Promote   Transfer and Problem Solving
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/1989,08/31/1994
* John Anderson, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Nora Sabelli
* 08/31/1994
* USD 624,819.00

The PUPS Tutoring Architecure enables exploration of new issues involving the
tutoring of introductory programming courses. Its unique features are that it
allows one to tutor any programming language and its performance is not
significantly affected by the complexity of the program that is being tutored.
The proposal is concerned with three different applications of the PUPS Tutoring
Architecture. The first concerns increasing the low level of transfer from a
first programming course to other programming languages. The effectiveness of
simultaneous instruction in multiple languages and the use of data-flow
representations to plan algorithms will be explored. Research under this topic
will explore issues of how to get students to represent knowledge in a
transferrable way. Thus, this research has implications well beyond transfer
across programming languages. The second topic concerns use of the architecture
to tutor larger programs. Here the concern is both with transfer between a
subject domain like mathematics and programming and with issues intrinsic to
larger programs such as data structures and algorithm efficiency. The goal here
is to begin to understand the relationship between an introductory course and
other intellectual activities it is supposed to facilitate. The third
application concerns developing training material and utilities to facilitate
use of the tutoring architecture by non-Al specialists. A tutor will be
developed for use of the production system core of the tutor and a set of
authoring aides. This system will be tested with local teachers of introductory
programming courses.//