* 8954736
* A Program for Teacher Preparation in Secondary School       Science and Mathematics
* EHR,DUE
* 02/15/1990,01/31/1992
* Michael Weiner, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* ryan smith
* 01/31/1992
* USD 109,483.00

CUNY City College will establish a program of recruitment, orientation, and
retention of students interested in pursuing a career in Secondary Science and
Mathematics Teaching. The program will focus on attracting students who have
interest and ability in science but had not considered teaching as a career and
supporting these students through their freshman year, a period in which the
attrition rate is highest. The project director intends to submit another
proposal later addressing the program beyond the freshman year. The program will
place heavy emphasis on establishing contacts with the high schools in New York
City to inform students, especially minority students, about careers in science
and mathematics teaching. Those students not ready for the rigors of college-
level course work will be given the opportunity to participate in a preparatory
semester to strengthen academic skills, increase confidence, and become oriented
to college life. This preparatory semester will include an integrated laboratory
science course, a pre-calculus course, a writing course, and an orientation
seminar, all in a participatory, non-threatening atmosphere. There will be a
major emphasis in the preparatory semester on developing problem-solving and
study skills in a setting of peer group support. The regular freshman
mathematics and science courses will be restructured to bring them into
concurrence with the philosophy of the project, and there will be weekly
tutorial sessions to reinforce the learning in these courses. A freshman seminar
will be held weekly that will focus on helping students understand and meet the
demands of college life, cultivate dialogue between students and faculty, and
bring in guest speakers to talk about the teaching profession and encourage
students to persist in achieving their goals. CUNY City College will contribute
82% of NSF's amount as cost- sharing.