* 8954685
* Planning and Implementation for Change in Scope, Sequence,  and Coordination of Secondary Science
* EDU,DRL
* 05/15/1989,04/30/1990
* Bill Aldridge, National Science Teaching Association
* Standard Grant
* None
* 04/30/1990
* USD 88,930.00

The National Science Teachers Association proposes to initiate steps to produce
a major reform in the scope, sequence, and coordination of secondary science
education in the United States. The first step in this endeavor is to conduct
three meetings which will determine the framework for this reform. The first
meeting is the Preplanning Meeting of 15-20 leaders from science education,
scientific, and engineering organizations. This group will address the
opportunities and problems associated with a change in secondary science
instruction. The group will establish the agenda for the second meeting, the
Strategy Conference, which will convene in July, 1989. The Strategy Conference,
of approximately 100 participants, will garner broad support and establish an
implementation plan for the reorganization of secondary science. The Conference
will also identify pilot sites to begin the reform effort. Conference
proceedings will be widely distributed. The third meeting is the Project
Planning Meeting which will consist of approximately 15 participants including
education officials from each of the school districts which will serve as pilot
sites. This meeting will set the agenda and plans for organizational reform
beginning with the pilot districts in 1989-90. All three meetings will be
thoroughly documented and evaluated. Cost sharing--$16,025 or 15% of the total
cost of this project.