* 8954615
* An In-Service Summer Workshop in Natural Science for        Middle/High School Science Teachers Including Research      Experience in the Grand Canyon
* EDU,DRL
* 07/15/1989,12/31/1993
* Stanley Beus, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Wayne Sukow
* 12/31/1993
* USD 398,702.00

Dr. Stanley S. Beus of Northern Arizona University (NAU) will direct 6-week in-
service workshops for 26 science teachers (grades 6-12). Workshops will begin in
the summer of 1990 and continue for 3-summers. Each summer 6 participants
identified as Master Teachers, may earn seven-graduate credits and 20 as
"Research Assistants" may earn six-graduate credits. Participating teachers will
come from Arizona and other southwestern states. The workshops have 3 two-week
phases. An intensive Phase I emphasizes content in biology and geology with
classroom, laboratory and field experiences. Phase II is a 12-day outdoor field-
research camp in the Grand Canyon with a focus on biological and geological
aspects as well as uses of the canyon and river (STS aspects). During Phase III,
back at NAU, participants guided by research scientists, will prepare their
findings from Phase II and guided by master teachers will develop teaching
materials based on the previous experiences. It is intended that the teaching
materials will translate the workshop experiences into using the outdoor
resources of the home district; be it a canyon environment or a flat desert
environment for earth-science instruction. Follow-up activities include a
science activity manual with contributions from all participants, a Grand Canyon
slide set, a bi-monthly newsletter, ongoing electronic communications via CISCO-
NET and a two-day workshop in Flagstaff. Finally, Master Teachers will conduct
two or more workshops in their home school districts for their peers. The
Research Assistant teachers will attend one or more of these workshops. This
carefully crafted project uses a variety of teaching/learning techniques,
reinforcement and support for both the well-prepared and underprepared science
teacher. It uses an exciting national resource yet customizes classroom activity
material to make use of local outdoor resources. It builds upon exemplary
cooperation between NAU, local school districts, the National Park Service, the
Bureau of Reclamation, the Museum of Northern Arizona, and private industry. NSF
support will enable teachers from Native American settlements to participate.
This focus, the cooperation and a study of resource management of this "national
treasure" give the project a strong science, technology and society component
and significant minority impact. There is cost sharing in an amount of $182,368
which is 50% of the NSF award.