* 8954597
* National Workshop and Network for the Enhancement of the    Under-Prepared Teacher of Physics Using The Mechanical      Universe High School Adaptation
* EHR,DRL
* 11/15/1989,10/31/1993
* Richard Olenick, University of Dallas
* Continuing Grant
* Wayne Sukow
* 10/31/1993
* USD 810,918.00

Under the guidance of Dr. Richard Olenick of the University of Dallas (UD) the
Mechanical Universe High School Adaption (MUHSA) will be used in workshops for
leader teachers and underprepared teachers. During each of three successive
summers leader teachers (4, 10 and 10 respectively) will attend intensive three
week workshops at UD to hone their skills in using MUHSA materials. In turn they
will offer MUHSA workshops for 10 underprepared teachers in their local area.
Following their initial summer workshop these leader teachers will return to UD
each summer for one-week review workshops. The leader teachers will also offer
follow-up support, during the academic year, to the underprepared teachers from
their workshops. Over the course of the project 24 leader teachers will
participate and 140 underprepared teachers. During the third year another 240
underprepared teachers will participate with no-NSF funding. The workshops will
provide underprepared teachers with important fundamental content of high school
physics curricula, a new approach to many ideas of physics, historical
enrichment on the discoveries of physics and instructional methodologies to
effectively implement MUHSA. The quality of the MUHSA materials has been
enhanced by the cycles of development, evaluation, adjustment, re-evaluation and
refinement. This project design is continued in the workshops and associated
activities. In following this design it avoids one of the major pitfalls
associated with the curriculum development work of the 1960s. Documentation of
this project's success will provide a basis for national dissemination. Follow-
up activities including a newsletter and electronic communication will be
facilitate using support from UD and the National Diffusion Network. The
videotapes of the MUHSA will be supplied to each participant using non-NSF funds
as well as VCRs for schools that cannot afford them. With NSF funding being
phased out for the underprepared teachers in the third year of the project and
being replaced by non-NSF funds there is an excellent possibility the project
will continue after the NSF grant period. The cost sharing in an amount of
$329,600 is equal to 39% of the NSF award.