* 8954797
* Contemporary Mathematics and Technology as a Driving Force  for Change
* NONE,NONE
* 04/15/1990,03/31/1995
* Robert Devaney, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing grant
* Joyce B. Evans
* 03/31/1995
* USD 1,276,424.00

This project seeks to infuse into the secondary school mathematics curriculum
concepts and techniques from the modern topics of dynamical systems and fractal
geometry. The purpose is to modernize the existing curriculum and more fully
motivate the study of traditional topics. Computers, software, and related
equipment provide the vehicles for exploring the new mathematics concepts as
well as offer opportunities for flexible instructional systems at the school
level. The project's format is to work with many teachers (grades 7-12) from
single districts rather than single teachers from many districts. This is a
collaborative effort between Boston University, the Belmont School System and
the Boston School System. All of the junior and senior high schools in the
Belmont District and four schools in the Boston District are involved in the
project. Beginning in the summer of 1990, a set of seminars will be offered to
teams of teachers (45 total) from these schools. This set of participants will
remain with the project for its four year duration. They deal with the essential
ideas from dynamical systems and fractal geometry as well as didactical issues
involving innovative teaching techniques afforded by the existing technology.
Teachers will work in the technology classroom and the computer labs at the
university during the summer months and during monthly meetings throughout the
year. The seminars provide the teachers with a knowledge base in the new
mathematics topics as well as practical experience in using the technology. The
districts will emulate the technology application as it is appropriate for their
local situations. The goals of the project are that: 1) the mathematics
curriculum at the district schools will be modified to incorporate the new
mathematics as well to more fully motivate the mastery and application of
traditional skills; 2) the teachers will learn and have confidence with new
mathematics and be able to apply new instructional strategies with their
students; and 3) the dynamics of the schools involved will change to more
effectively provide mathematics learning experiences within a multiplicity of
formats for their students. Costs sharing in an amount of $371,982 represents
29% of the NSF award.