* 8954133
* Comprehensive Regional Center for Minorities
* EHR,HRD
* 09/01/1989,02/28/1995
* Stephen Riter, University of Texas at El Paso
* Continuing Grant
* Betty Ruth Jones
* 02/28/1995
* USD 3,408,728.00

This project, developed under the leadership of the University of Texas-El Paso
(UTEP), establishes a Comprehensive Regional Center for Minorities in the El
Paso region of West Texas. Cooperating institutions and organizations, in
addition to the University, include the following: El Paso Community College;
the El Paso, Socorro, and Ysleta Independent School Districts; New Mexico
Institute of Mining and Technology; Sul Ross State University; Western New
Mexico University; and, the Texas Region XIX Education Service Center. Figures
on the minority enrollment in the cooperating colleges and universities show a
total of 21,000 minority students (over 19,000 of whom are Hispanic). This
represents 66% of the total enrollment in those institutions. Minority
enrollment in the targeted school systems is 101,000 (95,500 of whom are
Hispanic), representing 81% of the total enrollment. Center activities include:
a focus on critical junctures in the science career pipeline and on the factors
that affect Hispanic students' decisions about education; an emphasis on the
needs and characteristics of the local Mexican American population and of the
institutions in the region; characteristics designed to complement and support
the University's NSF Minority Research Center of Excellence; and, an emphasis on
the support and involvement of industry, business and community leaders. Center
management is the primary responsibility of the two Co- Directors with advice
from two committees: a Regional Advisory Board; and, the NSF National Advisory
Committee. The membership of the Regional Advisory Board includes one key
administrator from each of the three participating school districts, three
teachers, one representative of each higher education institution, two regional
business leaders, one regional civic leader, and one state-wide leader of public
education. The NSF National Advisory Committee consisting of leaders in science,
industry, engineering, science education, and higher education provides advice
to the Center and to NSF on long-term planning and evaluation. Among the
enrichment activities for precollege and community college students are: Summer
Science Day Camps at elementary schools; Summer Math/Science Computer Camps for
8th and 9th Grade students; Summer Institutes in science and engineering for
junior and senior high students; Campus Visit Days for science students; and,
Summer Bridge Programs for Community College Graduates. A series of activities
to improve instruction in the schools include: A series of Summer Workshops for
precollege teachers; a Science/Math Aides Program; and, Regional Conferences for
Science Educators. The Center also sponsors a series of Science and Engineering
Career Workshops for counselors and teachers. Improvements in the effectiveness
of entry level college mathematics and science courses is the major focus of the
undergraduate activities of the Center, with Chemistry being the discipline
targeted in the first year. A detailed evaluation and reporting plan will be
completed during the first year including a formative evaluation of first year
Center activities and a report to NSF outlining the results of that evaluation
and proposing program revisions for the second through fifth years. Ample
computer capacity is available to support the evaluation of Center activities.
This project is an excellent example of a Comprehensive Regional Center for
Minorities. It is targeted at a minority population of substantial size, and it
is comprehensive in terms of attention to the various educational levels and age
groups, in disciplinary coverage, in coordination and cooperation among school
systems, colleges and universities and community organizations, and in its focus
on nurturing, encouraging and motivating minority students. Significant
additional financial support is being contributed to the project by the
participating organizations and groups. //