* 8954692
* Improved Indicators of Science and Mathematics Learning: A  Multi-State and School Initiative
* EHR,DRL
* 07/01/1989,02/28/1994
* Joan Baron, Connecticut State Department of Education
* Continuing Grant
* Larry E. Suter
* 02/28/1994
* USD 1,185,672.00

In order to measure learning in science and mathematics, the Connecticut State
Department of Education, in collaboration with 7 other states and the Coalition
of Essential Schools (a network of schools dedicated to innovative learning of a
common core curriculum in science, mathematics, and the humanities) proposes to
develop appropriate assessments in science and mathematics that transcend mere
multiple-choice tests. These will consist of complex situations that measure
students' knowledge and understanding, as well as necessary skills and
competencies. These "performance-based assessments" will employ collaborative
learning, and involve the design and execution of field and laboratory
investigations. The collection, analysis, interpretation, and clear reporting of
data will be an essential part of the assessments. Some of the problems to be
solved will require a short amount of time, while others may last a month or
more. The development of this program will take 31 months, and will include the
participation of knowledgeable individuals (both content experts and exemplary
classroom teachers) from CT, MI, MN, NY, TX, VT, and WI. The CT assessment will
be administered to a statewide sample in the spring of 1991. The bases of the
assessments of the CT common core of essential learning standards include a
number of national recommendations (NCTM, 2061, MSEB, NSTA and so on. The
assessment tasks will be designed to represent active learning and which include
divergent as well as convergent thinking. The tasks will also be designed to be
as useful for instruction as assessment and serve as a catalyst for the learning
valued in CT and the national recommendations from the content-focused reports
mentioned above. The final goal of the project is to determine if such
assessments and the evidence they generate can be aggregated into meaningful
summaries for state accountability purposes. Amount of Award over 45 months
$997,956 (reduced from original request of $1.6 million over 31 months) -
initial FY89 funds award $500,000. COST SHARING - $874,150 in direct cost
sharing equals 88% of the NSF award.