* 8954340
* Undergraduate Faculty Workshop on Computer-Aided            Spectroscopy
* EDU,DUE
* 02/01/1990,01/31/1992
* Victor Kalasinsky, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* William E. Haver
* 01/31/1992
* USD 44,256.00

A two week summer workshop at Mississippi State University for Chemistry faculty
members from undergraduate institutions in Mississippi and the adjoining states
of Arkansas, Tennessee, Alabama, and Louisiana is being conducted. A special
effort is being made to attract women and minority participants from within the
region. The topic of computer-aided spectroscopy is being treated in three
components involving Fourier transform infrared and Fourier transform nuclear
magnetic resonance spectroscopies and computer-aided data acquisition and
analysis. Those topics represent more modern methods of chemical analysis which
are likely to be less familiar to most undergraduate faculty. The workshop
consists of both lecture and laboratory components in which hands-on experience
are helping emphasize the advanced concepts developed in the classroom. The
primary goals of the workshop are to up-date the training of the undergraduate
faculty on modern methods of spectroscopic analysis, encourage the enhancement
of the current curricula at the participants' home institutions, and promote
continued interaction between workshop staff and participants for future
seminars, consulting, or research collaboration. A workshop handbook containing
the materials and experiments covered is being developed for each participant.
The handbook is being used in conjunction with the workshop, and afterwards the
participating faculty are taking it to their home institutions to aid in
curriculum development.