* 8954775
* Curriculum in Human Biology for the Middle Grades
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/1990,12/31/1995
* Herant Katchadourian, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* M.Patricia Morse
* 12/31/1995
* USD 2,668,581.00

A group of scientists and science educators at Stanford University will develop
a student text, a set of student activities, and a teacher's resource book for a
two-year course in human biology designed for seventh and eighth graders. The
course will include a large component of human physiology as well as topics in
anthropology, psychology, and sociology that are relevant to the maturation of
adolescents. Because the course focuses on the development of the very age-group
that will study these materials, it should prove to be highly motivational. A
team of middle-school science teachers will test early versions of the materials
in class, and will provide feedback and assistance as revisions are made. A
series of three two-week summer institutes for thirty participants per year has
been planned to facilitate the rewriting process. The development of a college-
level version of this human biology course was supported by the Carnegie
Corporation of New York; this course is now offered to several hundred Stanford
under-graduates each year. Carnegie has also provided support for preliminary
work on the current project, and the staff of the Stanford Human Biology Program
is available to assist in the new task. In addition, the project will benefit
from the advice of an eminent group of scientists and educators who have agreed
to serve on the project's Advisory Board. Teachers of this course will be
challenged by its scope and by the sensitivity of some of the topics to be
treated. The project staff will assist on two levels. All adopting teachers will
be able to acquire a set of videotapes designed to provide background for the
print materials. Teachers who need more help with the fundamental course content
will have an opportunity to participate in a summer institute that will focus
specifically on these materials. The project time-line calls for three years of
materials development, testing, and revision. Evaluation will begin before the
end of this period and continue beyond. Teacher education efforts, in part
supported by royalty revenue from textbooks sales, will continue for several
additional years. The Innovative Projects Division of the Addison-Wesley
Publishing house will assist in all phases of development process and will
publish and market the finished products. The company will also share
responsibility for the teacher education activities.