* 8954064
* A Comprehensive Regional Center for Minorities for the      Greater Philadelphia Region
* EHR,HRD
* 09/01/1989,06/30/1995
* Stephen Cox, PATHS/PRISM
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 06/30/1995
* USD 3,584,000.00

PATHS/PRISM is a program of The Philadelphia Partnership for Education,
representing colleges and universities, foundations, and corporations in
partnership with the School District of Philadelphia. The acronym PATHS stands
for the Philadelphia Alliance for Teaching Humanities in the Schools; PRISM
stands for the Philadelphia Renaissance in Science and Mathematics. This
project, submitted by PRISM as a representative of the Greater Philadelphia
Regional Consortium, involves a cooperative effort among the following
institutions and organizations: four metropolitan school districts; thirteen
universities, colleges and community colleges; museums; corporations; and
minority community organizations. Leading higher education partners in the
Consortium include Lincoln, Temple, and Drexel Universities, and the University
of Pennsylvania. It consists of a set of coordinated activities, targeted
throughout Metropolitan Philadelphia, designed to significantly increase the
representation of minorities in careers in science, engineering and technology.
The formal consortium, already in existence, was established to further these
efforts. Figures on minority enrollments in the colleges and universities in the
Consortium show Lincoln University (1,245, 90%), the Community College of
Philadelphia (6.642, 45%) and Temple University (4,898, 16%). Minority
enrollment in the School District of Philadelphia is 141,351 (73%). The central
programmatic strategy of the Center is to focus on the introduction to and
retention of minority students in the science, mathematics and engineering
pipeline from the first grade through the undergraduate years. This is being
accomplished through the integration of three principal components: Precollege
professional development programs in science and mathematics for teachers;
Precollege student programs; and College level programs. Under the precollege
rubric, the first category includes five programs which will be implemented with
a focus on teachers, counselors and parents: The Elementary and Middle School
Project (teachers); The Secondary School Project (teachers); The Mathematics
Project (elementary and middle school teachers); The Teacher/Private Sector
Project; and, Counselor & Parent Programs. The second category of precollege
activities, designed for students (Grades 9-12), includes a set of projects
originally developed and implemented by PRIME (Philadelphia Regional
Introduction of Minorities to Engineering) which are being expanded with Center
support. Other similar summer programs for students are being supported at
colleges and universities in the region. At the college level, research
experiences, internships, scholarship support, mentoring, tutoring and minority
student support groups, and career awareness are being implemented. This project
is an excellent example of a Comprehensive Regional Center for Minorities. It is
targeted at a minority population of substantial size , and it is comprehensive
in terms of attention to the various educational levels and age groups, in
disciplinary coverage, in coordination and cooperation among school systems,
colleges and universities and community organizations, and in its focus on
nurturing, encouraging and motivating minority students. Significant additional
financial support is being contributed to the project by the participating
organizations and groups.