* 8954580
* A Multifaceted Approach to Chemical Education
* EHR,DRL
* 03/01/1990,12/31/1993
* Rollie Myers, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* David E. Jones
* 12/31/1993
* USD 1,059,680.00

This project is a three year program with components designed to meet the needs
of two diverse audiences. Program A, Update and Enrichment, is an eight-week,
two summer intensive program for two sets of forty underprepared teachers of
chemistry from the western region of the country, including the states of
Alaska, Arizona, California, Colorado, Hawaii, Idaho, Montana, New Mexico,
Nevada, Oregon, Texas, Utah, Washington, and Wyoming with a major emphasis on
the selection of teachers from among underrepresented groups and those whose
main teaching responsibilities are for students of those populations. Program B,
Research and Instrumentation, is a three-week program for twenty well-prepared
chemistry teachers per year to enrich their knowledge base of chemical
instrumentation and further develop their leadership skills as they are prepared
to disseminate this information to their colleagues. The Update and Enrichment
Program will provide in-depth instruction in fundamental concepts of chemistry,
experience in the laboratory and in performing demonstrations, the use of
computers and the field-testing of the ICE-developed materials on the assessment
of laboratory experiments. The participants will be challenged to provide input
on their classroom efforts during the academic year between the two summers'
workshops. Faculty from the Chemistry Department of the University of California
at Berkeley will provide the instructional expertise augmented by leader
teachers, both Black and Native Americans, who will provide the support and role
models for these participants. The Research and Instrumentation Program
emphasizes the frontiers of research areas in chemistry and the application of
modern instrumentation. As above, UCB faculty provide the instructional
expertise, and all work will be carried out in the labs of the University and at
Lawrence Berkeley Lab. Participants will visit other labs, participate in
seminars and prepare instructional materials that can be used in chemistry
classrooms. Teachers will be encouraged to plan and present programs to other
teachers, parents and/or other members of their communities. These teachers will
be selected from many applicants across the country. Cost sharing from the
University and the participating schools represents 18% of the NSF request.