* 8954570
* Project OCEAN:  Dissemination of a Successful Marine ScienceProject to Two Sites in California and Texas
* EHR,DRL
* 10/01/1989,03/31/1993
* Craig Strang, Ocean Alliance
* Standard Grant
* Curtis D. Howard
* 03/31/1993
* USD 588,662.00

Over the past three years, the Oceanic Society, San Francisco Bay Chapter, has
pilot-tested a high impact marine science immersion program, Project OCEAN, in
West Coast schools. Funding for this pilot effort was obtained from the
California Fund for Postsecondary Education, the US Department of Education and
the Packard Foundation. This project disseminates the model to additional school
sites in California and to schools around the University of Texas Marine Science
Institute on the Gulf Coast. This three year project will field test the model
over an extended period of time, the use of a second expert facility (UTMSI) as
a resource for the teacher enhancement, and refine the curriculum and teacher
materials developed by the Oceanic Society for use in the teacher enhancement
projects. The seven grade level specific marine science guidebooks integrate
science, mathematics, social studies and language arts and are thus used by all
teachers in all classes from K-6. Each volume is built around the context of a
specific habitat, such as Kelp Forest, Bays and Estuaries, Tidepools, etc. The
Project includes a year-long emphasis on the marine sciences which culminates in
a school-wide observation of Oceans Week. There are strong indications that the
immersion event significantly improves school climate and culture, student and
teacher attitudes about science, and learning and second language acquisition
among students who are Limited English Proficient (LEP) and/or otherwise at
risk. Sixteen schools from California and Texas coastal regions will participate
with 10 teachers from each school attending the intensive leadership workshops.
These schools serve heterogenous populations that include a relatively large
number of educationally disadvantaged and LEP students (Black, Hispanic and
Southeast Asians). The schools have committed money, released time, minimum of
80% faculty involvement in workshops and Oceans Week and the presence of strong
committed administrators and teachers. Project activities include a 10-day
residential training workshop led by Project Ocean and UT staff for small teams
of specialist teachers to become immersed in marine science, trained in
innovative curricula and instructional methods. This is followed by a third week
of training for these teams to develop their leadership capabilities in order to
expedite the school wide program. All-day faculty workshops will be held for the
entire school staffs prior to Oceans Week. In the second year, habitat-specific
workshops will be held for all teachers as well as follow-up workshops by
specialist teams, presentations for parents and evaluative activities. Extensive
documentation and evaluation will be carried out enabling other sites to use the
model. Schools, University and Oceanic Society cost-sharing is equivalent to 56%
of the grant request.