* 8954742
* Partial Support of Annual Directory of Student Science      Training Programs for High Ability Precollege Students
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/1989,03/31/1993
* E. Sherburne, Science Service Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Hyman H. Field
* 03/31/1993
* USD 90,000.00

The Directory of Student Science Training Programs for High Ability Precollege
Students informs students, teachers, counselors, and parents of opportunities
for student participation in the United States and in some countries abroad. The
Directory also helps program directors of national programs by providing them
with needed national publicity, reaching students that their budgets would not
permit them to reach on their own. The Directory was started by Science Service
in 1982, when the National Science Foundation ceased publishing its own
Directory. The Directory has grown from 54 listings the first year to 612 for
the 1989 edition. The distribution has grown from a printing 35,000 the first
year to 77,000 for the 1989 edition. The costs have thus greatly increased. In
1986, Science Service was awarded a grant of $60,000 over a three- year period
in support of the publication while alternative sources of continuing support
could be developed. Advertising was chosen as the best possibility and
successfully started, with 18.9% of the current (1989) Directory being covered
by paid advertising. The interest shown by advertisers and potential advertisers
suggests that the Directory could come close to the break-even point in three to
five years. A three-year grant of $90,000 over a three-year period is therefore
requested in partial support of the Directory while paid advertising support is
developed.