* 8954793
* Leadership Infusion of Technology in Mathematics and Its    Use in Society (LITMUS)
* EDU,DRL
* 05/01/1990,08/31/1997
* John Olive, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* diane spresser
* 08/31/1997
* USD 1,834,099.00

The overall purpose of this project is to model a collaborative strategy for
infusing significant applications of modern technologies in the teaching of
mathematics, K-12, in two northeast Georgia rural school systems served by the
University of Georgia (UGA). Forty-five (45) selected mathematics teachers who
will serve as Leader Teachers (LTs) will work intensively, with University
mathematicians, scientists, mathematics and science educators and master
teachers over a period of two years. They will be grouped by teaching level,
grades K-4, 5-8 and 9-12, and will complete specially designed mathematics and
applied science content courses, teaching and curriculum implementation courses,
a supervised internship and two research seminars during 2 six-week summer
sessions and academic years. The mathematics content will emphasize real- life
problems, having heavy emphasis on problems with science components. In this
manner, the teachers, in particular those of grades K-8, will experience the
integration of mathematics and science, emphasizing the applications of
mathematics. Based on their studies and the implementation experiences in their
own classrooms, the LTs will develop, with the help of the project staff, four
inservice workshop packages for each of the teaching levels. These LTs will work
in teams and conduct the staff development workshops for their colleagues,
called School Partners (SPs), and provide continuing classroom support for these
SPs over the next two years of the project. Every teacher of mathematics, K-12,
in these two districts will be involved in this project as either a Lead Teacher
or a School Partner. Wherever possible, the LT will work with teachers in his or
her own school. The University of Georgia, Greene and Walton Counties as well as
the Apple Corporation have cost-shared a very large part of the cost of the
total project. Sufficient computers will be provided to implement this project
in a realistic and appropriate way. Content course syllabi, grade-level teaching
resources, inservice workshop packages and descriptive and technical reports
will be produced as a result of this project. The large amount of cost-sharing
is a virtual match on a dollar for dollar basis to the NSF request, with funds
coming from UGA, the counties, Apple Computer Corp and State of Georgia
Eisenhower money.