* 8954759
* The Impact of Tests and Testing on Teaching and Learning    in Science and Mathematics
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/1989,12/31/1993
* George Madaus, Boston College
* Continuing Grant
* Larry E. Suter
* 12/31/1993
* USD 1,066,407.00

The proposed study will investigate the quality, validity, and significance of
text-embedded and high-stakes science and mathematics tests and accompanying
test preparation materials, as well as their impact on instruction and learning.
The study will document the degree to which the relatively hidden text- embedded
assessments, typically produced by textbook publishers to supplement textbooks,
as well as state-mandated and national standardized tests and test preparation
materials affect what is taught, how it is taught, what is learned, how it is
learned in science and mathematics across the county. Particular emphasis will
be given to the extent to which the form of questions in these assessments
influence student thinking in favor of facts and recall over higher order
thinking processes. The study will focus on the effects of standardized test use
on learning in large school districts, with a specific focus on underprivileged,
minority, and special needs students, and on the potential effects of test use
on differences in science and mathematics learning of boys and girls. The
research will also examine relative congruence of these tests and test-related
materials vis-a-vis current efforts to deepen and broaden science and
mathematics curricula in order to develop problem posing, exploratory, and
analytical attitudes. $60,000 in direct cost sharing equals 7% of the NSF award.