* 8954664
* Describing, Modeling, and Facilitating the Development of   Children's Geometric Thinking
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/1991,08/31/1999
* Michael Battista, Kent State University
* Continuing Grant
* Larry E. Suter
* 08/31/1999
* USD 718,978.00

According to extensive evaluations, elementary and middle school students are
failing to learn basic geometric concepts and geometric problem solving, and are
woefully underprepared for the study of more sophisticated geometric concepts
and proof. The most critical barrier to students' successful learning of
geometry is the failure of standard geometry curricula to systematically
facilitate students' progression from basic intuitions and simple concepts to
higher levels of geometric thought. To overcome this barrier, mathematics
educators need to know specific conceptual constructions they make, and how such
progression can be facilitated in the classroom. It has become apparent in our
current NSF-supported curriculum development project that the original levels of
geometric thought described by Piaget and van Hiele are useful but not
completely adequate for understanding children's geometric thinking or designing
and fine-tuning instructional treatments. Thus, the major goal of the proposed
project is to construct more elaborate, precise, and powerful descriptions and
models of children's development of geometric thinking. Such descriptions and
models have strong potential to impact on theories of learning geometry. In
fact, a by- product of the proposed research project will be further refinement
and field-testing of the Logo-based geometry curriculum that we are currently
developing ( which we consider to be one implementation of the NCTM Standards
for teaching geometry.)