* 8954201
* Florida Comprehensive State Center for Minorities
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/1989,06/30/1994
* Bennie Samuels, Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University
* Standard Grant
* Costello L. Brown
* 06/30/1994
* USD 2,142,846.00

This project, developed under the leadership of Florida A&amp;M University
(FAMU), establishes the Florida Comprehensive State Center for Minorities in
Science &amp; Technology. Cooperating institutions and organizations, in
addition to the University include the following: Bethune-Cookman College,
Edward Waters College, Florida Memorial College and Miami-Dade Community College
(which are all minority institutions); the FAMU/Industry Cluster; Dade, Duval
and Leon School Districts; and, the Florida Department of Education. Figures on
the minority enrollment in the cooperating colleges and universities show a
total of 42,500 students (Black and Hispanic), which is 74% of the total
enrollment in those institutions. Minority enrollment in the targeted school
systems is 250,000 (Black and Hispanic), representing 60% of the total
enrollment. The Center is developing, and implementing programs designed: to
identify and track academically promising minority students who demonstrate a
propensity for learning mathematics and science; to improve the quality of
mathematics and science instruction received by minority students in Florida; to
improve academic achievement of minority undergraduate students enrolled in
science, mathematics and engineering programs; and, to increase the number of
Florida minority students who earn graduate degrees in science, mathematics and
engineering. A triumvirate of community, government, and business are engaged in
collaborative efforts to deliver these programs through five regional centers
affiliated with the cooperating minority institutions listed above. In its first
year of operation, the Center is expected to serve 1,100 students (Grades 4-12),
440 undergraduates, 190 precollege teachers, 100 college faculty, and 30 school
counselors. The organizational structure of the Center involves an Executive
Board, a National Advisory Council, Public and Private Sector Allies, with
activities centered in the five regional centers, each of which is in turn
affiliated with school districts and local organizations. The Center is
implementing a data-based student reporting and tracking system to monitor
student progress and success over time. Center programs include activities for
both pre-service and in- service teachers, student-focused activities for
elementary, middle and high school students, high school to college transition
programs, undergraduate programs at the freshman and sophomore level, and
undergraduate research participation. Workshops for parents and counselors are
also provided. In addition, a National Conference on Strategies for Increasing
the Pool of Minority Science and Mathematics Teachers will be held during the
second, third, fourth,