* 8954647
* Seeing Beauty in Mathematics:  Using Fractal Geometry to    Build a Spirit of Mathematical Inquiry
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/1989,07/31/1991
* Wayne Harvey, Education Development Center
* Standard Grant
* Nora Sabelli
* 07/31/1991
* USD 502,643.00

Advanced tools and appropriate activities for thinking visually and
experimentally in mathematics will be designed and will be used to demonstrate
how such an environment can 1) dramatically change how students pose, explore,
and solve problems, and 2) make accessible more complex and varied problems than
students can handle in the traditional symbolic world of classroom mathematics.
This project will: o select topics in traditional and contemporary mathematics
that lend themselves to visual approaches (including but not restricted to
topics arising naturally from the study of fractal forms), and appropriately
related science content; o investigate how visually-based options for problem-
posing, reasoning ("visual proofs"), and mathematical research in selected
domains can result in fundamental changes in students' active engagement in and
positive perception of mathematics; o identify the components and features of a
learning environment using interactive computer graphics tools and supporting
teaching materials, that will best support and enhance students' investigations
of the selected mathematical domains; o give insight into the mathematical
capabilities of 7th through 12th graders when they are availed of powerful,
interactive graphics tools with which to experiment, explore, and tinker with
mathematical objects and processes concretely and to reason visually; and o show
that visual/experimental approaches to mathematics generalize well enough over a
variety of domains to form the basis for realistic future curriculum
development.