* 8954571
* Enhancing Junior High Science Teachers Background Through   Development and Utilization of Relevant Laboratory          Activities in Chemistry
* EHR,DRL
* 08/01/1989,01/31/1993
* Lee Summerlin, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* David E. Jones
* 01/31/1993
* USD 424,643.00

Based on a successful pilot project in which the junior high school teachers of
Birmingham were involved in a year-long program of laboratory activities and
chemistry content updating, the University of Alabama-Birmingham will offer a
similar program to twenty-five junior high teachers from the Central Alabama
area per year for three years. The principal foci of the project are
professional development and laboratory/content updating in topics particularly
suitable for middle/junior high school students. Every month during the school
year, teachers will participate in a two- day workshop geared toward these
objectives. Because they are in their classroom during the intervening weeks,
teachers can not only enhance their own content background and teaching
strategies, but can implement these activities in their classrooms, sharing
those experiences in an on-going and constructive manner. This has proven to be
a very viable design for a project of this nature. The monthly two-day session
will be followed by a week-long summer session. The chemical activities will be
patterned after those in Chemical Activities, a recent publication of the
American Chemical Society (ACS) written by one of the consultants to the
project, Christie Borgford. This publication contains over l00 activities
suitable for students at this level and has been thoroughly checked by ACS for
safety considerations. A microscale approach to the laboratory work is being
initiated with a thorough evaluation to determine its effectiveness with this
age student. Emphasis will be on strong updating of chemical content background
in topics covering social and environmental issues as well the application of
chemistry to everyday life. Extensive follow-up activities are planned and an
effective outreach component will be conducted in which participants, with the
support of the project staff and their administration, will work with their
peers to enhance the laboratory offerings in their science curricula. The
University of Alabama Birmingham and the local school districts are contributing
an amount equivalent to 17% of the NSF request.