* 8954638
* Upgrading Contemporary Genetics Teaching Through Teacher/   Scientis~                                    ,
* EDU,DRL
* 02/01/1990,07/31/1993
* Thomas Manney, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Stewart
* 07/31/1993
* USD 349,059.00

This project will implement a long-term strategy for upgrading the teaching of
contemporary genetics in grades 7-12 throughout the region in and near the state
of Kansas. Thirty teachers per year will be involved with practical, hands-on
classroom activities which draw upon the state-of-the-art laboratory technology
that has been developed by mentor teachers working in collaboration with
scientist in their research laboratories. Five mentor teachers per year,
research scientists, and a research technician with experience in science
education together with a science educator will comprise the instructional team
that will teach these activities to other well-prepared teachers and some less
well-prepared teachers in 2 three-week summer workshops on the campus of Kansas
State University during the summers of 1990 and 1991. Workshops will use an
effective, well-tested format that stresses individual mastery of simple lab
techniques, updating content knowledge and effective strategies. Topics include
genetics of yeast, plants (including fast plants) and flour beetles and the
biological effect of radiation on these species. In addition to their work in
the development and refinement of the activities, the mentor teachers will work
with the participants during the summer workshop and the academic year. The
small ratio of mentor teachers to participants will facilitate close cooperation
and reinforcement of the workshop objectives. Mentor teachers will be chosen
from the same geographical regions as are participants to ensure the
availability of their expertise. The use of microcomputers will be an integral
component of the project both for data analysis and for subsequent networking
among the teachers in the follow-up phase of the project. An existing on-going
computer bulletin board-electronic mail network, teleconferences and a final
weekend conference at a professional meeting (e.g. NSTA) will facilitate and
ensure an ongoing relationship among the participants, the project staff and the
University researchers. Objective and subjective assessment methods will be used
to evaluate both the effectiveness of the training and educating of teachers and
the strengths and weaknesses of this model of development and dissemination of
innovative science activities in the topic areas that are not generally included
in secondary biology. Cost-sharing from The University and the cooperating
school districts amounts to approximately 30% of the NSF request for funds.