* 8954352
* Teaching Artificial Intelligence and Expert Systems Courses:Content and Strategies for Undergraduate Faculty
* EDU,DUE
* 11/01/1989,10/31/1991
* Rafael Perez, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* William E. Haver
* 10/31/1991
* USD 129,509.00

In order for undergraduate teaching faculty to be capable and comfortable in
introducing courses in artificial intelligence (AT) and expert systems into the
curriculum, they must be well founded in content and have personally experienced
prototypical development processes in AT. In addition they need to know the
associated learning strategies and experiences of those who have taught and
researched this area. This project is presenting an intensive, three week,
Summer Institute for 25 faculty consisting of content modules, hands-on
laboratory experiments, and teaching strategy sessions to present up-to-date
information on Symbolic and Logic Programming, Fundamentals of Artificial
Intelligence, and Knowledge-Based and Expert Systems. The fundamental concepts
of symbolic programming (as exemplified by the use of Lisp) and of classical
logic and logic programming (within the practical limits of Prolog) are being
presented first in both a theoretical and a practical laboratory setting. The
second week is covering the fundamental paradigms of artificial intelligence
(reasoning, goal reduction, constraint propagation, searching, control,
deduction, knowledge representation, and the elements of machine learning,
vision, robotics, natural language processing). During the third week the
participants are learning knowledge engineering concepts and practicing them,
working with and gaining experience in programming, analyzing, and using a
number of KBS and ES shells in laboratories, and designing a working rule-based
system of their choice. The highly modular nature of this summer institute is
offering the attending faculty a wide variety of individually tailored courses
adaptable to the precise needs and circumstances of their home institution
curriculum environment.