* 8954405
* Great Lakes Research Consortium Summer Practicum for AppliedEnvironmental Problem Solving:  New Approaches and Techni-  ques for Undergraduate Faculty
* EDU,DUE
* 11/01/1989,10/31/1991
* James Haynes, SUNY College of Environmental Science and Forestry
* Standard Grant
* William E. Haver
* 10/31/1991
* USD 106,010.00

The Great Lakes Research Consortium (GLRC) is immersing 20 undergraduate faculty
in a three week summer practicum that is demonstrating environmental problem-
solving as an effective teaching strategy to stimulate undergraduates' interest
in environmental science. Undergraduate faculty participants are learning
environmental analysis techniques and preparing environmental impact statements
for a hypothetical development project in a contaminated harbor of Lake Ontario.
As they are being exposed to new innovative theoretical concepts and techniques
developed by the Great Lakes Research community to understand and solve
environmental problems, participants are being shown how to integrate
environmental problem-solving into curricula at their home institutions. Special
topics, based on the Great Lakes experience are including the theories and
applications of cascading trophic interactions and particle-size spectra in
community ecology; analytical methods for determining toxic chemical
concentrations in sediments and fishes; and use of microcomputers for mass-
balance and bioenergetics modeling of large lake systems. Through preparation of
environmental impact statements for a realistic project, these techniques are
being integrated into the overall environmental analysis and problem-solving
approach that has stimulated undergraduate interest in science at two GLRC
campuses for a decade. Participants in the practicum are returning to their home
institutions with expanded and updated professional skills and new strategies,
methods and techniques for improving undergraduate education and addressing
environmental problems in local communities.