* 8954779
* Haptic Diagrams and Related Text for Human Biology/Health   Science Curricular for the Blind and Visually Impaired
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/1989,08/31/1992
* Charles Severin, SUNY College at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Gerhard L. Salinger
* 08/31/1992
* USD 151,645.00

A paucity of appropriate human biology/health science educational materials
exists at the secondary school level which effectively conveys information
difficult for the visually impaired to conceptualize based on a verbal
description alone. The goal of this project is to alleviate this shortage. This
is being accomplished through a collaboration between health science and special
education faculty which has been established to create and formally assess a
collection of innovative teaching aids in the form of haptic diagrams
accompanied by brailled and audio texts. This material will serve to improve the
quality and effectiveness of health science education. It provides students an
opportunity to actively participate in their learning process through tactual
exploration of illustrative material designed to enhance their understanding of
the structure, function and health maintenance of the human body. The related
texts will diminish the need for supervised instruction, thus fostering
independent learning on the part of the visually impaired student. Sighted
students will benefit as well, thus encouraging interaction among blind students
and their sighted peers, a long-sought goal of mainstreamed education. The
results of this project will be disseminated to all U. S. Resource Centers for
the Visually Handicapped by means of a national conference.