* 8954693
* Fundamentals of Pre-Engineering:  Networking for School Mathand Science Teachers
* EDU,DRL
* 07/15/1989,06/30/1993
* C. Gambrell, Mercer University
* Continuing Grant
* Joyce B. Evans
* 06/30/1993
* USD 408,896.00

The Mercer University School of Engineering will organize a network of science
and mathematics teachers in rural districts of south and central Georgia to
enhance their understanding of the engineering field. The goal is to improve
their ability to interest students in engineering, counsel them about its
opportunities and educational requirements, and insure their courses prepare
students well for entry into engineering colleges. Through the network the
School will provide the teachers with workshops in engineering fundamentals,
current technology for incorporation in science curricula, and examples of
mathematics applications in industry. The three year program will include: (1)
one-week summer residential institutes on the Mercer campus; (2) school year
visits by engineering educators to elementary, middle, and high schools for
demonstrations, lectures and counseling; (3) a final one-day working reunion and
planning session for network continuation, and (4) a regular newsletter. During
the three years at least 100 teachers will have been in the summer workshops,
and 200 teachers and 6000 students will have been involved in school year
activities. Particular emphasis will be given to reaching female and minority
students, since they have traditionally been underrepresented in engineering.
Cost sharing by the partners will total 8% of the National Science Foundation
funding.