* 8954710
* Spaceship Earth:  A Global Geography (A Television Series   for PBS Broadcast)
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/1990,06/30/1992
* Ruth Sproat, ETV Endowment of South Carolina, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Hyman H. Field
* 06/30/1992
* USD 367,430.00

The ETV Endowment of South Carolina, in an international co-production with
Channel Four, London, will produce, promote and distribute a PBS television
series "Spaceship Earth", consisting of ten 30 minute programs and an
accompanying book on world geography, presented from the perspective of a global
understanding of planet Earth. Geography will be viewed as an integrating
science, treating physical, biological, and cultural components as interrelated
parts of a whole. The series will present a satellite's eye view of the earth,
utilizing the best available imagery from satellite, photographic coverage,
maps, animation, and computer generated imagery. Program topics will include
global systems and remote sensing, patterns of settlement, geologic processes,
local impacts of global markets, climatic zones and climatic changes, oceans of
the world, rivers and lakes, forests of the world, feast or famine, and
ethnicity and technology. The Producers, Nigel Calder and Nicholas Barton, are
experienced writers and producers of science book and films. They will be
supported by an internationally recognized team of senior consultants and
advisors. SPACESHIP EARTH will be complemented by educational materials packages
for wide use in formal and informal settings, and U.S. precollege teachers will
have unlimited three year off air tape and reuse rights to the series. This
series promises to be an engaging and fresh approach to science through global
views of geography, with substantial appeal to educators and schools as well as
at home viewers. NSF's contribution will be 13% of the total.