* 8954679
* A Longitudinal Analysis of Cognitively Guided Instruction   and the Primary School
* EHR,DRL
* 07/01/1990,09/30/1996
* Thomas Carpenter, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Larry E. Suter
* 09/30/1996
* USD 4,458,291.00

This project is an extension of Cognitively Guided Instruction (CGI) to Grades
1-3, to the content domains identified in the NCTM Standards for those grades,
to multicultural populations, and to preservice education programs. Outcomes
include a pre- and inservice teacher education program. Research outcomes
include knowledge about how teachers use knowledge about children's thinking;
how classrooms are structured when teachers have CGI knowledge; and how
teachers' beliefs and knowledge influence their instruction and their children's
learning. Knowledge will be gathered about the impact of CGI on preservice
teachers' knowledge of children's thinking and its use during their first year
teaching. At the University of Wisconsin (Site I), a longitudinal study of
grades 1-3 will be implemented and the preservice work will be initiated. At the
University of Maryland (Site II), CGI will be implemented and studied in
multicultural schools. At both sites during the first year, teachers and
children will be identified; baseline data about their knowledge and beliefs
will be gathered; materials will be developed to give teachers access to
knowledge about children's thinking; and work with teachers will begin. At Site
I during the next three years, a longitudianl study will investigate the
development of teachers' knowledge and beliefs, its impact on instruction and on
learning. At Site II, CGI (as defined by addition/subtraction) will be taught to
a group of teachers during Year I and its impact on the teachers and their
children will be assessed during Year II. At Site I, participating preservice
institutions will be identified during Year I. During Year 2, educators will
receive CGI knowledge and they will implement it in their preservice programs
during Years 3 & 4 and teachers who graduated from these programs will be
studied. During the last year, the research will be reported and the revision of
the workshop materials will be completed. This project is jointly funded by the
Division of Materials Development, Research and Informal Science Education and
the Division of Teacher Preparation and Enhancement.