* 8954641
* Project ESTEEM:  Earth Science Teachers Exploring           Exemplary Materials
* EDU,DRL
* 11/01/1989,04/30/1994
* Ursula Marvin, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Wayne Sukow
* 04/30/1994
* USD 777,890.00

Dr. Irwin Shapiro of Harvard University Observatory will direct a project which
is national in scope to serve the average earth-science teacher. The focus of
the program is establishing a repository for existing earth science materials at
the Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics (CFA). Concurrently, during each
of three years in a summer workshop, 40 master earth-science teachers will spend
three weeks examining, evaluating existing activity-based earth- science
materials and developing new materials to supplement them. They will also attend
a series of lectures on science and science education; discuss how to
incorporate new information in earth-science in an activity based format;
examine, evaluate, and summarize 80 activities on a variety of earth-science
topics; produce a teacher activity resource book; and establish a schedule for
master teachers to deliver workshops, using these materials, in local districts
near their home. The on-site workshops will be delivered during each of three
academic years following the participant's summer at the CFA. The first workshop
will begin in the summer of 1990. These workshops are based on the Physics
Teacher Resource Agent (PTRA) model. A data base, already established for
astronomy materials will be expanded to include other earth-science materials;
geological, oceanographical and meteorological. This will permit rapid access
for teacher agents during the summer workshops and later by modem from their
home school. The latter would enable them to customize the on-site earth-
science workshop, responding to local needs. The database will include science,
technology and society curriculum topics. An Advisory Panel composed of
distinguished educators and research scientists will set the direction for the
scientific content of materials and use of appropriate pedagogical practices.
The project is designed around the PTRA model. It will test its applicability to
other audiences and disciplines. It is based on an extensive national survey of
earth-science teachers. It responds to teachers content and on-site needs as
well as their time constraints. It builds upon a knowledge of the numerous
excellent but dispersed existing earth-science curriculum materials and the very
successful projects STAR and SPICA directed by the Principal Investigator. This
project titled Earth Science Teachers Exploring Exemplary Materials gives it its
name, Project ESTEEM. There is cost sharing in an amount of $165,200 which
equals 28% of the NSF award.