* 8954723
* Revise Northern Arizona University's Secondary Science      Teacher Training Program
* EDU,DUE
* 02/15/1990,12/31/1993
* Raymond Tamppari, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* David E. Jones
* 12/31/1993
* USD 576,775.00

This three-year project will completely revise, and re-do, the Northern Arizona
University secondary science teacher training program. This will be done by
teachers, educators, and scientists working cooperatively to further develop and
implement already planned changes. Nine semester hours of science courses
designed specifically for the preservice teacher will be implemented. The
traditional pattern of professional preparation that requires a prescribed
sequence of courses will be revised. The professional training will be replaced
by a sequence of experiences designed specifically for preservice science
teachers, and taught by teams of education and science personnel. The revisions
in the science training are designed to provide the students with opportunities
to: investigate the interrelationships among science-society-technology; study
the contributions of the southwestern cultures to science; formally consider how
to appropriately translate the science content to the secondary classroom;
become competent in laboratory skills performed in the secondary class; and,
become familiar with literature in science content and education that will be of
assistance in teaching. The professional training will: continually emphasize
the application of the professional theory to science teaching; provide numerous
and immediate opportunities for the student to apply the professional theories
in science classrooms; provide a planned student teaching experience with
specific experiences and tasks in which all student teachers will engage;
provide time for the student to analyze and begin to formulate his/her
philosophy of science teaching; and, provide time for the students to work on
curriculum development for his/her first teaching position. The project has a
number of innovative aspects that are designed to enhance the faculty of science
concerning the problems of teaching and learning science. The faculty will
engage in an ongoing seminar with leading consultants in research in children's
learning and in teachers' teaching of science. In addition, they will be engaged
in a faculty exchange program with experienced teachers in schools in Arizona.
The University of Northern Arizona will cost share approximately 28% of the
total budget for the project.