* 8954668
* Relationships Among Disciplinary Knowledge, Teachers'       Conceptions of Teaching Science, and Student Learning in    High School Biology, Chemistry and Physics
* EHR,DRL
* 05/01/1990,03/31/1994
* Robert Hollon, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Barbara Lovitts
* 03/31/1994
* USD 964,748.00

The research has three purposes. The first is to describe the way in which
experienced high school biology, chemistry, and physics teachers think about
their discipline, their students, and their teaching. The second is to identify
relationships between the teachers' thinking, their planning and teaching
practices, and the conceptual learning of students in their classrooms. The
third is to develop techniques of video data collection in high school science
classrooms and computer- based video and audio data analysis to support the
above purposes. In a pilot study, video data collection and computer-based
analysis procedures will be developed and refined by observing three teachers,
one in each discipline. In the full study eighteen teachers will be studied, six
in each discipline. Each teacher will be observed teaching three target units
each of about 2 weeks duration. Each teacher will also be interviewed at
intervals throughout the project; at the start and end of the study about the
way they think about teaching science to high school students, at the end of
each unit to clarify classroom events, and in the final year of the project to
provide feedback about the analysis of data. Finally, each class of students
will be given a pre-test and post-test for each unit. This research will provide
information about different ways in which eperienced teachers think about the
nature of their discipline, the ways in which their students learn science, and
the effect this has on instruction. Further, it will describe various patterns
of practice; ways in which teachers' thoughts relate to their classroom
practices and to the conceptual learning of their students. Finally, it will
detail similarities and differences in these patterns of practice for biology,
chemistry, and physics teachers. These detailed descriptions will provide a
level of understanding of science teaching which will significantly enhance the
quality of preservice and inservice science teacher education and, ultimely,
science teaching in the nation's high schools.