* 8954402
* Undergraduate Faculty Workshops in Computer Graphics and    Software Engineering
* EDU,DUE
* 11/01/1989,10/31/1991
* Valerie Miller, Georgia State University
* Standard Grant
* William E. Haver
* 10/31/1991
* USD 90,666.00

There has been a rapid growth in undergraduate computer science departments in
the past few years, without sufficient growth in Ph.D.s in Computer Science to
staff these positions. This means that in many institutions the bulk of the
computer science faculty have their degrees in other fields and are self taught
in computer science. This problem is compounded in undergraduate or teaching -
oriented institutions where the faculty are expected to teach in several areas
and have difficulty in keeping up with the rapid progress in computer science.
To enhance the quality of the undergraduate programs in computer science,
retraining and revitalization of the faculty is necessary. Along with the
retraining of the faculty, there is a need for the development of new curriculum
materials for use in the undergraduate courses. In this project for 48
undergraduate faculty, curriculum materials are being developed and workshops
are being held for undergraduate faculty in two areas: Software Engineering and
Computer Graphics. These two areas were chosen because of their increasing
importance and because they are both areas where recent hardware and software
developments have significantly changed what can be offered at the undergraduate
level. The home institutions of the participants are contributing the travel
costs and Georgia State University is contributing an additional $33,000 in
support of the project.