* 8954588
* Linking Institutions for Networking and Knowledge for       Elementary School Science Teaching
* EDU,DRL
* 01/01/1990,06/30/1993
* James Wailes, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Haney
* 06/30/1993
* USD 260,288.00

The Colorado Alliance for Science has formed a partnership with 14 school
districts and Adams State College in the San Luis Valley of Colorado. Their
model project is designed to improve the teaching of science at the elementary
level in a rural area by building on local and state resources. Since this area
is so isolated the main or only source of science education support for most of
the elementary teachers is the secondary school science teacher in their
building. This project aims to take advantage of that relationship by educating
the elementary and secondary school teachers together. During the program, the
elementary school teachers will be introduced to the content, pedagogy, and new
curricular materials available for teaching science to young children and the
secondary school science teachers will be introduced to materials, and ideas
which should allow them to become better resources for their elementary school
colleagues. Teams made up two elementary school teachers, one secondary school
teacher and one principal will participate in the three week summer institutes
conducted over a three year period. At the conclusion of each team's institute,
the teachers and administrator will select the science program or collection of
science programs to be adopted and supported by the local system. In addition to
the on-going support provided by the secondary science teachers, six in-service
sessions will be conducted throughout the school year. These sharing sessions
will continue with support from the Colorado Alliance for Science after the NSF
grant is completed as a method for maintaining support for teachers and a means
of capturing community interest. The cost sharing for the proposal will be at
least 43% of the NSF portion.