* 8955089
* "Planning for Science Curriculum Reform:Integrating Content, Teaching, and School Organization/Policy"
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/1989,03/31/1991
* James Greeno, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* None
* 03/31/1991
* USD 87,343.00

This project comprises a series of four planning meetings - 3 focus group
sessions and a final conference - designed to inform the planning of science
curriculum reform. It brings together individuals from diverse disciplines and
perspectives - vis. science, mathematics, cognitive science, curriculum theory
and development, organization theory, policy analysis and practice - to discuss,
in depth, aspects of the interaction of school organization, science teaching
and learning, and policy. This year-long effort of conceptualization and
planning will result in two substantive products. One will be an issue paper
submitted to the Directorate for Science and Engineering Education that will
provide information to the Foundation about the development and support of
curricular reform initiatives in science. The second will be a paper developed
for school practitioners and reformers. It will integrate the best knowledge and
practice in areas of science education, teaching, curriculum reform, and planned
change to offer advice to educators pursuing new models of science education.
The project is being led by a diverse group of core participants: Milbrey
McLaughlin, Leon Henken, Jerome Pine, Lee Shulman, James Greeno, and Penelope
Eckert. They will be convened in the summer of the planning effort and will
engage other experts from similar backgrounds - but from a variety of different
settings and experiences - in each of the focus group sessions. The iterative
planning effort will generate a rich understanding of the current status in re
research, practice, and organization policy and change vis. research, planning
and implementation of science curricular reform initiatives in school settings.
The cost sharing by Stanford University amounts to 21% of the amount requested
of the Foundation.