* 8955274
* San Francisco Bay Area Earth Science Workshop for Junior andSenior High School Educators
* EHR,DRL
* 03/01/1990,02/28/1994
* Ellen Metzger, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Wayne Sukow
* 02/28/1994
* USD 234,535.00

The Bay Area Earth Science Institute (BAESI), is a cross- disciplinary, summer
workshop for secondary school earth and physical science educators. Starting in
July, 1990 BAESI will bring together experts from academia, government agencies,
and industry in a community wide effort to improve the earth science backgrounds
and teaching skills of middle and senior high school educators in the San
Francisco Bay Area. Each summer 38 science teachers from local school districts
will meet at San Jose State University to receive in-depth instruction on topics
ranging from earthquakes and plate tectonics, mineral and energy resources, to
weather, climate and water issues. The workshop will run for four weeks, Monday
through Friday. Topic development in the Monday through Thursday morning
sessions will be complemented by afternoon sessions involving interactive
laboratory experiments and innovative teaching method presentations. These
sessions will include computer-assisted instruction and training on BAESEnet a
computer network designed to aid participants after the summer workshop is
completed. Each Friday participants will travel to the field to learn how
natural features such as fault scarps, landslides, beaches, and local resources
such as university seismographs and mineral collections can be used to enhance
classroom topic development and provide alternatives to traditional science
teaching methods. Participants will receive stipends, commuting costs, and
materials packets from the National Science Foundation and industry sponsors.
Participants will also be given the opportunity to earn up to four units of
advanced college credit. In addition, industries and other businesses who
sponsor participants from economically disadvantaged school districts will
provide support for classroom earth science projects and field trips during the
following academic year. Each year workshop participants will help in the
development or modification of the BAESI educator's workbook, a compendium of
the most useful and innovative classroom, laboratory and field exercises. This
workbook will also contain participant work addresses and will be available to
all previous BAESI participants. Outstanding participants will be targeted for
the Mentor Teacher program and will be asked to serve as instructors in future
workshops. The program strongly encourages minority educator participants and
participants from school districts with high minority enrollments. Cost sharing
in the amount of $169,700 equals 73% of the NSF award.