* 8955223
* National Expansion of Summer Industrial Internships for     Teachers
* EDU,DRL
* 04/01/1990,12/31/1991
* John Fowler, National Science Teaching Association
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 12/31/1991
* USD 145,844.00

This a two year program which will develop 12 summer industrial fellowship
programs for high school teachers. Sponsored by the Triangle Coalition for
Science and Technology Education it is based upon a similar successful program
operated by the Industry Initiatives for Science and Math Education (IISME) in
the San Francisco Bay area. A similar program was started in the Detroit area as
a pilot project and has proven to be successful. The intent of this proposal is
to disseminate the program on a national scale. The funding will support
workshops at 12 proposed sites throughout the country, 8 of which are at NASA
facilities. Consultants from IISME will help to plan the local fellowship
program and will train educational coordinators for each site so that the
fellowship experience can be translated into classroom contributions. The result
will be that 240 science teachers will be placed as industrial interns and will
have direct hands-on experience with science based technology. The interns upon
returning to the classroom will have up-to-date information to teach students in
the schools. The NSF share of this project is $159,490. It will be matched by
contributions from the industries where the interns will be placed. This match
will amount to $329,100, more than double the funds provided by NSF.