* 8955175
* Developing Environmental Experiences for Leadership for     Outdoor Projects (Project DEVELOP)
* EDU,DRL
* 04/01/1990,03/31/1993
* Charles Ritter, University of Dayton
* Standard Grant
* Emma L. Walton
* 03/31/1993
* USD 259,318.00

Project DEVELOP is a six-week summer workshop with an academic year follow-up
that emphasizes the development of teaching content, critical thinking skills
and leadership techniques in field biology, ecology, and geology for newer or
less well prepared middle and high school teachers. Over two years, forty
participants will be selected from Western and Central Ohio and Eastern Indiana.
The first three weeks will provide an introduction to the principles of ecology
and geology, thinking skills, leadership, and discussion of local resources. The
workshop will then travel by vans to the High Altitude Laboratory of the
University of Denver (at 10,700 feet on the slopes of Mt. Evans), where the
participants (accompanied by several researchers) will spend 15 days
investigating the biology and geology of the area. A paved road services the
mountaintop (14,258 feet). The area abounds in biological and geological topics
to study. Workshop participants, with staff assistance, would pass on the
benefits of their experiences to their students and fellow teachers throughout
the following academic year. Each participant will develop a teaching module or
exercise from the summer experience. These modules are to be shared with the
participants' colleagues at their own institution and with workshop
participants. The development of the modules will involve assistance by a mentor
team selected from past workshop participants. During the academic year, six
evening meetings will be held with the participants to discuss their module
development and implementation. Additionally, there will be several field trips
during the academic year to identify local resources. The program participants
will receive ten semester hours of graduate credit, certificates of achievement,
and will be recognized by the local media. An amount equivalent to 30.4% of the
NSF award is being contributed as cost-sharing.//