* 8955200
* A Regional Teacher In-Service Project in Meterology
* EDU,DRL
* 04/01/1990,03/31/1995
* David Cox, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Wayne Sukow
* 03/31/1995
* USD 448,887.00

This three-year teacher enhancement project will provide in- service science
content and pedagogy instruction to 80 teachers from 40 middle and high schools.
It will emphasize the use of meteorological observations to facilitate the
development of scientific concepts and process skills which are relevant to
students' everyday lives. Teachers will learn to use and maintain a network of
computer linked weather stations for classroom instructions. The project
includes academic year in-service courses, annual fall and spring conferences,
annual three-week summer workshops and academic year classroom visits by
professional meteorologists. The project begins with workshops for 30 teachers
in the summer of 1990. Participants may earn six graduate credits from Portland
State University for the summer workshops and (1-4) credits for the academic
year work. Working scientists are ongoing participants and the resources of
public and private schools are combined with those of the university, business
community, and professional organizations and agencies. The cooperative pooling
of human and fiscal resources from school districts, universities, the business
community, professional organizations and other agencies, is a compelling
feature of this project. Cost sharing in an amount of $460,219 equals 122% of
the NSF award.