* 8955128
* Workshop Utilizing an Innovative Approach to the Teaching ofScience in the Elementary Level
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/1990,03/31/1994
* Zafra Lerman, Columbia College
* Standard Grant
* Joyce B. Evans
* 03/31/1994
* USD 328,054.00

The Department of Science and Mathematics at Columbia College has developed a
highly successful method of teaching science to people who do not have extensive
science backgrounds. A major component of this unique approach is the
integration of science with the humanities and the arts. This project will
attempt to transfer that method of instruction to a program designed to improve
the knowledge and teaching skills of middle school science teachers. A series of
workshops using this creative approach and lasting four weeks will be offered
during three consecutive summers. Under the "umbrella" theme of environmental
science, the topics of physics, chemistry, geology and biology will be studied,
through laboratory experiences, discussions, and lectures. Teachers will
demonstrate their mastery of the material by creating and presenting projects
which incorporate their talents and interests. The projects will be able to take
the form of paintings, films, videos, dances, poems, photoessays, sculptures,
drama or journalism. During each afternoon teachers will reflect on the methods
of instruction being used to teach them science during the workshop and plan
ways to transfer such methodology to their own classrooms. The cost sharing for
the program will be fifty percent of the NSF portion.