* 8955157
* Teacher Training in the Observational Sciences at the       George Observatory and at Rice University
* EHR,DRL
* 03/01/1990,02/28/1994
* Patricia Reiff, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Wayne Sukow
* 02/28/1994
* USD 310,007.00

"Teacher Training in the Observational Sciences at the George Observatory" is a
comprehensive three-year program to teach twenty teachers per year techniques
actually used in research in the physical and ecological sciences. This program
will them experiences that present science as a process rather than a collection
of facts. The Observatory, situated at Brazos Bend State Park, is an ideal site
for both astronomical and ecological study, with a 36' telescope in the Research
Dome, smaller telescopes in the East and West Domes, a heliostat (solar
observatory), and an ecology laboratory to study flora, fauna and environmental
conditions on the 5000-acre park site. The teachers will participate, in pairs,
in ongoing research programs guided by a research mentor (faculty members or
professional scientists at Rice University, the Houston Museum of Natural
Science, or other Houston institutions). The first week will comprise lectures
by each mentor to the entire group, presenting science background and outlining
research techniques that are used both in general and for the specific research
project. The teachers (working in pairs) can then make an educated choice of
which project to work on. Assigned to each project will be a Research Assistant,
who will accompany each pair of teachers at all times during the data gathering
phase of the research (60 hours, spread over a maximum of seven weeks) and will
be responsible for the safe operation of all equipment. In addition, a student
programmer will work with each pair of teachers to create a customized research
database most compatible with the teachers' computers at their home schools. In
this way, the teachers can continue to add to their own databases with their own
pupils adding new data each year, either at local sites or as field trips to the
Observatory. Participants in the program may earn three semester hours of
graduate credit. The program begins in the summer of 1990. The research projects
include galactic and stellar astronomy, nebular astrophotography, solar
observation, light and air pollution studies, acid rain studies, population
studies of both plants and animals, weather observations, tree growth
observations, etc. The teachers will be required to write up a report covering
the techniques used and results found. Each teacher will take home with them
videotapes of all ten lectures plus copies of all ten reports, so that the
teachers can replicate with their school classes any of the ten research
projects. In this way the transference to the classroom is maximized. Cost
sharing in the amount of $46,773 equals 15% of the NSF award.