* 8955204
* Hands-on Chemistry:  Enhancing Pre-College Science Education
* EHR,DRL
* 06/01/1990,05/31/1994
* Glen Dirreen, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* David E. Jones
* 05/31/1994
* USD 2,022,907.00

The Institute for Chemical Education (ICE) will continue its diverse program of
chemical education for teachers at the elementary, middle school and high school
levels. This current two-year project describes the continual evolution of the
ICE program, with some of the proven components continuing with non- NSF funding
and current ones reflecting both the maturing of relatively new programs and
changes in the perceived needs of the community of teachers. Continuing programs
are (1) the Instrumentation Program at University of Arizona (UA) which includes
a strong Outreach (Equipment Loan) Program, and (2) the Fellows Program at
University of Wisconsin-Madison (UWI-M) whose Fellows will be embarking upon the
task of assembling, editing and publishing the materials that have been produced
as a result of the programs of the last six years. The first program involves 30
highly selected, well-prepared teachers from across the nation who will
participate in a two-week long workshop preparing them to produce some simple
instruments based on the study and use of more complex instrumentation which
will be available to them for their own use. The loan program has been very
successful in providing sophisticated equipment to schools which would
ordinarily not have access to this level of instrumentation. The Fellows Program
will select three chemical educators for a period of one year to begin and
complete the massive task of making the accumulated materials, such as the ICE
Guidebook for Chemical Activities, available for dissemination. New programs are
(1) Science Activities for Elementary Schools (SAES) at UWI-M, University of
Northern Colorado (UNC), and Miami University of Ohio (MU), an outgrowth of the
Supplements Program which will provide opportunities for 60 elementary and
middle school teachers (20 at each site) to spend two weeks on hands-on
chemistry appropriate for those grade levels, (2) the Affiliates Program to be
held in conjunction with the SAES programs, selecting 10 college or university
chemists who are charged with replicating this program on their own campuses,
and (3) Chemistry Fundamentals for Prehigh School Teachers which will select 40
prehigh school teachers in need of updating and enrichment in chemistry and
chemical education methods of instruction and laboratory activities for an
intensive four week workshop, to be held at UNC in year one and UNC as well as
UWI-M in year two. This iteration of the ICE Programs will have teacher
workshops at sites across the country with participants having an opportunity to
select sites close to home. These sites are UWI-M, UNC, MU, and UA. Ongoing
programs include the Fundamentals Program for High School Chemistry Teachers at
University of California- Berkeley (UC-B) and Catholic University (CU), with an
emphasis on minority participation of teachers from the Western region and the
Greater Washington, D.C./Baltimore area, the Instrumentation Program at UC-B and
the recently completed Laboratory Leadership Program at UC-B. The current
project has cost-sharing from the Universities and school districts equivalent
to 20% of the NSF request.