* 8955183
* Instituting a Teacher Enhancement Program for High School   Teachers of Chemistry at the Biennial Conference on ChemicalEducation
* EHR,DRL
* 03/01/1990,12/31/1992
* Melvin Webb, Division of Chemical Education Inc
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Stewart
* 12/31/1992
* USD 99,100.00

This is a project which will augment the Chemical Education Conference of the
Division of Chemistry Education (DivChed) of the American Chemical Society (ACS)
which is held biennially at different sites across the country. The 11th
Biennial Conference will be held at the University of Atlanta, Athens GA in
August of l990. The objective of the project is to serve the needs of the
underprepared high school teachers of chemistry. Specifically, a series of
lectures, demonstrations workshops, and computer- usage workshops are planned
which will take place at the University of Georgia and Clark University before
and after the week-long Conference. During the Conference, the 100
teacher/participants selected from within a 300 mile radius of the planned site
will attend meetings, symposia, workshops and informal activities. In this way
they will begin to interact with the chemical education community. This ought to
help allay the teachers feelings of isolation from their peers. The
participants' registration will be provided by the sponsoring organization,
DivChed. A Visiting Master Teacher Program and a spring Follow-up Session are
also included in the project in order to support and reinforce the momentum
developed during the summer. A high priority of the program is to develop an
infrastructure among teachers of the southeastern region of the United States,
particularly among those who are teaching large numbers of students who are
traditionally underrepresented in the sciences. It is hoped that this program
will provide a model for enhancing the effectiveness of the DivChed Biennial
Conferences in working with the underprepared and underserved precollege
chemistry teachers. Approximately one-third of the total cost of the project is
being provided by private sector, the ACS, DivChed and in-kind contributions.