* 8955243
* Oceanography as a Vehicle for Teacher Enhancement in the    Sciences
* EDU,DRL
* 05/01/1990,04/30/1993
* Charlie Council, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Wayne Sukow
* 04/30/1993
* USD 367,531.00

Working with a five county consortium of school districts served by the
Southwest Florida Teacher Education Center (SWFTEC) in Ft. Meyers, the Florida
Institute of Oceanography (FIO) proposes a two year program of
seminar/workshops, research vessel experience and field exercises designed to
translate the strongly multidisciplinary nature and excitement of oceanography
into enhanced understanding and teaching skills in the basic sciences and
mathematics. Later sessions of the program will stress the application of
scientific principles in coastal management and will involve community and state
leaders. The content and activities are tied to the Florida Department of
Education Curriculum framework. Beginning in the summer of 1990, thirty teachers
from the five county area will act as lead teachers, translating with the aid of
the professional staff of SWFTEC, the program content into pedagogical
techniques, lesson plans and teacher aids that will be presented in a series of
teacher led workshops in the school districts. An emphasis will be placed on
continuing teacher access to the many scientists in Florida's public and private
research institutions. Through the lead teacher network, the program will be
exported to other school districts in the state through inservice teacher
training and workshops. Participants may earn five graduate credit hours per
semester. All of the participant's salaries during the regular school year and,
through FIO, the Florida Department of Education, and private funding, the
entire cost of the academic, oceanographic and Keys facility field activities
are cost shared. The cost sharing in an amount of $332,792 equals 90% of the NSF
award.