* 8955632
* NSF/Loyola University Young Scholars Project
* EDU,DRL
* 02/15/1990,07/31/1992
* Eric Hamilton, Loyola University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Roosevelt Y. Johnson
* 07/31/1992
* USD 97,718.00

Loyola University of Chicago will initiate a 6-week commuter Young Scholars
project for l8 students in grades ll-l2 in math/computer science. This project
gives participants a comprehensive introduction to computer science from both
hardware and software perspectives. Students experiment in two distinct forums.
First, they assemble IBM-compatible microcomputers, and then perform digital
circuitry experiments on the computers and other electronics equipment. Second,
they experiment on mathematical objects through programs they write in the
project's software science introduction. Also, during the summer, participants
visit software development firms and R&amp;D facilities at Motorola, Inc. and
AT&amp;T Bell Labs. At the end of the full-time summer activity, students take
their computers home to keep and use throughout an intensive and sustained
eight-month academic year follow-up. The project began in l988 under YSP
funding. It has been widely recognized by Chicago's news media and by its
municipal government. Beginning in l990, the project will adopt an artificial
intelligence component and accompanying group programming project; the career
exploration and philosophy/ethics components will be deepened; and, the project
will become formally affiliated with an NSF-funded prototype Comprehensive
Regional Center for Minorities.