* 8955065
* Project CATALYST
* EHR,DRL
* 03/15/1990,08/31/1991
* Edwin Duckworth, San Francisco State University
* Continuing Grant
* Wayne Sukow
* 08/31/1991
* USD 363,600.00

CATALYST is a three year faculty development program at San Francisco State
University (SFSU) and the University of Rhode Island (URI) for high school
teachers of science, mathematics, and computer science. It will: 1. Train 60
high school science, mathematics and computer science teachers how to use
interactive technologies in the classroom. This 1990-91 academic year component
will stress hypermedia, intelligent tutoring systems, repurposed videodiscs,
microworlds, coaches, inspectable simulations, computer animation, and automated
data collection and analysis. The teachers will learn how to: o Teach students
how to solve scientific problems using the heuristic approach of Polya. o Manage
CAI and video/digital audio projects (including writing, producing,
implementing, and evaluating them). o Use the computer to write multimedia
programs. o Deal with the different learning styles of students. o Recognize
science preconceptions and help students to overcome them. o Evaluate software
and interactive products. o Create instructional material with such commonly
available tools and microcomputers and workstations. The teachers will finish
the program's first phase with projects they design and implement themselves. 2.
Select 30 of the original participants to develop indepth projects. Fifteen will
attend SFSU and fifteen URI for six week workshops during the summers of 1991
and 1992. They will also work at the Universities on a 20 to 50 percent release
time basis during the 1991-92 academic year. 3. Evaluate how well the teacher
developed materials work with large numbers of students. It will also evaluate
additional material that workers at Tufts University, SFSU, URI and their
collaborators have developed in the areas of physics, chemistry, astronomy and
mathematics. 4. Develop a series of probes and sensors along with computer
analysis tools to measure such phenomena as heat, temperature, electromotive
force, light, oscillations, and sound. The teachers will use these tools to
produce a large number of laboratory experiments. The experiments, teacher
notes, and follow-up materials will be published in a manual at the end of the
program. 5. Distribute donated computer equipment and other hardware, when
appropriate, to participating school districts. The microcomputers and
workstations used in CATALYST will be the most modern and will come from major
vendors. To be sure teaching methods are designed that accommodate the wide
range of ability and preparation among students, project directors will rely on
such curriculum ideas as those from the AAAS- sponsored Project 2061, NSTA, and
the NCTM Commission on Standards for School Mathematics. The major goals are to
give students a deep understanding of content, an ability to solve problems in
mathematics and science, and to enable them to become interested, active
learners instead of passive consumers of knowledge. CATALYST relies on resources
from several institutions. These include intelligent problem solving tutors from
URI; microworlds, inspectable simulations, repurposed videodisc and coaches from
SFSU; and microcomputer based laboratory experiments from Tufts. The total grant
request from NSF is $1,035,500. The institutions and their corporate sponsors
have already committed $3,250,000 in matching resources and hardware, equal to
319% of the NSF award.