* 8955348
* "N" is a Number
* NONE,NONE
* 03/15/1991,02/28/1993
* George Csicsery, Film Arts Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Hyman H. Field
* 02/28/1993
* USD 75,000.00

This one-hour documentary film profile of world famous mathematician Paul Erdos
is being made for eventual broadcast on the NOVA series. At age 76, the world's
most prolific mathematician (1,100 papers and over 200 co-authors) still spends
all of his time moving from country to country, meeting with other
mathematicians to work on problems. The film will show how a prodigious
mathematician, with a career of over 50 years, lives and works, how he interacts
with his colleagues, and how the international community of mathematicians
functions. It aims to explore the human side of a discipline in which God,
Beauty and Numbers are the subjects of daily speculation. But what do
mathematicians actually do? Because of his peripatetic nature and eternal
curiosity, Erdos provides an ideal window on a field that has often been
perceived by the public as remote and intimidating. The film will show Erdos and
his colleagues at work and play. Interviews and archival materials will
establish his contributions in combinatorics and in Number theory. Some more
accessible problems will be illustrated with animation and computer graphics.
The interplay of a warm human story with intriguing philosophical speculations
and mathematical problems will show important results are arrived at in
mathematics. This is expected to stimulate interest in mathematics among
television viewers and students. The film is in production and only partial
funding is being requested from NSF.