* 8955280
* Enhancing the Knowledge and Teaching Skills of High School  Biology Teachers Through a Program in an Interdisciplinary  Science -- Immunology
* NONE,NONE
* 06/15/1990,11/30/1993
* Ah-Kau Ng, Foundation for Blood Research
* Standard Grant
* Lowell J. Bethel
* 11/30/1993
* USD 325,156.00

This project will enhance the knowledge and teaching skills of Maine high
school biology teachers through a program on immunology. The program will be
managed and implemented as a joint effort by the Foundation for Blood Research
(FBR) and the University of Southern Maine (USM). FBR carries out
immunologically-based research activities, and its science Education Division
has extensive experience in developing and introducing new science programs and
curricula into secondary schools, including a recent joint effort with the BSCS
to develop an immunology monograph for secondary schools. USM has recently
established a graduate program in applied immunology and assembled a science
faculty with diverse interests and skills in the field of immunology. This 3
level, 3 year program will provide didactic sessions, workshops and laboratory
sessions during both the summer and the school year for 75 biology teachers from
Maine, and it is anticipated that the program will be continued with support
from Maine's Department of Education (and other sources) to include as many of
the remaining biology teachers in the state as possible. Individual research
projects will be designed for teachers at the most advanced level, and a
partnership will be encouraged between faculty/researchers and the teachers to
allow ongoing access to new information. Emphasis throughout will be placed on
designing teaching strategies suitable for secondary school students and on
teaching immunology as an interdisciplinary science. The goal is to improve the
quality of science education in Maine so that a broad base of the population may
better understand immunologic concepts and so that more students may be
stimulated to consider careers in science. An amount equivalent to 66.4% of the
NSF award is being contributed as cost-sharing.