* 8955041
* ON GROWTH and FORM:  Learning Fractals and Applied          Probability by Doing Science
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1989,08/31/1992
* H. Eugene Stanley, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing grant
* Nora Sabelli
* 08/31/1992
* USD 964,684.00

Very recent advances in computer technology provide the power of mainframe
systems in relatively compact and inexpensive personal computers. Over the next
decade this tremendous computing power will become available in high schools
throughout the country. This new technological resource will be harnessed as a
teaching tool for specific topics in math and science, focusing on random
processes in nature and their deep connection to concepts in probability and
fractal geometry. Such natural phenomena as the growth of snow flakes via random
aggregation and the disordered geometric configurations of polymer chains
demonstrate that fundamentally random microscopic processes can give rise to
predictable macroscopic behaviors. They also give rise to random fractal
structures of inherent interest and great beauty. Because it is impossible to
view the underlying processes directly, computer simulation and visualization is
an indispensable tool for understanding and studying these phenomena. In the
process of "doing science" with both hand-on experiments and computer
simulations, students will learn abstract mathematical concepts in a context
which is at once concrete and inherently motivating. Futhermore, the techniques
they will employ will mirror in most respects those in current use by
researchers, thus forging an unprecedented link between this curriculum and the
professional worlds of science and mathematics.