* 8955160
* MITS:  A National Model for a State-Wide Collaboration of   Science Museums for Improving Science Literacy among        Elementary School Teachers
* EHR,DRL
* 06/01/1990,11/30/1991
* Frank Gardner, New England Aquarium Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ethel Schultz
* 11/30/1991
* USD 325,965.00

Eleven museums in Massachusetts have formed a unique collaboration to help
elementary school teachers improve their over all science literacy and their
ability to transmit such literacy to the children that they teach. The main
focus is a three-week summer institute and school year follow-up program that
has created a professional partnership between classroom teachers and the
diverse resources of the museums, their staffs, collections and exhibits. These
partnerships contribute to the development of greater science literacy and
improved attitudes toward science by these teachers and their students. One
hundred and thirty two elementary teachers from at least thirty-five school
districts in Massachusetts will be provided the opportunity to choose a workshop
at one of the following facilities: The Arnold Arboretum of Harvard University,
The Children's Museum, Boston, The Massachusetts Audubon Society, The MetroPark
Zoos, The Museum of Comparative Zoology at Harvard, The Museum of Science,
Boston, The New England Aquarium, The Manomet Bird Observatory, The Cape Cod
Museum of Natural History, The New England Science Center and The Springfield
Science Museum. The whole group of teachers meet together for one day at the
beginning and end of the workshop, but then attend the workshop of their choice,
with their varying emphases on life science, physical science, and/or
environmental science. All programs are inquiry-based with a heavy emphasis on
activities and discovery. Key summer activities focus on helping teachers
understand the commonalities among diverse scientific fields. The teachers
develop an understanding of the nature of inquiry, the ways to foster it among
children in school and out and investigate activities that can be modified for
direct use in their classrooms. Throughout the year, a variety of programs help
the teachers with lesson planning, resource consultation through the various
informal science facilities, the loan of materials and other support services.
Networking activities are encouraged through the publication of "Science is
Elementary", a rich newsletter that is distributed on a regular basis to
participants of the program. Thirty-five percent of the request has been cost-
shared by the New England Aquarium, the collaborating museums, schools and
private sector contributions.