* 8955387
* Understanding and Teaching the Mathematical Concepts of     Functions and Their Graphs
* EHR,DRL
* 06/15/1990,04/30/1994
* Alan Schoenfeld, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Richard A. Lesh
* 04/30/1994
* USD 1,015,472.00

This project will conduct three interrelated R & D studies on understanding and
teaching the mathematical concepts of functions and their graphs in the
Cartesian plane. These studies (1) elaborate the role of concrete materials and
intuitive notions in students'developing conceptual understandings of functions
and graphs' (2) develop and examine computer-based softare and curricula for
developing deep understandings of these concepts' and (3) elaborate the role of
interactions in learning, characterizing some limitations of learning via the
narrow bandwidth of computer-based tutorizl systems. The studies are as follows.
(1) A comparison of "apparatus-based" learning with learning in a purely
symbolic environment. These investigators plan to elaborate (a) the role of
intuitions about pysical objects in helping studends come to grips with their
mathematical representations, (b) the conceptual underpinnings of robust
understanding in this domain, and (c) the mechanisms of concept acquisition. (2)
The examination of innovative curricula (a) in schools chosen for the diversity
of their student populations, with an emphasis on including at risk and minority
students, and (b) in the project laboratory with a sample of students from the
same schools. These investigations will explore the effects of each setting on
the kinds of learning that take place in it, and to see what kinds of
extrapolations can be made from the laboratory to the classroom. This work is in
collaboration with the Interactive Mathematics Project (IMP). IMP is chartered
with the development of pilot curricula consistent with the new California
Mathematics "Framework". The units have the potential for wide distribution. (3)
A comparison of human and computer-based tutoring strategis. Using a computer-
based interface named OZ, the project staff will simulate computer-based
tutoring on functions and graphs, when the tutoring is in fact done by a person
at a distance. Comparisons of "live" and "at a distance" tutoring will provide
insights into (a) the strategies used by human tutors that depend on personal
interactions, and (b) the kinds of constaints that need to be overcome for
effective machine tutoring.