* 8955346
* Rational Number Project:  Research on Teaching and Learning in Multiplicative Structures
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/1990,08/31/1994
* Thomas Post, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Raymond J. Hannapel
* 08/31/1994
* USD 819,843.00

This five site project is designed to accomplish the following six objectives:
1) Conduct a mathematical/psychological/instructional analysis of the content
domain of multiplicative structures. This analysis will identify relationships
within and between the many topics included in this domain, and will form the
framework for the curriculum development, assessment, teacher education, and
research components of the project. 2) Develop an objectives framework and a
scope and sequence for elementary and middle school mathematics curriculum
material for the domain of multiplicative structures: to consist of multiplica-
tive concepts, relationships, operations, and problem situations and will
include: multiplication, division, rational number concepts including fraction
(part whole), ratio, decimal, operator, measurement and proportionality up to
and including missing value numerical comparisons situations, qualitative
reasoning and the graphical depiction and interpretation of linear functions. 3)
Outline a complete assessment program to coincide with project goals. This
assessment program will include a computer adaptive learner profile test and
computer based simulations of clinical interviews. 4) Develop, pilot, and
implement abbreviated teaching experiments designed to explore students'
"logical conceptual development." Several of these mini units will also be field
tested in 6-10 intact classrooms. Teachers will be interviewed. 5) Refine,
redevelop and extend, rational number related materials from our previous work
so as to reflect more recent project understandings. Materials will be formatted
so as to be usable by middle school classroom teachers. 6) Develop and validate
a model of rational belief change, which will used for both helping teachers
acquire knowledge about multi- plicative structures, and for evaluating
teachers' knowledge about this domain.