* 8955076
* Involving Scientists in Initiatives to Reform Science and   Math Education in the Context of Restructing Public Schools
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/1989,08/31/1990
* Michael Usdan, Institute for Educational Leadership
* Standard Grant
* Herbert E. Wylen
* 08/31/1990
* USD 93,606.00

The Institute for Educational Leadership and the New York Academy of Sciences
believe that there is a critical nexus between efforts to reform science and
math education and the broader school reform and restructuring agendas. Indeed,
available evidence suggests that absent structural reform of our public schools,
the potential to improve K-12 science and math education on a broad scale is
limited. The primary objective of this project is to determine how to involve
leading scientists and their professional organizations, in education reform. If
scientists can be come involved they can help propel school reform forward, even
as they promote the basic changes that are required in science and math
education. The objective of the project will be achieved through the
implementation of two conferences. The focus of discussion will evolve from a
working paper developed for both conferences. The meetings will be held in New
York and California and will include attendance by some of our nation's leading
scientists. A final report based on the conferences will recommend to the
National Science Foundation strategies to involve scientist more extensively in
education reform. Cost sharing is 22% of total award: $20,280. //