* 8955214
* Sea Experience:  A Theoretical and Practical Summer Program of Teacher Enhancement in Marine Sciences
* EDU,DRL
* 04/01/1990,09/30/1993
* Paul Joyce, Sea Education Association
* Standard Grant
* Lowell J. Bethel
* 09/30/1993
* USD 329,433.00

This three-year project will provide an intensive five-week summer educational
program in Marine Sciences for middle through high school science teachers
involved in teacher training and workshops in their home states. The program is
designed to provide teachers with a general knowledge of Marine Sciences, ideas
for field and lab work that they can implement in their classrooms and teach
others and, most importantly, a practical experience of working and living at
sea. The shore-based, three-week component will be held in Woods Hole and will
consist of an intensive fifty hour course of lectures, labs, workshops, and
field trips in Marine Sciences. This course will emphasize the basic concepts in
physics, chemistry, geology, and biology that can be conveyed to students
through studies of the ocean, and will be directed towards development of
curricula to be implemented in the classrooms of these teachers. In addition,
two short lecture series -- one entitled "The United States and the Sea" and the
other on various topics in Nautical Science -- will be presented to enhance the
subsequent experience that the teachers will have at sea. This final two weeks
will then be spent on board a fully equipped oceanographic sailing research
vessel where the practical hands-on experience of carrying out a research
project and participating in the operation of one of the few remaining "tall
ships" that practice marine research. This extraordinary experience will expand
the participants scientific knowledge base, help them to understand current
methodology of scientific research, and revitalize their teaching. The cost
sharing will be sixteen percent of the NSF portion.