* 8955248
* Program for Leadership in Earth Systems Education
* NONE,NONE
* 05/15/1990,04/30/1995
* Victor Mayer, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing grant
* Joseph Stewart
* 04/30/1995
* USD 1,186,284.00

The Program for Leadership in Earth Systems Education is a cooperative effort
among national, regional and local leaders in earth science education. The
project's national coordinating center will be at Ohio State University. Teacher
teams, each including an upper elementary, a middle or junior high school and a
senior high school teacher will be selected from each of the 50 states and
prepared at one of two regional centers (an Eastern Center at Ohio State
University and a Western Center at Northern Colorado University) each conducting
three-week long summer workshops. During the four-years of the project, 64
teachers will be prepared with updated activities and information regarding
Planet Earth. Teams will select exemplary instructional materials dealing
broadly with planet Earth systems using as a guide a K-12 syllabus prepared by a
national planning committee of teachers, science educators, and scientists and
modified by the teams for appropriateness for their own locality. The syllabus
will have been based on a framework of goals and concepts identified at a
Conference of Educators and Geoscientists held in April, 1988, supplemented by
plant Earth understandings obtained from an analysis of Project 2061, Phase I
results. Participants may earn six-semester hours of graduate credit. Teams will
identify a local school administrator and a local college liaison as resource
agents. Both will be invited to attend a conference on the objectives of the
program held during the last week of the teams' summer workshop. Together the
three team members and the two liaisons will act as a mutual support group to
provide a stimulus for improving curriculum and instruction regarding planet
Earth systems and, since all teaching levels above the fourth grade are
represented, provide an articulated approach in their schools, locales and
states. Subsequent to the completion of their summer workshop, each team will
conduct a minimum of two workshops in their state and locality using their
syllabus and correlated teaching materials. Workshops on appropriate regional
versions of the planet Earth syllabi and teaching materials will also be offered
at each of the regional and national meetings of the NSTA. As a result, some
4000 teachers will have been directly assisted by the project over its life-
span. Communication between all participants and staff, and the earth science
education community at large, will be facilitated through networking consisting
of a newsletter and an electronic Earth Systems Education Conference (using PSI-
NET) both of which will be maintained by Ohio State University beyond the end of
the project. Cost sharing in an amount of $158,870 equals 15% of the NSF award.