* 8955254
* Urban, Minority, Middle School, STS Teacher/Community       Enhancement Project
* EDU,DRL
* 04/01/1990,12/31/1993
* Nelson Mitchell, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* David E. Jones
* 12/31/1993
* USD 560,270.00

This 38 month program will work with a total of 80 teachers in the urban core
of Phoenix, Arizona. Four middle schools serving predominately minority (
Hispanic, Black and Native American ) students are the target group and will
become demonstration schools for the seven school districts in this area. The
project will involve in this program for change not only school personnel but
also parents, community leaders and student volunteers. Project personnel will
teach teachers issues and topics relating to Science, Technology and Society
(STS) and will teach curriculum development skills as well. Eight teachers, two
from each demonstration school, will be selected and trained as Master Teachers
so that they can assist in dissemination of the curriculum. Over a three year
period the target schools (including the principals and middle school teachers)
will be prepared to serve as "Demonstration School-Communities" thus conducting
staff development, community development and curriculum reform workshops and
activities for the target urban core schools and districts. Sharing the funding
for this project with the National Science Foundation are Arizona State
University, the Salt River Project, the Arizona Museum of Science and Industry
and the school districts themselves. The $560,270 NSF portion of funding will be
matched by $217,489 from the above institutions which is approximately a 39%
contribution.