* 8955365
* Undergraduate Science Education: The Impact of Different    College Environments on the Educational Pipeline in the     Sciences
* NONE,NONE
* 11/15/1989,09/30/1992
* Helen Astin, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Iris C. Rotberg
* 09/30/1992
* USD 379,234.00

National surveys of college and university undergraduates indicated that
student interest in majoring in scientific fields and in pursuing careers in
science is at or near its all-time low (Astin et al, 1989; Green, 1989). Despite
these declines, a number of earlier studies suggest that undergraduate
institutions and programs may differ substantially in their capacity to develop
students' scientific interests and talents. The principal purpose of the study
described in this proposal is to examine a wide range of factors in the college
environment that may affect students' interest in science, choice of a
scientific career, and level of mathematical-quantitative competence. The study
represents a major elaboration and expansion of a national study of the outcomes
of general education programs funded recently by a $366,800 grant from the Exxon
Educational Foundation to the Higher Education Research Institute at UCLA. The
Exxon project involves a four-year longitudinal follow-up of the 1985 entering
freshmen classes at a sample of 53 colleges and universities and a Fall 1989
survey of all faculty of these same institutions. The proposed expansion would
add 100 institutions to the Exxon sample in order to achieve greater
representativeness, to increase the reliability of results using the institution
as the unit of analysis, and to generate larger samples of minorities, students
in scientific subfields, highly able students, and other subpopulations of
interest. Various multivariate techniques will be used in applying an "input-
environment-output" model to the analyses of how various environmental variables
affect the students' interest in science majors and careers, retention,
attitudes toward science, aspirations for graduate study and mathematical-
quantitative competence. In addition to institutional characteristics, the
independent variables will include measures of curricular characteristics, peer
climate, student involvement, faculty climate (teaching techniques, commitment
to undergraduate education, involvement in research etc.), and student-faculty
interaction.