* 8955246
* Program for Excellence in Precollege Chemical Education     at Northern Arizona University
* EDU,DRL
* 05/15/1990,10/31/1994
* John DeKorte, Northern Arizona University
* Continuing Grant
* David E. Jones
* 10/31/1994
* USD 941,740.00

Northern Arizona University (NAU) will establish a Program for Excellence in
Precollege Chemical Education to provide comprehensive summer training
experiences for l92 teachers of general and advanced high school chemistry
courses during the summers and academic years of l990-1993. These workshops will
be conducted by experienced, master high school teachers and University faculty.
The goals of the project are (1) to encourage changes in the methods of high
school chemistry instruction to show more strongly the application of modern
technology to the teaching of chemistry and (2) to provide a cadre of
enthusiastic, well-qualified teachers to teach both general chemistry and
advanced high school chemistry courses, honors, enrichment and/or AP courses. As
a result of these workshops, the courses taught by these teachers should have
sufficient relevance, appeal and challenge to encourage more students to enjoy
science and to pursue chemistry at the postsecondary level. Forty eight teachers
per year for each of the four years will be selected to attend one of two
parallel workshops. One group will be comprised of those teachers who have an
adequate content background for the teaching of a first-year chemistry course,
but who lack any expertise in the use of technology and current science teaching
methods, such as cooperative learning and microscale laboratory. This three-week
workshop will stress the blend of content, technology, and methodology. The
participants of the second three-week workshop will be selected from among
teachers who are very well-prepared, content-wise and are comfortable with use
of technology, but who need an update on modern and/or more advanced topics,
since they are being assigned to teach a second-level chemistry course. NAU has
piloted this second workshop very successfully in the past. As a result of
several surveys taken at NSTA regional meetings, local teachers have expressed
the need not only for the continuation and expansion of these Advanced Chemistry
Workshops, but the addition of the General Chemistry Workshop as described
above. The schools from which the majority of the teachers will be selected are
in regions serving large numbers of minorities and underrepresented groups, both
Hispanic and native American. One half to two thirds of project participants
will come from those population groups. Northern Arizona University has
demonstrated its ability to attract teachers from this region to workshops for
advanced chemistry teachers on the basis of its expertise and geographical
location. An amount equivalent to approximately 30% of the NSF request is being
cost shared by the NAU, school districts and grants from the Eisenhower Math and
Science Education funds of the State of Arizona.