* 8955347
* Educational Statistics:  Improving Research Infrastructure  for Math and Science
* EDU,DRL
* 01/01/1990,12/31/1992
* William Russell, American Educational Research Association
* Standard Grant
* Larry E. Suter
* 12/31/1992
* USD 519,987.00

The American Educational Research Association (AERA) is conducting a research
and training program with joint support from the National Science Foundation and
the National Center for Education Statistics. The purpose of the program is to
foster policy and practice relevant research in the general area of math and
science education using the rich data bases available at NCES. The Program has
four components: (1) a fellows program; (2) a small grants competition to
stimulate policy and practice relevant research using NCES math and science data
sets; (3) a series of training opportunities for educational researchers in the
use of NCES data sets, especially those related to math and science; and (4) an
internship program in NCES for advanced graduate students. The fellows program
will facilitate collaboration and consultation among academic scholars and NCES
scientists in their endeavors to improve the quality of education indicators.
The small grants competition, the training program, and the graduate internships
will foster more systemic and sustained analyses of math and science education
data and also help build the educational research infrastructure and increase
the number of scholars conducting policy and practice-related research with
NCES' data sets. The training program, the fellows program, the graduate
internship program, and the small grants competition will be administered by
AERA and guided by an Advisory Board composed of prominent scholars.