* 8955282
* Sharing Science:  Summer Institutes for High School         Physics Teachers
* EDU,DRL
* 04/15/1990,03/31/1994
* Walter Wesley, Minnesota State University Moorhead
* Standard Grant
* Wayne Sukow
* 03/31/1994
* USD 260,168.00

The Department of Physics and Astronomy at Moorhead State University is
offering a series of three, four week, institutes providing professional
development opportunities for underprepared high school physics and physical
science teachers. The institutes will be held over three successive summers
beginning in 1990. The overall objective of the institutes is the upgrading of
breadth of content and teaching skills. The content areas are mechanics, waves,
electromagnetism, optics and selected areas of modern physics. These institutes
will provide opportunities for 20- 24 high school teachers, per year, from the
tri-state region of Minnesota, North Dakota and South Dakota. It is expected
that the majority of the teachers will attend all three institutes. Selected
participants will represent a good mix of private and public school teachers, as
well as an equitable gender mix. Participants can earn (8-10) graduate credits
per summer. Since the institutes are designed to focus on the upgrading of the
content and teaching skills of underprepared teachers, planned activities will
involve lectures, activities and readings on basic mathematical skills pedagogy
and teaching methods, as well as the physics content. A major emphasis will be
on hands-on activities, such as projects, development of lecture demonstrations,
the use of computers as teaching/learning aids, and the critical analysis of
subject matter content. Opportunities will be available for help
sessions/tutorials which will enhance the participant's problem solving skills
and for the development of simple, inexpensive, but pedagogically sound, physics
demonstration and laboratory materials. Guest speakers, including accomplished
high school teachers, will be invited to interact with the participants on
various aspects of teaching methods, pedagogy and research, and industrial
innovations. Follow-up activities include one-day sessions at Moorhead State
University and site visits to teachers classrooms. Two high school teachers,
(Presidential Awardees or PTRAS) who have expressed a long term commitment for
improved science education will be involved in the planning and delivery of the
institutes' activities and in developing comprehensive evaluation procedures to
determine the effectiveness of the project. Cost sharing in an amount of $89,000
equals 40% of the NSF award.