* 8955185
* Lead Teacher Project:  K-6 Mathematics and Science Teacher  Enhancement
* NONE,NONE
* 04/15/1990,09/30/1993
* Ralph Martin, Ohio University
* Continuing grant
* Susan P. Snyder
* 09/30/1993
* USD 727,383.00

This project is a unique opportunity for 84 selected elementary teachers (of
grades K-6) from 42 schools in five counties in Southeastern Ohio's rural
Appalachian region to become Lead Teachers (LTs), as well-trained and educated
in science and mathematics. This project will enable them to become change
agents who will target the mathematics and science problems within their own
schools by working with their principals and fellow teachers to develop school-
based action plans to improve all teachers' skills, implement those plans,
evaluate their effects, help project staff revise the program model and assist
with its dissemination in the region. They will work toward a program which will
reduce the problems which limit elementary pupil achievement and contribute to
poor attitudes toward mathematics and science. The design of the participating
schools will become effective leaders in their own schools, capable of effecting
change among their students, their peers and in their school. The LTs, many whom
have been identified by fellow teachers and principals for their outstanding
teaching and leadership qualities, will participate for three full years. Three
4 week summer workshops stressing the content, activities and methodology of
science and/or mathematics will be supplemented by very specific leadership
activities designed to enhance their capabilities to effect change. These summer
workshops will be held on the campus of Ohio University with members of the
science, mathematics and education faculties cooperating to provide the
expertise. Academic year seminars will reinforce the content of the workshops as
well provide the opportunities for teachers and staff to share their experiences
and plans for school-based changes. Cost-sharing from the University, the Ohio
Department of Education and the five county schools is equivalent to 105% of the
NSF request. This is a strong indication of the enthusiastic endorsement and
support of the participating institutions. There is excellent assurance that
continuing support for the intent of the project will be forthcoming in future
years.