* 8955315
* Rural Educators Integrated Science/Technology Institute     (REISTI)
* EDU,DRL
* 05/01/1990,08/31/1993
* James Hickman,  Montana Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Stewart
* 08/31/1993
* USD 240,730.00

This two-year project, starting in May 1990 and sponsored by Montana College of
Mineral Science and Technology, offers a geoscience based four week summer
program for middle-school teachers in the rural areas of Montana, Idaho, North
Dakota, Utah and Wyoming. There will be 20 teachers involved in the program the
first year and 25 in the second. The project will use the resources of a well
established local Science/Technology Alliance and the Montana Tech Math/Science
Resource Center. The teacher participants will experience the cross curriculum
nature of science and technology through course work and field activities led by
professors from the Montana College of Mineral Science and Technology and
representatives of local natural resource based industries who are part of the
Science/Technology Alliance. Activities particularly relevant to rural
communities such as water quality control, wildlife impact studies, and mining
will be the basis of the content. These represent "real world" issues which will
have meaning both to teachers and students. Continued year-round content and
activity support will be provided by the Montana Tech Math/Science Resource
Center. Teachers will involve their clases in "real-life" activities of science
research. Reports of these activities will be compiled and disseminated to all
particapating teachers. The NSF share of support for the project is $240,730 and
is being matched by Montana Tech and other local agencies in the amount of
$105,277. The matching funds are approximately 44% of the NSF grant.