* 8955218
* A Teacher Enhancement Program to Stimulate Laboratory-based Instruction in DNA Science for Advanced Placement and       Honors Biology Classes
* EHR,DRL
* 03/01/1990,08/31/1993
* Mark Bloom, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Lowell J. Bethel
* 08/31/1993
* USD 489,036.00

A Teacher Enhancement Program to Stimulate Laboratory-Based Instruction on DNA
Science for Advanced Placement and Honors Biology Classes This proposal is to
support workshops on molecular genetic analysis for 288 advanced
placement/honors biology teachers during summers 1990-92. Modeled after the
successful Molecular Cloning course, (TEI 87-51248), the DNA Science workshop
extends the traditional postgraduate training mission of Cold Spring Harbor
Laboratory to the secondary level. During the week-long workshops, teachers make
and analyze a recombinant DNA molecule, using the techniques of DNA restriction
and ligation, agarose gel electrophoresis, microbial culture, bacterial
transformation, and plasmid isolation. A weekend follow-up workshop reinforces
the learning experience and stresses the practical aspects of implementing a
lab-teaching program. The current NSF-sponsored program has reached 449 biology
teachers in 12 states-aided programs in California, North Carolina, and
Wisconsin. Statistical analysis has documented significant behavioral effects
among workshop participants, including lab teaching, leadership networking, and
fundraising activities that more than match NSF funds expended. NSF support has
been highly leveraged, forming the basis of what is arguably the largest
commitment to public biotechnology education by any institution in the country.
The PIs now propose to hold four workshops per summer that would reach an
additional 288 high school teachers in the southeast and midwest. Three
"commuter" workshops each summer would service large urban areas, while on
"residential" workshop would target minority teachers from a wider geographic
region. We also request funding to continue a substantial longitudinal study of
innovation among the 1,600 teachers in 24 states who have been taught the DNA
science curriculum to date. An amount equivalent to 14.5% of the NSF award is
being contributed as cost-sharing.