* 8955386
* A Collaborative Program to Develop and Test a Model for     Enhancing Preservice Teachers' Conceptual Understanding in  Middle Grades and High School Physical Sci & Teach Metho
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/1990,05/31/1994
* Barbara Merino, University of California-Davis
* Continuing grant
* William E. Haver
* 05/31/1994
* USD 379,157.00

The University of California, Davis, will undertake a project to develop a one-
year graduate level program for training physical science teachers. The project
will seek to attract students with a degree in the biological sciences who have
a demonstrated competence in the mathematics and physical science coursework
required for their degree. There is an excess of individuals trained in the life
sciences and a shortage of those qualified to teach physical science in
California, and this project will attempt to remedy the imbalance. The
curriculum will be designed by scientists, science educators, and meritorious
classroom teachers. The students will receive subject matter and pedagogical
training in physics, chemistry, and earth science during the program and will
carry out student teaching in all three disciplines. California is in the
process of implementing a new State Science Framework in which all the
disciplines will be taught each year with instruction cutting across the
disciplines. Since the graduates of this program will have strong competencies
in all sciences, they will be ideally suited to teach in this restructured
environment. A cadre of mentor teachers will participate in workshops to enhance
their subject matter and pedagogical competencies and will serve as supervising
teachers for the participants during their field experience. Transportable
instructional materials will be developed by the project, and a dissemination
conference will be held for those from other institutions seeking to adopt the
program. After the development period, the program will become institutionalized
and a permanent offering of the university. The university will cost sharing
will be 24% of NSF's contribution.