* 8955197
* A Living Laboratory:  Mount St. Helens
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/1990,09/30/1992
* Howard Jones, Educational Service District 112
* Standard Grant
* Wayne Sukow
* 09/30/1992
* USD 352,633.00

During this two year project, teachers of grades 5-9 will participate in two-
week basic level workshops (Years I and II - 40 teachers each year) and an
advanced three-week workshop (Year II-10 teachers) at and near Mount St. Helen's
National Volcanic Monument. Instruction in science content will be offered by
leading scientists. Content will be presented in exemplary lecture/discussion
format, model hands-on classroom activities and well-designed, relevant
investigative field experiences. Science content needs will be integrated with
teaching strategies and materials development. Level I Workshops beginning in
the summer of 1990 will consist of 10 days of classroom instruction alternating
with and reinforced by four days of on-site field observation and study.
Classroom days will be divided equally between instruction in science topics and
in instructional methods appropriate to the target grade levels. Level II
Workshops will add advanced work in building-level implementation through a
peer-coaching model, and introduction to videodisc curriculum technology.
Science topics will be taught in lecture, seminar, small group and laboratory
formats. Methods instruction will emphasize effective classroom and field-study
strategies. Participants will spend part of each day developing teaching methods
that will be pilot-tested in peer-teaching situation. Priority will be given
applicants 1) able to attend in teams of two or more, 2) underprepared for their
assignments in terms of science content and science-instruction methods, 3) able
to provide evidence of ongoing administrative support for implementation at the
home-site, and 4) responsible for teaching selected at-risk populations.
Participants may earn up to eight quarter hours of graduate credit. Cost sharing
in the amount of award.