* 8955097
* The Wonders of Physics
* EHR,DRL
* 10/15/1989,03/31/1991
* J. Sprott, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Patricia A. Ferguson
* 03/31/1991
* USD 15,840.00

Professor J. C. Sprott of the University of Wisconsin-Madison Physics
Department, has delivered a series of public lectures on "The Wonders of
Physics" that has been very well received. Under this grant, Professor Sprott
will produce a kit of materials designed to encourage and assist physicists and
physics teachers throughout the Nation to establish programs similar to the
"Wonders of Physics" in their own communities. The kit will include the
following items: 1) A "How-to" booklet motivating the concept and describing
logistical considerations involved in presentations to the public. 2) A list of
80 suitable demonstrations. 3) A bibliography of references on physics
demonstrations. 4) A list of vendors of scientific demonstration equipment,
audiovisual materials, and computer software. 5) A sample videotape of a recent
"Wonders of Physics" presentation. 6) Computer software suitable for lecture or
museum use containing animations of ten physics demonstrations with written
documentation and an Instructor's manual. 7) A booklet entitled "What the Heck
Is Physics?" that is suitable as a handout at public lectures. 8) A leaflet
describing at least five home experiments in physics. 9) Samples of publicity
materials and posters. The availability of these kits will be advertised in
physics journals and through direct mailings to physics departments. The kit
will be sold at modest cost; income will be invested in kit improvement and
maintenance. A questionnaire will be sent to purchasers to evaluate the effect
of the kits in stimulating effective interactions between physicists and the
general public.