* 8955113
* Microbiological Concepts: A Pilot Program for a National    Improvement of Biology Teaching and Learning in the         Secondary School
* EDU,DRL
* 05/15/1990,04/30/1993
* William Croasdale, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Lowell J. Bethel
* 04/30/1993
* USD 211,454.00

Microbiological Concepts will be a national project to improve the teaching and
learning of basic microbiological concepts in the secondary schools. In its
first stage, this pilot project will test and refine the overall project concept
prior to its extension to each of the states and U. S. possessions. This first
stage will train three-member replication teams geographically distributed in
Southern New England, the Mid-Atlantic states, and the state of Texas. Eight
teams (24 persons) each year will participate in an intensive activity-oriented
four week workshop at the American Type Culture Collection facility in
Rockville, Maryland. Educational kits have been designed by the professional
staff of this project. The kits consist of a basic introduction to Microbiology
plus the 12 basic microbiological concepts typically suggested for use in the
secondary school biology courses. The teams trained will receive assistance from
the University of Rhode Island's science education staff in using these kits to
plan and conduct a required minimum number of in-service workshops in their
local areas. These will train additional teams to replicate these workshops for
delivery to Biology teachers in the local school districts. A support system
will be developed for the teams and teachers receving this training. An amount
equivalent to 66.4% of the NSF award is being contributed as cost-sharing.