* 8955245
* The Nature of Science and the Instructional Role of         Scientific Theories
* EDU,DRL
* 06/01/1990,11/30/1992
* Lawrence Scharmann, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* None
* 11/30/1992
* USD 90,858.00

This two-year program is to conduct a summer inservice institutes for 50
secondary biology teachers from Central Kansas and surrounding area to provide
them with: l) more adequate conceptions of the nature of science and scientific
theories; 2) enhanced science content from the biological and geological
perspectives; 3) alternatives for assessing and addressing student
misconceptions regarding evolutionary theory; and 4) a rationale for and
opportunities to integrate the nature of science, enhanced content, alternative
instructional strategies, and the assessment/confrontation of student
misconceptions about evolution into their biology curriculum, instructional
units and lessons. The institutes are proposed for high school biology teachers
primarily from rural/small schools, many of whom often represent a school
district as a science department unto themselves. Follow-up sessions will be
conducted at each participant's school district during the academic year to
assess individual teacher progress and potential individual concerns. In
addition, the second-year institute will establish a cadre of experienced
"master" teachers capable of promoting opportunities among their students to
participate in learning experiences which simulate the processes by which
scientists examine the natural world, establish criteria by which to judge
scientific from non-scientific beliefs. Finally, the second-year institute will
enable these "master" teachers to share/model successful alternative approaches
for the teaching of biology for another group of less experienced science
(biology) teachers in their home school districts. An amount equivalent to 60.7%
of the NSF contribution is provided by Kansas State University as cost-sharing.