* 8955162
* Excellence in Elementary Science:  A Project for the        Cincinnati Public School Systems
* NONE,NONE
* 04/15/1990,03/31/1996
* Edward Jones, Miami University
* Continuing grant
* Susan P. Snyder
* 03/31/1996
* USD 845,097.00

The two outstanding features of this project are its emphasis on a hands-on
investigative approach to elementary science instruction and its commitment to
addressing the needs for effective science education of underrepresented and
underserved groups in the Cincinnati Public School System. Thirty leadership
teachers will receive extensive educational experiences during the first year of
the project and will support the school system's efforts to identify new
instructional material for the elementary science program. Seventy-two
underprepared or less well-prepared teachers will participate each year
following the first year for a total of 246 participants. This will allow the
school system to have teachers with special experiences in elementary science
instruction in each of the city's elementary schools. All workshops and seminars
will provide teachers with in-depth experience with concepts and processes in
the biological, physical, environmental, and earth sciences. As the
participants' familiarity with science concepts and process increases, they
should become more comfortable with the subject matter and increasingly
confident in their abilities to support their fellow teachers as they implement
the new hands-on science curriculum. The cost sharing will be 95% of the NSF
portion.