* 8957469
* Presidential Young Investigators Award - Estimation of      Exceedance Probabilities of Extreme Storms
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/1989,01/31/1997
* Efi Foufoula-Georgiou, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Mahendra P. Singh
* 01/31/1997
* USD 314,404.00

The research plan for this Presidential Young Investigator is divided in three
parts: 1) quantification of the risk of extreme rainstorms; 2) quantification of
the risk of extreme floods; and 3) incorporation of the developed methodology
into a risk-based decision-making framework. Based on work done on storm
regionalization and a probabilistic approach to storm transposition, the first
part of the investigation includes the assessment of extreme storm data base and
development of estimation methods to account for record incompleteness; develop
stochastic spatial models; study the feasibility of analytic asymptotic
approximations to the tails of the distributions using extreme value theory; and
determine the reliability of alternative estimation procedures and quantify the
uncertainty of the exceedance probability estimates. The second part comprises
research on the spatial variability of several basin characteristics relevant to
rainfall/runoff transformations under extreme conditions; study and assess the
effects of land use changes on resulting floods for the homogeneous conversion
of storm data bases to floods; investigate the performance of several
rainfall/runoff models for converting extreme rainfall into flood hydrographs;
and integrate all findings into a method for estimating probabilities of extreme
floods and assess the reliability of those estimates. The third part is to apply
the developed models to real systems and to incorporate them into a risk-based
decision making framework.