* 8957071
* Presidential Young Investigator Award
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/1989,12/31/1994
* Krzysztof Matyjaszewski, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Akbar Montaser
* 12/31/1994
* USD 312,000.00

Properties of polymers depend not only on their molecular weight or
composition, but also on the stereochemical arrangement of substituents.
Stereoregular polymers are usually prepared by heterogeneous polymerization and
are limited to a few systems. We plan to synthesize and to study various
properties of polymers which will contain stereocenters in the main and in side
chains, We expect that in some systems polymers which will contain stereocenters
in the main and in side chains. We expect that in some systems chirality of
substituents may affect the microstructure and also may lead to control of the
direction of polymer helical structure. The latter case will be very important
for polysilanes which have promising nonlinear optical properties. The first
part of the larger proposal is focused, however, on cationic polymerization.
Recently a few systems leading to well-defined polymers by cationic
polymerization of alkenes have been reported. They are based either on the
combination of the strongly nucleophilic anion with an activator such as Lewis
acid, or on the addition of relatively strong nucleophiles, such as aromatic
amines or ethers. In both these systems, the lifetime of the carbenium ion is
very short, and it remains in dynamic equilibrium with prevailing covalent
active centers or onium ions. Polymerization is much slower than in the typical
cationic system but the transfer and termination reactions are suppressed.
Cationic polymerization of alkenes leads usually to atactic polymers. The
presence of chiral center in the closest surrounding of active site may induce
asymmetric control in the propagation step. Therefore, the proportion between
meso and racemic diads should by dependent on the chirality of the counterion or
nucleophilic additive. We plan to prepare optically active 1-phenylethyl
acetates, such as phenylpropionate or chloropropionate, and use them as
initiators in the polymerization of styrenes and vinyl ethers. The NMR studies
of microstructure of resulting polystyrenes and poly(vinyl ethers) should give
not only better understanding of mechanism of living cationic polymerization,
but also yield polymers with controlled tacticity and potential industrial
importance.