* 8957238
* Presidential Young Investigator:  Star Formation and        Galactic Structure
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/1989,01/31/1995
* Dan Watson, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Wayne Van Citters
* 01/31/1995
* USD 312,000.00

This Presidential Young Investigator Award will support a research program in
the physics of regions of star formation and the relationship between star
formation and the structure and evolution of galaxies. The next couple of
decades hold the potential for great advances in the study of star formation,
since the technology and facilities required for definitive observations will
first become available during that time. Aspects of star formation of particular
interest include: studying the coalescence of diffuse atomic clouds into
molecular clouds by determining of the thermodynamic state of galactic and
extragalactic diffuse clouds; assessing the impact of massive star formation on
the molecular cloud environment by studying the interaction of ionization fronts
and outflows from young stellar objects with molecular clouds; searching for
true protostars, still in the process of collapse by identifying the spectral
signatures of collapse in low-luminosity, low-mass objects in nearby molecular
clouds; obtaining strict constraints on the form of the initial mass functions
of starbursts, by high resolution observations that determine the intrinsic (de-
reddened) luminosity, colors and internal dynamics of the nuclei of starburst
galaxies; shedding light on processes which were of importance in past epochs of
star formation, and which led to "metal" enrichment of the interstellar medium,
by making precise determination of the relative abundance of elements in spiral
galaxies. Like many studies of the physics of star formation, these problems are
best or exclusively addressed with observations of molecular, atomic or ionic
spectral lines at infrared and submillimeter wavelength (1-1000 microns). There
remains a great need for better detectors and astronomical instruments at these
wavelengths, and the Principal Investigator will continue his work in developing
gar infrared detector arrays and spectroscopic instruments which use these
devices. He plans to employ detector array technology in constructing a high
resolution echelle spectrometer for the 4-14 micron wavelength range. These
devices represent substantial extensions of the present capability of infrared
spectroscopic instrumentation, and in particular would be of great value in the
astronomical projects mentioned above.