* 8957386
* Presidential Young Investigator Award
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/1989,12/31/1994
* Frank Bates, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 12/31/1994
* USD 312,000.00

This Presidential Young Investigator research program will be developed along
three lines: investigation of the thermodynamics of polymer mixing, evaluation
of the dynamics of polymer-polymer phase separation and block copolymer
ordering, and establishment of a synthesis and characterization facility for the
development of model materials. In the area of thermodynamics two classes of
mixtures are of principal interest: binary polymer mixtures and block
copolymers. Research efforts will be directed at advancing our understanding of
polymer segment interactions using model systems, and at correlating this
knowledge with experimentally determined excess thermodynamics properties, phase
diagrams, and interfacial phenomena. Such information will be obtained using
neutron, x-ray and light scattering methods, along with electron and optical
microscopy techniques. Two projects will be initiated in the dynamics category:
spinodal decomposition, and nucleation and growth of binary polymer mixtures,
and rheological characterization of order and disorder in block copolymers.
These investigations take advantage of our thermodynamic results in developing
the appropriate phase diagrams with which to explore issues relating to the
dynamics of phase separation, and the properties of the resulting materials.
Isotopic polymer mixtures represent one example of an ideal model system which
we will be using in study -ing spinodal decomposition by light and neutron
scattering. Investigation of block copolymers dynamics will rely mainly on the
combined use of a mechanical spectrometer and small-angle x- ray and neutron
scattering. Achieving these thermodynamics and dynamics goals depend upon the
ability to manipulate the molecular weight, microstructure, isotopic
constitution, and chain architecture of model polymers. This requirement will be
met through the development of an anionic polymerization facility, augmented by
a catalytic hydrogenation and molecular characterization capability. Thus,
information regarding polymer thermodynamics and dynamics can be applied
directly to materials optimization.