* 8957860
* Presidential Young Investigator Award:  Knowledge           Engineering in Design and Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/1989,03/31/1992
* Steven Kim, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* None
* 03/31/1992
* USD 124,500.00

This research effort is directed toward the development of theoretical
foundations and software tools to serve as the basis for supporting engineering
design and manufacturing automation. These objectives require a synergistic
interaction between theory and practice. A substantial amount of effort over the
past few years has been dedicated toward the development of theoretical models
by adopting previous work in information theory, computability theory, symbolic
logic, and design methodology. This has been complemented by adopting existing
techniques in artificial intelligence and extending them to new applications. A
common theme in this research activity is found in the transformational model of
productive effort, from an initial functional specification to the final
product. This perspective has served as a unifying theme in fundamental
investigations for both the design and manufacturing components. The research
plan over the next five years is to work with industrial collaborators to
further refine the preliminary models and theories developed thus far, and to
generate software tools robust enough to accommodate the practical rigors of
real-world applications. The challenges of the envisioned work imply a high-
risk, high-pay-off program for which a Presidential Young Investigator award
would represent a major resource for turning the vision into reality.