* 8957323
* Presidential Young Investigator Awards:  Robust and         Intuitive Surface Design Methods
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/1989,09/30/1995
* Anthony DeRose, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Yechezkel Zalcstein
* 09/30/1995
* USD 312,000.00

Mechanical parts have traditionally been designed by having a designer or
engineer create detailed drawings of the part, then having a craftsmen create a
physical prototype. The prototype is subsequently evaluated based on its
mechanical (and possibly aesthetic) qualities. The results of this evaluation
are then fed back to the designer, often in the form of suggested modifications
to the part. The construction and evaluation of prototypes is extremely
expensive, so the cost of design can be dramatically reduced if the number of
physical prototypes can be minimized. This has largely been achieved by using
computers (i.e., solid modeling systems) in the design of certain types of
mechanical parts. However, there is a class of increasingly important design
applications, including the design of automobile bodies, ship hulls, and
airplane fuselages, that have not seen great benefits from solid modeling
systems. These applications are characterized by their need for compact,
efficient, and robust representations of smoothly varying shapes. This research
is concerned with providing a better understanding of the problems and solutions
of designing shapes containing smooth elements. The use of "free-form" curves
and surfaces has shown promise for smooth design applications, but their use has
been hindered for at least two reasons: conceptual complexity and robustness.
The issue of conceptual complexity stems from the fact that current techniques
typically require a great deal of mathematical expertise to use effectively.
Insufficient robustness is demonstrated by the fact that currently popular
techniques are applicable only in special geometrical situations (for instance,
when all surface patches have exactly four neighbors). The project is developing
techniques to make free-form design systems applicable in a wider variety of
geometrical situations, and also techniques that are more intuitive and natural
for designers. Such systems would not only make free-form design accessible to
mathematically unsophisticated designers, they would make mathematically
proficient users more productive.