* 8957208
* Presidential Young Investigators Award:  Combustion in      Boundary Layers and Particle-Laden Flows
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/1989,09/30/1996
* Derek Dunn-Rankin, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Farley Fisher
* 09/30/1996
* USD 326,200.00

The principle areas of research involved in this PYI award are the application
of optical diagnostics for measurements in practical engineering systems
involving combustion in droplet and particle laden flows. The specific focus is
on the development of non-intrusive optical methods to study particle transport,
heat transfer, and mass transport through boundary layers in two-phase flows. A
burning droplet is typically 0.2 mm in diameter surrounded by a 2 mm envelope
flame. One of the most powerful optical probes is based upon the coherent anti-
Stokes scattering of laser light by gas molecules within a cylindrical volume
about 0.1 mm in diameter by 2 mm long; so that to apply this method to droplet
flames the probe volume must be reduced an order-of-magnitude. Methods to
accomplish this increase in spatial resolution will be explored. Optical
diagnostics are ideally suited to boundary layer measurements because typical
boundary layers are sensitive to perturbations caused by physical probes.
Application of optical diagnostics is difficult, however, because the physical
dimensions of the boundary layer require extremely high spatial resolution. The
research will be centered on this problem, with applications to heat transfer to
solid surfaces in combustion engines, rapid solidification in molten metal
sprays, particle attrition and deposition on surfaces, and boundary layer heat
transfer in supersonic flows.