* 8957063
* Presidential Young Investigator Award-Active Galactic       Nuclei and Supernovae
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/1989,06/30/1995
* Alexei Filippenko, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Morris L. Aizenman
* 06/30/1995
* USD 312,000.00

The physical conditions and processes that occur in quasars (QSOs), active
galaxies, supernovae, and X-ray binary stars will be investigated from an
observational point of view, coupled with theoretical calculations. Much of the
research will involve the development of sophisticated image processing data
analysis techniques, as well as accurate numerical models of accretion disks and
ionized gases. In some cases the methods may become applicable to many non-
astronomical research areas. One of the main goals is to determine whether
nearby galaxies are in any way related to luminous QSOs. It is generally
believed that QSOs derive their energy from matter accreting onto supermassive
black holes in the centers of galaxies. If so, it is likely that at least some
local galaxies are "dead" QSOs, and therefore harbor such black holes in their
nuclei. Similarly, the QSO phenomenon may occur at a low intrinsic level in some
galaxies even if thy were not luminous QSOs in the past. High-quality optical
spectra of the nuclei of 500 bright, nearby galaxies, observed during the past
few years will be analyzed. After careful removal of the underlying stellar
continuum and absorption lines, faint emission lines are usually visible. The
study of supernovae (SNe) will also be carried out. A long series of photometric
optical spectra of every bright SN accessible to northern telescopes will be
used in statistical studies (progenitor stars, correlations with environment,
etc.). Comparison with the predictions of theoretical models should shed light
on the chemical composition and excitation mechanism of the expanding gas as
well as on the nature of the stellar explosion. There will be an attempt to
determine the physical characteristics of X-ray binaries, which often show
interesting parallels with active galactic nuclei. One of the most important
questions is whether the central object in SS 433 is a black hole or a neutron
star. The nature of the accretion disk, and the mechanism by which it undergoes
forced precession, are also outstanding problems that should be solved.