* 8957213
* Presidential Young Investigators Award: Nonlinear Dynamics  of Reaction and Transport Processes
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/1989,12/31/1994
* Yannis Kevrekidis, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Burka
* 12/31/1994
* USD 312,000.00

This grant is to provide research support for Dr. Yannis G. Kevrekidis under the
National Science Foundation's Presidential Young Investigator Awards program.
Dr. Kevrekidis' research is centered around the study of the dynamic behavior of
physicochemical and engineering processes. His work is focused on the
development, implementation and exploitation of computational tools at a
realistic modeling level. Specifically, his work is in two areas: (1) Nonlinear
dynamic behavior and control of lumped reacting systems--In this area his work
is aimed at obtaining a better fundamental understanding of the nature of non-
steady-state behavior in reacting systems, the development of methods for the
systematic detection of transitions, and the characterization and analysis of
fully developed time-dependent dynamics. (2) Instabilities, transitions,
patterns and complex dynamics in transport processes--In this area he is
concentrating on the systematic study of low dimensional (not fully turbulent)
dynamic behavior in a class of reaction/flow problems described by partial
differential equations. His long term goal is to use the computer to do
fundamental modeling of physical and chemical processes, analyze, and ultimately
design them based on this modeling.