* 8957159
* Presidential Young Investigator Award
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/1989,12/31/1994
* Robert Collins, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 12/31/1994
* USD 312,000.00

The objectives of this Presidential Young Investigator Award are to obtain a
fundamental understanding of the structure and properties of thin solid film
surfaces and interfaces and their relationship to the physics and chemistry of
vapor deposition. Progress in these aspects of thin film science has been very
slow owing to the complexity of the deposition processes and the relative lack
of in situ probes for studying nucleation and reactions at surfaces and
interfaces, particularly in reactive, high pressure environments of chemical
vapor deposition. In situ characterization gains importance as optical,
mechanical and electronic applications become more demanding and film structures
must be made to more exacting specifications. In situ spectroscopic cilipsometry
(SE) is one monolayer-sensitive, non- perturbat technique which will be applied
to a range of such problems. The experimental capabilities in the process of
development will allow optical spectra be taken in real time at every Angstrom
during the growth of these films. Other optical techniques will also be
developed. The preparation capabilities will include plasma enhanced chemical
vapor deposition, and the physical vapor deposition techniques of evaporation
(with and without ion assist), magnetron sputtering, and ion beam scattering.
Initial studies will concentrate on the nucleation and interface structure of
microcrystalline diamond thin films and the response of their surfaces to well-
characterized inert and reactive ion beams. Similar experiments will be used to
probe the nucleation, surface reactivity, and bonding for silicon-based films.
Other technologically important materials will be studied. These experiments
will be used to identify the physical factors which conceal film bonding and
morphology and impact materials technology.