* 8957825
* Presidential Young Investigator Award:  Stability, Moments  and Regenerative Simulation of Queueing Networks
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/1989,06/30/1995
* Karl Sigman, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Donald Gross
* 06/30/1995
* USD 154,521.00

Goldfarb A variety of queueing systems having a certain general class of point
process as input can be modeled as regenerative processes. The theory of Harris
recurrent Markov (HRMI) chains and processes will be used as the main tool.
These results give a significant contribution towards the development of a broad
theory of queues. Together with the development of regenerative simulation, it
is felt that such a theory will at least rigorously justify the standard
practice of simulating large and complicated networks (that cannot be studied
analytically) and possibly, by taking advantage of the inherent regenerative
structure, will lead to better simulation methods. Many questions remain
unanswered, immediate research plans are as follows: (1) Solve moment problems
for the queues. The main objective is to obtain necessary and sufficient
conditions on the input point process so that the distribution of steady- state
system quantities have finite moments. Solving this problem should lead to
approximations and bounds for these (extremely intractable) steady-state
quantities and should give rigorous conditions for using simulation to estimate
them. (2) Generalize much of the present theory to systems that allow feedback.
The research should show that (under reasonable conditions) even if arrivals to
an open queueing network have paths allowing them to repeatedly attend a given
station and/or return to previously attended stations, then the queue is
regenerative if the input is HRMI. (3) Make the general result (with HRMI) more
plausible. Assuming such general results hold, each node of the network when
isolated could be modeled so that the moment problems for these networks would
fall in the framework.//