* 8957149
* Presidential Young Investigators Award:  New Solidification Techniques in Manufacturing of Materials
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/1989,12/31/1994
* Christoph Beckermann, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* mary chen
* 12/31/1994
* USD 322,000.00

The primary objective of this PYI grant is to create new solidification
techniques to manufacture materials with improved properties. This is to be
accomplished through a fundamental study of the large variety of transport
phenomena present in solidification processes. Specifically, research will
proceed through a thorough investigation of the heat and species transport by
convection and diffusion in both the solid and liquid phases, at the micro and
macro scales, together with consideration of nucleation, phase-change kinetics,
and solid mechanics. Because of their technological importance, the research
will concentrate on solidification of metallic alloys and metal composites. The
numerical modelling effort will be supported by an experimental program
involving novel diagnostic techniques for measuring temperature and species
concentration. Solidification processes are integral to the manufacture of
virtually all man-made materials, including metals, polymers, ceramics,
composites, as well as new electronics, optical, and magnetic materials.
Consequently, considerable research effort needs to be directed toward the
development of sophisticated solidification techniques to produce materials with
precisely controlled shapes, chemistry, and physical properties. Through close
collaboration with researchers in industry, this PYI award can have a strong
impact on present manufacturing technologies.