* 8957534
* Mathematical Sciences: Presidential Young Investigator Award
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1989,11/30/1995
* Gerald Young, University of Akron
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 11/30/1995
* USD 260,396.00

The research in this project is concerned with the modeling and analysis of
growth-related defects induced by thermal and mechanical stresses and melt
weight in the production of large high quality crystals. The goals are to
describe the scientific phenomena of heat, solute, and melt transport
determining the crystal structure and composition, and to elucidate the coupled
dynamics of these transport mechanisms. The results of this study will aid the
design of material processing technique by defining optimal temperature profiles
and freezing rates to gain control over the solidifying interface and to
minimize thermal stresses in the crystal. Coupled asymptotic/numerical methods
will be implemented to take advantage of the disparity in length and time scales
associated with these problems. The approach is to reduce the governing
equations to a system which is simpler for analysis, but which retains much of
the physics of the process. The simpler system may be a single evolution
equation describing the shape of free solidifying interface, or a coupled set of
fields together with a consistent description of any deformable interfaces. The
achievement of specified criteria for the grown crystal will require the
location of a system parameter solution manifold yielding the optimal growth
conditions. These techniques of analysis will be developed for directional
solidification, float-zone, crystal sheet, and fiber growth systems.