* 8957236
* Presidential Young Investigator Award
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/1989,07/31/1995
* Brian Bent, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* David Nelson
* 07/31/1995
* USD 312,000.00

Initial research efforts will focus in two area: (1) Selective Chemical Vapor
Deposition (CVD): One of their objectives here is to determine how
"functionalizing" surfaces such as Si with H, OH, and halides will alter the
barriers to film nucleation. Experimentally, they will probe the barriers to
adsorption and nucleation by scattering a seeded supersonic molecular beam of
precursor molecules from the functionalized surface at various well-defined
translational energies. At incident energies where the barrier height is
exceeded, the dissociatively adsorbed surface intermediates will be trapped by
maintaining the substrate at cryogenic temperatures. Vibrational spectroscopy
(by electron energy loss) will be employed to identify the adsorbed fragments.
The gas phase products, film composition, and the degree of epitaxy during
deposition will be monitored by mass spectroscopy, Auger electron spectroscopy,
and low-energy electron diffraction, respectively. In addition, they will apply
scanning tunneling microscopy to study film nucleation at an atomic level during
CVD. (2) Heterogeneous Catalytic Polymerization: Initially, studies will focus
on olefin polymerization. The polymer chemistry will be modelled by attaching
alkyl groups to modified Ti and Zr surfaces. Precursors such as aluminum alkyls
and alkyl iodides will be utilized to generate the surface alkyls. The olefin
insertion chemistry will be probed by scattering olefin molecular beams from
active catalysts deposited onto a quartz crystal microbalance designed to
measure the polymerization rate. These studies will permit them to determine the
effects of olefin translational energy on the polymerization rate.