* 8957461
* Presidential Young Investigators Award:  Robustness and     Feedback Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/1989,08/04/1991
* Kameshwar Poolla, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/04/1991
* USD 96,150.00

His future research plans fall into three broad areas and are outlined below. I.
Parallel Algorithms. His principal objective here is to develop efficient
multiprocessor algorithms for the solution of large, sparse Lyapunov and Riccati
equations. Such equations typically arise in the control, stability analysis and
model reduction of large flexible structures for which high order, banded,
sparse finite element models are often available. The development of efficient
Lyapunov and Riccati solvers would facilitate obtaining low order approximations
to these complex models. These simplified models would play a key role in the
context of simulation and feedback control of flexible structures. II. Adaptive
Robust Control. Physical plant models are inherently inaccurate and incorporate
both parametric and dynamic modelling uncertainty, often involving a large
number of parameters. In many circumstances it may be possible to fragment the
set of possible plant models into smaller, more manageable "operating points"
for which locally robust LTI controllers may be readily designed using, for
instance, H -optimal control methods. The entire problems of controlling the
plant then reduces to adaptively "gain-scheduling" between these robust
controllers. In this connection he has provided an adaptation scheme that
uniformly input-output stabilizes the uncertain plant. Much work, however,
remains, especially in the context of obtaining acceptable transient responses
and disturbance rejection. III. Nonlinear Feedback. The research here is
motivated by fundamental questions such as: What can and cannot be accomplished
by the use of (arbitrary) nonlinear feedback? When are nonlinear controllers
significantly better than linear ones? Answers to these questions are vitally
important because they would allow control system engineers to select or
eliminate broad classes of design methodologies for specific design problems.
His principal research goals are to develop quantitative techniques that offer
guidelines on actuator-sensor reconfiguration and the choice of an appropriate
feedback synthesis methodology.