* 8957662
* Presidential Young Investigator Award
* SBE,SES
* 11/15/1989,04/30/1996
* Christina Romer, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Bonney Sheahan
* 04/30/1996
* USD 191,500.00

This award provides support to Dr. Christina Romer under the National Science
Foundation's Presidential Young Investigator Awards Program. The objectives of
this program are to provide research support to the Nation's most outstanding
and promising young science and engineering faculty. The awards are intended to
improve the capability of U.S. academic institutions to respond to the demand
for highly qualified science and engineering personnel for academic and
industrial research and teaching. This award will allow the investigator to
pursue her research which systematically links modern macroeconomics with
economic history. One of her major research accomplishments has been to
challenge the data used to analyze prewar business cycles. In the 1960s and
1970s, economists tended to view prewar estimates of such indicators as gross
national product or the unemployment rate as comparable with modern estimates.
They then used these data to argue that business cycles had gotten much less
severe between the early 20th century and the more recent era. Dr. Romer's work
directly contradicted this widely accepted finding by showing that the prewar
estimates of most major indicators of economic health were constructed in a way
that accentuated prewar cycles. When these biases were removed, the new prewar
estimates showed that cycles before and after the Great Depression were of
roughly equal severity. Thus, by measuring output in a consistent way, she found
that much of the pre- and post-war difference was the result of a better data
base for measurement in the latter period. This finding is important for it
overthrows the key observation used by both monetary economists, e.g., Nobel
Laureate Milton Friedman, and Keynesian economists, e.g., Nobel Laureates James
Tobin and Franco Modigliani, as being strongly supportive of their respective
theories. Now, she proposes another challenge, this time to the widely held
belief about the macroeconomy that movements in money cause movements in real
output. This research involves investigating whether there is in fact an
identifiable statistical relationship between particularly dramatic movements in
the supply of money in the prewar era and the behavior of the real economy and
the close examination of the historical record to see if the large movements of
money associated with financial panics should be viewed as exogenous events or
as endogenous movements triggered by the early states of a depression. Dr. Romer
has stimulated a new interest in the evolution of the American economy and she
will continue to be a major contributor to reinterpretations of it. While
evidence from the past has often been used to illustrate or illuminate, Dr.
Romer's research is differentiated by the depth of the historical analysis and
its use in posing relevant hypotheses that have the power to reshape
macroeconomic theory.