* 8958435
* Mathematical Sciences: Presidential Young Investigator Award
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1989,05/01/1990
* Fang-Hua Lin, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 05/01/1990
* USD 12,700.00

Work sponsored by this Presidential Young Investigator Award will focus
primarily on questions arising in the applications of mathematics to problems of
elsticity and liquid crystals, to geometric problems related to the study of
curvature on manifolds with boundary. The problems to be addressed are presented
in terms of various partial differential equations arising either from physical
considerations - minimization of functionals or variational inequalities, or are
motivated by geometrical concepts. The latter include the problem of finding a
metric on a manifold with prescribed Ricci tensor. This problem is studied
locally or globally through the analysis of systems of elliptic equations. In
the Hodge theory, the problem reduces to that of solving the boundary regularity
of solutions of degenerate elliptic systems. For a single equation, the problem
has recently been settled. Focus of the elsticity (plasticity) studies will be
on the Singonolli problem, seeking the best possible regularity of vector valued
functions which solve obstacle problems. In liquid crystals many physical
properties such as line singularities, phase transition, and moving defects, may
be explained within a comprehensible theory. Related work will be done on
studies of the corresponding dynamical equations. In an isotropic case, these
problems reduce to the analysis of heat flow of harmonic maps and to harmonic
maps from Minkowski space to singular target manifolds.