* 8958225
* Presidential Young Investigator Award
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/1989,11/30/1994
* Barbara Block, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* David Vleck
* 11/30/1994
* USD 274,500.00

This proposal by a young investigator of unusual breadth of expertise spans
several levels of biological organization. The basic interest of the PI is in
the biology of muscle and, more particularly, how the membrane system within
muscle cells controls the contraction/relaxation cycle of muscles. In ordinary
striated muscle, ie, those that contract to produce movement, these membranes
serve as storage depots for calcium ions. The release /sequestration of calcium
ions in the membranous system of such muscle cells regulates their contraction.
The PI is examining the coupling of these calcium mechanisms to the impulse
generated by nerves which initiates the contractile event. To do so she employs
a unique muscle cell found in the eye muscles of deep-diving fish such as the
marlin, that is, a muscle cell that does not contract but rather produces heat.
This "heater tissue" is used to warm blood on its way to the fish's brain, thus
keeping the brain warm even while the fish dives in deep and cold water. The PI
is currently studying the elaborate counter-current heat exchange system at the
base of this heater organ, using biochemical and morphological methodologies to
study how these cells regulate the movement of calcium and thereby generate
heat. Using a unique, non- contracting muscle system the PI will also be
addressing questions of interest to all contractile physiologists.