* 8958451
* Presidential Young Investigator:  Chemistry of Soluble and  Solid State Metal Chalcogenides
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/1989,12/31/1994
* Mercouri Kanatzidis, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul H. Smith
* 12/31/1994
* USD 312,000.00

This Presidential Young Investigator award from the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and
Organometallic Chemistry Program will support the research of Dr. Mercouri
Kanatzidis on the chemistry of sulfur and selenium compounds of heavy metals.
One facet of the research program will focus on the chemistry of ruthenium/
sulfur compounds, with the aim of attaining new insights into heterogeneous
catalytic processes such as the hydrodesulfurization of petroleum by ruthenium
disulfide. The second facet of the research program involves research at the
interface of inorganic chemistry and materials science. The techniques of
synthetic inorganic chemistry will be used to produce precursors to new
materials, such as low dimensional intermetallic alloys. Anionic soluble
clusters containing late transition and main group metals bridged by either
selenium or tellurium will be formed in solution and then precipitated with
heavy metals such as cadmium to form new solid compounds. An example of a
substance synthesized in this manner has the composition Cd:Hg:Te = 1:1:8, and
has potential applications in the area of low energy detection. Also to be
explored are syntheses of metal/sulfur and metal/selenium compounds at high
temperatures with molten salts as solvents. Of particular interest are compounds
containing S-S or Se-Se bonds which can be reductively (and reversibly) cleaved
electrochemically or by reaction with alkali metals. Such materials may be
useful as cathodes for high energy density rechargeable batteries.