* 8958544
* Presidential Young Investigator Award:  Research in Sparse  Matrix Methods
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/1989,05/31/1996
* Howard Elman, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Robert G. Voigt
* 05/31/1996
* USD 302,210.00

Methods for solving sparse linear systems of equations, especially of the type
arising from discretized elliptic and parabolic partial differential equations,
will be studied. The solution of such systems is often the most costly
computation in scientific codes. Three general areas will be emphasized.
Iterative solution of sparse linear systems of equations, including parallel
techniques and nonsymmetric systems: "Multicolor" variants of incomplete
factorization preconditioners display slower convergence than standard
preconditioners on serial architectures, but theoretical and computational
studies with model problems show them to be superior on parallel machines. These
methods will be tested on problems arising in scientific application codes,
where it is not certain that they will be robust. Alternatives, such as block
ordering methods which have less efficient parallel implementations but display
faster convergence on two-dimensional problems, will be examined. In addition,
new analytic and experimental results suggest that iterative methods for
nonsymmetric linear systems based on partial elimination and "line"
preconditioners are very effective for solving the convection-diffusion
equation. Further studies of these techniques will be made, including
implementation on parallel architectures. Numerical methods for three-
dimensional problems: Linear systems arising from three-dimensional elliptic
problems cannot be solved at reasonable cost at the present time. Successful
development of parallel and/or faster converging methods will expand the domain
of solvable problems, but special attention must be paid to the specific issues
associated with three-dimensionality. Two ideas will be examined: three-
dimensional multicolor schemes, and "plane" preconditioners (which would
generalize line methods). The latter idea build upon effective parallel two-
dimensional solvers. Parallel implementation of finite element methods: Finite
element methods comprise a widely used solution technique for elliptic problems
that present special difficulties for parallel computing, including the presence
of irregular grids and three- dimensional problems. High order finite element
methods appear to offer some advantages for parallel solution of two-dimensional
problems on uniform grids. Starting from this preliminary observation, the
parallel solution of finite element models on irregular grids and in three
dimensions will be studied. Two methodologies that will be considered are the
combination of local direct solution with global iterative solution methods, and
parallel solution using hierarchical basis functions.