* 8958407
* Presidential Young Investigators Award:  Effects of Inter-  facial Properties on Contaminant Transport and Transforma-  tions in Aquatic Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/1989,08/31/1995
* Kim Hayes, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Edward H. Bryan
* 08/31/1995
* USD 290,500.00

PYI: Effects of Interfacial Properties on Contaminant Transport and
Transformation Processes in Aquatic Systems This is an award to support research
on how the extent and rates of sorption of trace contaminants are effected by
the surface chemical and physical characteristics of the sorbent particles.
While relaxation kinetic studies have shown that rates of adsorption/desorption
reactions are quite rapid, the observed rates of approach to equilibrium in
batch or column reactors are much slower. This suggests that physical transport
processes caused by particle association control the rates of sorption. This
project involves an investigation of the relative importance of surface chemical
and physical processes on the extent and rate of sorption, by varying the
particle-fluid hydrodynamics, particle size and porosity, and mineralogy of
sorbent, using various reactor types including batch, column, and differential
column reactors and determination of how changes in surface and interfacial
properties affect two-phase flow in porous media. One key factor affecting the
transport of a separate organic liquid in the subsurface is the properties of
the three interfaces of the systems: organic liquid-water, water-solid, and
organic liquid-solid. These properties determine wettability which, in turn,
influence the pore networks through which the two liquid phases flow. Very
little is known about how inorganic and organic solutes change wettability by
changing the interfacial properties. This initial increment of support for this
Presidential Young Investigator is aimed at identifying the effects that mineral
surfaces and interfacial properties have on transport and transformation
processes of environmental contaminants in groundwater aquifers. A variety of
problems of national concern are controlled by surface and interfacial
properties of geologic subsurface formations. The release of polyehlarinated
biphenyls and heavy metals from resuspended lake or ocean sediments from
dredging operations, the leakage of radionuclides into the groundwater from
subsurface geologic repositories, or the migration of hazardous organic liquid
at spill and waste disposal sites are examples of the issues toward which this
research is addressed.