* 8958632
* Presidential Young Investigators Award
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/1989,06/30/1995
* Daniel Hammer, Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* william weigand
* 06/30/1995
* USD 312,000.00

Cell behavior is strongly influenced by cell surface receptor macromolecules.
Both theory and experiment will be used to study the role of receptors in
several important biological processes including cell adhesion, viral infection,
vesicle fusion and membrane signal transduction. Such information will allow the
use of receptor-binding ligands to manipulate cell behavior in bioreactors, and
develop therapies for aberrant biological processes. One area of interest is
receptor-mediated cell adhesion to ligand-coated surfaces, found in cell
separation technology, and in physiological precesses such as cancer cell
metastasis. Well-defined extracellular matrix-like supports which contain
receptor- binding ligands will be developed. Using these supports both the
dynamic adhesion of leukocytes under flow conditions and the long-term adhesion,
elongation and physiology of genetically engineered cells will be explored. In
these problems, experiments are analyzed using mathematical models which employ,
real fundamental parameters. Biotechnology holds immense promise for the future.
In order to engineer cellular behavior for commercial and societal gain, it is
necessary to understand cellular behavior on a fundamental basis. For example,
to elicit the synthesis of high value pharmaceuticals from cells, or treat
diseases which result from malfunctioning cells, it is necessary to have
detailed information about how the cell works. Molecules on the cell surface
called receptors are extremely important in tranducing information to the cell.
It is proposed to study how to exploit cell receptors to manipulate and modify
cellular behavior. Using both mathematical modelling and experimental
techniques, the quantitative relationship between receptors and cell behavior in
several important processes such as the adhesion of cells to surfaces, the
adhesion of viruses to cells, and the secretion of proteins will be studied.
This understanding can then be used to develop bioreactors for pharmaceutical
production, treat adhesion- related diseases such as the spread of cancer cells
through the body, separate cells more efficiently, or block the progression of
virally transmitted diseases, such as AIDS.