* 8958327
* Presidential Young Investigators Award:                     Picosecond Electronic Circuits
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/1989,07/31/1995
* Mark Rodwell, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Virginia M. Ayres
* 07/31/1995
* USD 289,532.00

This Presidential Young investigator award will be used to support a research
program in high speed circuits and devices for picosecond and millimeter-wave
functions. Electronic circuits and devices performing time-domain (pulsed and
other transient signals, logic) are an order of magnitude poorer in performance
(speed) than comparable circuits and devices in narrowband millimeter wave
systems. This discrepancy arises from both technological reasons (the bandwidth-
efficiency limitations in matching to lumped-element devices) and
historical/economic factors (strong research funding and large markets for
narrowband microwave technologies used in radar). There is now strong demand for
pulse and time-domain circuits operating on the 1- 100 ps time scale, in high-
speed logic, multi-gagahertz fiber-optic digital transmission, real-time high-
capacity signal processing, and instrumentation. We will address these areas by
concurrent development of novel circuit designs and the required high-speed
semiconductor devices. In the first year of the program, we will start
development of devices and circuits for multi-gagahertz fiber- optic
transmission. The bandwidth of semiconductor laser, photodetectors, and optical
fibers has exceeded the capacity of digital decision, retiming, and
multiplexing/demultiplexing circuits. The required digital functions can be
performed with diode switching and pulse generation circuits similar to those
previously demonstrated for picosecond pulse generation and sampling. A target
goal for the NSF program will be the first demonstration of working diode
multiplexing circuits at the end of the first year. The PYI funding will then be
used to support initial investigation and process development for fabrication of
high-speed 3-terminal devices (heterojunction bipolar transistors or modulation-
doped field-effect transistors) to be used in novel high speed fiber-optic and
millimeter-wave receivers and high-speed instrumentation.