* 8958347
* Presidential Young Investigators Award:  Convective         Transport Complex Flows
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/1989,02/29/1996
* Melany Hunt, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* George P. Peterson
* 02/29/1996
* USD 318,379.00

Heat and mass transfer in fluid-solid flows encompasses many engineering
disciplines from handling and processing of granular material to chemical
synthesis using packed and fluidized beds. Though petrochemical, process, and
energy industries have extensively used these technologies, models governing the
bulk fluid-solid transport rates are based largely on empirical data. To
simplify the analysis the fluid-solid systems are often viewed as
macroscopically homogeneous; however, on the microscopic or pore level, the
medium consists of a random distribution of individual particles in a
surrounding fluid. The pore-level transport depends on the bed structure,
frequency of the particle collisions, heat, mass and momentum exchange between
the particles and fluid, and interactions with bounding surfaces. Though exact
descriptions incorporating these local or microscopic effects appear
inextricable, the current efforts focus on understanding the local mechanisms
with the intent of furthering development of the industrially-important
macroscopic relations. The planned analytical and experimental research will
investigate transport in the bulk and in the boundary regions of the particle
flows. In the bulk region, the overall flow appears uniform, but locally the
individual particles rotate and translate laterally. This local motion increases
the cross-stream heat and mass diffusion and yields higher transport rates. Near
a bounding surface, the particles are not uniformly distributed but contact the
surface at distinct points causing a near-wall alignment of particles. The
distribution depends on the surface conditions of the wall, the type of
particle, and the flow rate and affects the velocity profile, molecular
diffusivity and local particle convection. The work performed with this PYI
grant will emphasize fluid-solid transport involving heat and mass transfer in
contact-dominated granular flows. This field has many industrial applications in
energy, process, and food industries, and also combines aspects of the simpler
fixed-bed problems with the more complex moving- particle flows. These aspects
of granular flows are poorly understood and yet they comprise the mechanisms
that govern the heat, mass and momentum transport. Continued research in these
areas will advance the modeling of granular material flows and may lead to other
fluid-solid research areas such as fluidized beds and suspension flows.