* 8958415
* Presidential Young Investigators Award
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/1989,06/30/1995
* Jonathan Dordick, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Fred G. Heineken
* 06/30/1995
* USD 322,000.00

The use of enzymes in organic solvents is a relatively new technology that
significantly extends conventional aqueous- based biocatalysis. However, the
multitude of applications in areas such as organic synthesis and enzyme-based
analyses have provided only the framework for elucidating the principles and
parameters that govern enzymatic catalysis in organic media. Two long-term
research directions will be pursued during the course of the PYI award and
include l) the understanding and control of the parameters that dictate
enzymatic catalysis in non-aqueous media; and 2) the development of
methodologies for the use of enzymes as catalysts in organic synthesis. The
first goal involves studying the role of the solvent on enzyme structure and
function. EPR spin labeling will be performed to probe enzymic active site and
surface microenvironments during catalysis in non-aqueous media. The second goal
has far reaching implications for regio-and stereoselective biotransformations.
Specific reactions to be studied include the synthesis of sugar-containing
polyesters for biodegradable polymers, peroxidase-produced phenolic resins as
formaldehyde-free plastics replacements, and selective synthesis of
oligosaccharides. Enzymes are nature's catalysts that exhibit keen reaction
specificities and fast rates of catalysis under mild conditions. Traditionally,
enzymes have been thought of as water-based catalysts. Because enzymes function
in a water (aqueous) environment within living tissues, nearly all applications
of enzymes in biocatalysis has involved aqueous solutions. Unfortunately, for
most reactions of commercial interest (e.g., pharmaceutical manufacture,
synthetic intermediates, plastics production, etc.), water is not a suitable
reaction medium. Synthetic chemists had realized this long ago, and most organic
reactions are routinely performed in organic (non-aqueous) solvents. Recently, a
number of research groups have shown that enzymes can function in organic
solvents. The research directions being targeted during the course of this PYI
award involve both fundamental and applied aspects of enzymatic catalysis in
organic media. From a fundamental standpoint, the factors that control enzyme
function in solvents will be studied.