* 8958559
* Presidential Young Investigator Award: Detection and        Estimation in Low Dimensional Subspaces
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/1989,07/31/1996
* Barry Van Veen, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* John Cozzens
* 07/31/1996
* USD 202,160.00

Van Veen This research involves the development and evaluation of efficient,
high performance signal processing algorithms for signal estimation and
detection. Algorithms for processing data collected at arrays of sensors and for
analysis of time series are of particular interest. One technique for reducing
the complexity and improving the performance of signal processing algorithms is
based on mapping data into subspaces prior to processing. Mapping of data into
subspaces is appropriate for almost all signal processing problems, and is
especially applicable, if not mandatory, to problems in which large quantities
of data must be processed. A key issue under study is the design of linear
transformations which maximize performance while minimizing subspace dimension.
Processing of data mapped into subspaces is being explored in adaptive
beamforming, adaptive filtering, spectrum estimation, and source location
estimation problems, as well as in more general nonlinear signal processing
algorithms. Determination of appropriate performance criteria for transformation
design and tradeoffs between performance and complexity are under investigation.
Statistical analysis and simulation are being utilized to analyze the
performance of the resulting algorithms.