* 8958510
* Presidential Young Investigator Award
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/1989,06/30/1995
* Veit Elser, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 06/30/1995
* USD 312,000.00

The research plan will consist of: (a) Quasicrystal growth and structure. There
is still a great deal of controversy whether the disorder observed in real
quasicrystals is intrinsic to this phase of matter or just a consequence of non-
optimal growth conditions. A particular non-equilibrium model of growth appears
to reproduce both qualitatively and quantitatively the disorder observed in
diffraction experiments. A more difinitive comparision will be devised since the
structures generated by this model very definitely are characterized as having
intrinsic disorder, similar to a glass. Progress in this direction may be made
by using the electron microscope in a more quantitative capacity than
previously. (b) Low temperature physics. Beyond the work of Nagaoka and Thouless
in the 60`s, surprisingly little is understood (even qualitatively) about the
motion of a hole (vacancy) in a lattice of spin 1/2 particles (electrons, 3He).
Examples: (1) Is the ferromagnetism induced by a single hole in a bipartite
lattice stable when a finite density of holes is introduced? (2) What form of
magnetic ordering is induced by a single hole in a triangular (nonbipartite)
lattice? These are among the simplest, highly correlated fermion systems which
are nontrivial and for which an intuitive understanding is completely lacking.
Through the use of trial wavefunctions and various other computational
techniques, these and similar problems will be investigated.