* 8958253
* PYI:  Benthic Community Structure of Freshwater Ponds
* BIO,DEB
* 10/15/1989,03/31/1995
* Scott Wissinger, Allegheny College
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 03/31/1995
* USD 200,500.00

In support of his research activities over a five-year period, Dr. Scott A.
Wissinger of the Departments of Biology and Environmental Sciences at Allegheny
College (Pennsylvania) will receive Presidential Young Investigator Award
funding. This work concerns complex biotic interactions at the interface of
population ecology and community ecology. Specifically, the focus of the
investigations is on multi-species competition, predation, and habitat selection
processes among fish and dragonfly (Odonata) larvae in North American ponds. By
manipulating replicate artificial ponds, effects of invading, migratory, large
dragonflies on the resident smaller dragonfly species will be studied. Select
undergraduate students, particularly seniors, at Allegheny College will have the
opportunity to participate in this research. The second focus of the research
addresses effects of acid precipitation on pond community structure; the study
sites are a series of pristine high altitude (at 3500 meters) ponds located
within the Nature Conservancy's Mexican Cut Nature Reserve near the Rocky
Mountain Biological Laboratory (Gunnison, Colorado). Initially, surveys will be
made to assess the relationship between alkalinity, and salamander (the top
vertebrate predator) and invertebrate abundance. Results will then be used to
design experiments for separating effects on prey from effects on predators.
This award of funding will enable the investigator to complete development of an
experimental pond facility, purchase maintenance and sampling equipment, and
facilitate travel by personnel to remote study sites.