* 8958228
* PYI:  Theoretical and Experimental Studies of Animal FeedingBehavior
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1989,07/31/1995
* David Stephens, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 07/31/1995
* USD 168,813.00

This Presidential Young Investigator award will provide support for theoretical
and experimental analyses of feeding behavior, which Dr. Stephens views as a
useful model for many behavioral systems. The research will focus on the
economics of the feeding behavior of vertebrate animals in randomly varying
environments. Most theoretical models in behavioral ecology estimate the fitness
value of behavioral tactics in terms of some immediate gain (e.g., of food,
mates, or offspring). The models ignore the gains of information that an option
might provide; for example, a given food patch may provide both calories and
information about the patch's relative quality. Dr. Stephens has devised a new
way to estimate the value of information, and he will attempt to answer several
new experimental and theoretical quesions suggested by this technique. Evidence
from experiments on risk-sensitivity and on preferences for immediacy suggest
that the temporal pattern of food acquisition is an important (but usually
neglected) aspect of foraging. Dr. Stephens will attempt to show the theoretical
relationships between risk-sensitivity and preferences for immediacy, and will
attempt to distinguish experimentally among the many theoretical models that
have been proposed to explain these two phenomena. Learning is usually viewed as
an adaptation to an unpredictable environment. Dr. Stephens' theoretical work,
in its earliest stages, suggests that learning is as much an adaptation to
predictability as it is an adaptation to unpredictability. Further development
of these theoretical models has a tremendous potential to change conventional
views about animal learning and comparative learning abilities. Dr. Stephens'
research might be applied in two practical contexts. An understanding of feeding
behavior is fundamental to well-informed management of animal populations and
ecosystems, and understanding how natural selection has solved behavioral
decision-making problems may help students of human decision- making.