* 8958233
* PYI:  Plasticity, Gene Flow, and Differentials in Plant           Reproductive Fitness
* NONE,NONE
* 10/15/1989,03/31/1996
* Diane Marshall, University of New Mexico
* Continuing grant
* None
* 03/31/1996
* USD 290,533.00

This five-year Presidential Young Investigator Award will permit Dr. Diane L.
Marshall of the University of New Mexico to maintain a highly productive
activity level in her scientific research. Within an evolutionary ecology
framework, she is continuing studies of plant population biology. Her principal
work examines patterns of variation in plant reproduction and fitness (the term
"fitness" refers to reproductive success and the relative differential effects
brought about by natural selection). For the past several years, the wild
radish, Raphanus sativus, has been the subject species of interest for exploring
questions pertaining to plant mating systems (i.e., pollination, sexual
selection, and paternity). Results demonstrate effects due to genetic identity
of pollen donors, as well as variable responses on the part of individual pollen
recipients. This work has been an important contribution in quantifying gene
flow in plants. Future endeavors with another species will combine field work at
the Sevilleta Long- Term Ecological Research site with greenhouse results. Apart
from this work is that which has been done on a legume, Sesbiana. Recent
investigations reveal that this species shows plasticity in response to stresses
such as water or nutrient limitations, and that seed size is only one of several
components of yield response. Future research will document the nature of
plastic responses across a range of habitat types and plant species. Beyond
allowing expansion of pilot studies of variation in plant secondary chemistry
and its linkages to plant demography and herbivore pressure, this award will
also guarantee that Dr. Marshall is able to supplement her mastery of
electrophoretic techniques by developing expertise in the newer, more powerful
ones such as "DNA fingerprinting," using restriction fragment length
polymorphisms.