* 8958322
* Presidential Young Investigators Award:                     mm-Wave Devices and Integration Techniques
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/1989,01/31/1991
* Umesh Mishra, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Arthur R. Bergen
* 01/31/1991
* USD 25,000.00

The inherent response time of electronic devices can be improved by decreasing
the active device capacitance. As devices are scaled laterally using
sophisticated lithographic tools, such as e-beam lithography, the devices must
also be scaled vertically to ensure proper charge control. This includes the
thinning of active channel and contact regions in devices such as FET's and
HEMT's. Contact regions, in particular, are difficult to scale by conventional
techniques such as ion-implantation. Selective etch-back and regrowth techniques
will substantially influence the development of nanometer gate length devices
with reduced short channel effects. Using a chemically assisted ion-beam etching
system and a regrowth chamber will allow nanometer gate length devices with
reduced short channel effects to be fabricated. Vertical devices are exciting
because enhanced substrate currents which cause short channel effects in lateral
devices are absent. Also, the critical device dimensions are grown by epitaxial
techniques and hence can be made extremely small, thereby decreasing electron
transit times and enhancing device speed. These and other advanced fabrication
techniques will be investigated for use in producing improved performance solid
state devices for integrated circuit applications.