* 8960369
* Software for Large-Scale Numerical Calculation Using        External Memory Devices
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1990,09/30/1990
* David Foulser, Scientific Computing Associates Inc
* Standard Grant
* Kesh S. Narayanan
* 09/30/1990
* USD 49,799.00

Iterative methods for solving sparse linear systems require significantly fewer
arithmetic operations and less memory than currently popular direct methods.
However, for very large problems, for example as derived from discretizations of
partial differential equations in three space variables, it is still necessary
to use secondary storage devices to store the required data. This project will
develop an efficient out-of-core version of our powerful sparse preconditioned
conjugate gradient iterative method package, PCGPAK. This will involve the
development and implementation of new algorithms which attempt to minimize disk
traffic and overlap required reads and writes with computation as much as
possible. Analysis leads one to believe that one can develop a package whose
performance will be CPU bound (as distinct from I/O bound) on most reasonably
balanced computer systems for most problems of common interest. An out-of-core
PCGPAK would allow users to solve arbitrarily large sparse linear systems with
great speed without paying the penalty of using secondary storage devices.
Furthermore, users would not have to concern themselves with the intricate
details involved with efficient I/O programming. An out-of-core PCGPAK has
outstanding commercial potential. The oil industry is a concrete example of
where such a package would be used immediately. All commercial simulators have
an "Everything but the linear system" out-of-core option now and would include
an out-of-core linear system solver -- if an adequate one existed. Other
industries with a clear need for such a commercial product include the
aerospace, fluids, and structures industries.