* 8960966
* New Coating Techniques for Composite Membranes
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1990,09/30/1990
* Richard Baker, MEMBRANE TECHNOLOGY & RESEARCH, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 09/30/1990
* USD 50,000.00

Membrane diffusion is an inherently slow process. Consequently, membrane-based
separation processes can only be economically viable if extremely thin, defect-
free membranes are used. Thin-film composite membranes with a permselective
layer thickness down to about 0.5 um can be made by presently available
techniques. Membranes with permselective layers thinner than this would
dramatically improve the economics of membrane separation. The goal of this
program is to develop the technology for making industrial-scale composite
membranes with permselective layer thicknesses down to 0.1 um or below. The
membranes will be made by modifying the solution coating process used to apply
the thin permselective layer. The coating solutions to be used will be
characterized in having high viscosity at low polymer concentration. Previous
experimental data indicate that the use of such solutions enables a much thinner
defect-free coating to be applied than is possible with conventional techniques.
If the technique can be applied to many different polymers, it will enable
economically viable membrane-based separation systems to be made and applied to
a broad range of gas separation problems. Membranes made by the proposed process
could have a significant impact on many industrial gas separations, for example,
oxygen/nitrogen separation, removal of acid gases from effluent streams, or
hydrogen recovery from many sources. The process economics could be sufficiently
attractive to make membrane systems competitive with conventional separation
methods in these and other applications.