* 8960363
* Miniature Fabry-Perot Interferometer
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1990,09/30/1990
* John Farah, Optisensors Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 09/30/1990
* USD 49,800.00

This project will use Fabry-Perot interferometry to develop a novel angular
sensor. This approach is particularly attractive because the angular sensitivity
of a Fabry-Perot interferometer is proportional to the width of the etalon.
Hence, it can be made more sensitive by widening the etalon. A 10 mm wide
etalon, for example, yields a whole fringe for every 50 micro-radians of change
in the angle of incidence at a wavelength of 0.63 micron. This angular
sensitivity can be used to measure secondary phenomena that induce rotation such
as vibration and acceleration. Conventional Fabry-Perot etalons are polished
slabs of glass whose flatness and parallelism are maintained to a high degree of
tolerance. This process is costly and time consuming. This project will use an
alternative way of fabricating Fabry-Perot etalons with the use of waveguide
microfabrication technology. There are distinct economic advantages to this
approach because the resultant micro-sensor will be cheaper than the
conventional one when mass-produced. This project aims at determining the
effectiveness of the microfabrication techniques at producing semiconductor
micro-etalons whose performance is comparable to that of the glass ones.
Lithographic techniques will be used to define the etalons on the waveguide
structure. The new configuration will allow the angle of propagation inside the
waveguide to vary continuously so that it can be used as an angular sensor.