* 8960751
* Design, Synthesis and Evaluation of Ferroelectric Liquid    Crystals with Saturated Cores
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1990,12/31/1990
* Michael Wand, Displaytech Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 12/31/1990
* USD 50,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project is in the general
area of materials chemistry and in the subfields of organometallic chemistry and
physical organic chemistry. The long range scientific goals of this research are
to increase understanding of the correlation of molecular structure with
physical properties of ferroelectric liquid crystal (FLC) phases, and to test
strategies for the design of new materials. Specifically, this research is aimed
at inventing new FLC materials having low birefringence and low absorption at UV
wavelengths. Such FLC materials would have application in flat panel displays
and spatial light modulators (SLMs) for UV light. Ferroelectric (chiral) smectic
C* liquid crystals have been shown to exhibit high speed, multistate electro-
optic and display device applications, particularly when incorporated into the
surface stabilized ferroelectric liquid crystal (SSFLC) light valve. Flat panel
displays based upon the SSFLC device concept have many potential advantages.
However, due to the high birefringence and large UV absorption of existing
materials, SSFLC light valves prove problematical in some important
applications. Both of these problems are due to the fact that all known FLC
materials possess aromatic rings in the liquid crystal core. The specific goal
of this Phase I activity is to design, synthesize, and evaluate new FLC
materials with saturated cores. The specific core structures to be explored
include novel cubylcubanes, and cubane units combined with bicycloÄ±2.2.2!octane
units.