* 8960545
* A Sign Language Based User System Interface
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1990,09/30/1990
* Andrew Girson, Digital Video Processing Inc
* Standard Grant
* Kesh S. Narayanan
* 09/30/1990
* USD 49,990.00

Sign language is the normal mode of communication for many deafand non-speaking
individuals. The problem with sign language is that to communicate, all persons
involved must understand sign language and be in plain sight of each other. A
systems is needed that can encode sign language and convert it to the English
language text that it represents, so that remote signers and those not versed in
sign language can communicate with each other. Digital Video Processing, Inc.
will develop a sign language recognition and translation system to allow users
versed in sign language to more readily communicate. The system will harness
real-time motions and positions and encode this information. A sign language
recognizer will interpret the data and relate it to a dictionary of segments
(letter, words, etc.) and choose theappropriate segment. The Phase I effort will
address the significant problems and opportunities associated with encoding the
inputs, extracting the input's information content, and recognizing and
translating particular segments. A complete hardware and software specification
for the prototype systems will be detailed. Also, proposed algorithms for real-
time sign language recognition will be described, and the ability to recognize
sign language given the social, behavioral, and geographic differences inherent
in any form of communication will be ascertained.