* 8961062
* Long-Path Intracavity Laser Spectrometer for the Measurementof Atmospheric Trace Gases
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1990,09/30/1990
* J. Barry McManus, Aerodyne Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 09/30/1990
* USD 49,999.00

There are numerous important atmospheric trace gases with absorption lines in
the visible to near ultraviolet. The absorption cross sections for these gases
are moderate, but their extremely low concentrations (some below part-per-
trillion levels) make them difficult to measure. The Phase I effort will
investigate a technique for increasing the sensitivity of intracavity laser
absorption spectroscopy, with application to the detection and measurement of
trace gases in the atmosphere. The technique places a multipass absorption cell
within the resonant cavity of a dye laser. With an intracavity multipass cell,
the optical absorption pathlength can be increased by a factor of ten to thirty
over the typical values of experimental systems. Intracavity laser spectroscopy
may increase sentivity by a factor of ten or more over the previous state of the
art. The general goal for Phase I research is to demonstrate and explore the
behavior of a tunable dye laser that has an intracavity long-path multi-pass
absorption cell. The applicability of such a laser system to the problem, of
measuring weakly absorbing atmospheric gases will be evaluated. An atmospheric
trace gas measurement instrument based on this system would have many of the
properties desired in modern atmospheric chemistry research. These properties
include: high sensitivity, fast response, point measurement capability and
ruggedness.