* 8961028
* Isolation and Characterization of Microbial Genes for       Destruction of PCBs which are Environmental Contaminants
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1990,09/30/1990
* Ronald Unterman, Envirogen, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Kesh S. Narayanan
* 09/30/1990
* USD 50,000.00

The polychlorinated biphenyls are a highly stable family of compounds that have
accumulated in the environment over the past 50 years at sites of their
production, use, storage, or disposal. Their persistence in soil and sediment
and possible effects on human health have sparked an intense interest in
developing a safe, economical means for their destruction. It is our goal to use
recombinant DNA technologies to develop a superior biochemical process for the
microbial destruction of PCBs. Research by Dr. Unterman and his former
colleagues at GE has clearly demonstrated the existence of at least two
complementary classes of aerobic PCB-degrading bacteria and that use of both of
these classes in concert can effect a much greater extent of PCB destruction. It
is Envirogen's ultimate goal to combine the PCB- degradative genes from two of
these strains, respectively, into one superior, PCB-degradative microbe. The GE
group has now cloned the genes from a Class II organism. Although the genes from
Class I microbes have been isolated, we will isolate, clone, and genetically
engineer the genes that encode the enzymes responsible for PCB catabolism from
Acinetobacter strain P6, the best Class I microorganism isolated to date.