* 8961056
* THESEUS: A New Platform for High-Altitude Atmospheric       Science
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1990,09/30/1990
* John Langford, Aurora Flight Sciences Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 09/30/1990
* USD 50,000.00

Recent advances in aerodynamic, structural, electronic, and propulsive
technologies make possible a new generation of low-cost unmanned aircraft for
atmospheric science research. The first such platform, designated Perseus, is
already under development as a joint effort between Aurora Flight Sciences and
Harvard University. Perseus' lithium battery propulsion system will enable it to
carry a 50 kg chemical sampling payload to an altitude of 25km. The purpose of
this SBIR program is to initiate development of a larger, more versatile follow-
on platform called Theseus. The heart of the proposed Theseus platform is a
solid polymer electrolyte fuel cell powering an electrically driven propeller. A
unique oxidation scheme will allow Theseus to carry a 450 kg payload for
thousands of kilometers at an altitude of 20-25 km, and to reach altitudes as
high as 40 km for brief periods. The aircraft is intended to be operable by a
field team of three people and to be transported in a single C-130. Due to the
complete reusability of both the airframe and the payload/s, Theseus will be
capable of performing almost all of the scientific missions currently flown on
large balloons or the manned ER-2, at costs significantly lower than present. In
addition, it will make possible a number of new missions due to its increased
performance, precise spatial and temporal controllability, and increased
operational flexibility.