* 8961368
* Blue Phosphors for Full-Color High-Definition Video Display
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1990,09/30/1990
* Anton Greenwald, Spire Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 09/30/1990
* USD 49,858.00

Thin-film electroluminescent technology now produces matrix-addressed self-
luminous flat panels which come very close to providing the capability for high-
definition color television. The principal obstacle to advancing this technology
to full-color video imaging is the need for high-brightness, saturated-blue
phosphor. The most promising available candidate is ZnS:Tm, which has excellent
chromaticity but luminance that is too low by 1-2 orders of magnitude. Its weak
emission is inconsistent with its intense blue cathodoluminescence and
photoluminescence and is due, most likely, to defects. We will maximize the
luminance of ZnS:Tm-type phosphors as a function of film structure; optimal
charge compensation by specific anions and co-activation by other lanthanides
will also be assessed. Thin phosphor films will be grown by conventional
metalorganic chemical vapor deposition after a 10-30 nm seed layer is formed by
atomic layer epitaxy in the same large-area reactor. The resultant establishment
of a uniform large- diameter columnar grain structure is expected to greatly
increase electroluminance. Further, this deposition process is capable of laying
down all of the primary ZnS-host phosphors for full-color display in a single
chamber, it is amenable to lower-cost non- photolithographic pixel definition,
and it is inherently scalable.