* 8961116
* Gradient Coated Aluminum Columns for Gas Chromatography
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1990,09/30/1990
* Robert Schwartz, Ionics Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 09/30/1990
* USD 50,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project is in the general
area of separations science and in the subfield of gas chromatography. The
thrust of this activity is the evaluation and refinement of a novel gas
chromatographic column that has (a) a stationary phase of high thermal stability
bonded to aluminum, (b) a gradient of film thickness of stationary phase that
provides both high sample capacity and high resolving power, and (c) the ability
to perform size-exclusion chromatography in addition to partition
chromatography. These columns will be prepared by anodizing the internal
surfaces of aluminum tubing and bonding stationary phases irreversibly to the
anodized layer. Control of the depth and diameter of the pores which are
produced in the anodized layer will be achieved by control and variation of the
anodization conditions. Variation of the film thickness of the stationary phase
will follow the natural variation of the thickness of the anodized layer along
the axis of the tube. The effective diameter of the pores will be effected
through selection of stationary phases with different molecular dimensions. The
successful achievement of these Phase I goals should provide proof-of-concept
that is necessary for Phase II work. The approach to gas chromatographic column
preparation embodied in this research could impact significantly on the current
chromatographic practice.