* 8961379
* Silicon-Germanium and Silicon-Tin Waverguides for           Heterostructure Optoelectronic Devices
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1990,09/30/1990
* Fereydoon Namavar, Spire Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 09/30/1990
* USD 49,948.00

The growth of a single-crystal alloy layer of germanium and silicon on a very
high resistivity silicon substrate is a new and unexplored technique for optical
waveguiding in the 1.3 to 1.6 micron infrared wavelength range. A related, but
more speculative approach, is the epitaxial growth of crystalline tin- silicon
alloys on silicon, which has never been done. SnSi would allow a lower
percentage of tin in the alloy than the percentage of Ge in GeSi to achieve a
given amount of refractive index increase. The advantages of these alloys as
waveguides include very low waveguide propagation loss and compatibility with Si
processing. In Phase I Spire Corporation will grow symmetric Si/GeSi/Si and
Si/SnSi/Si waveguide structures using a double heteroepitaxy of crystalline
GexSi(1-x) or SnxSi(1-x) on (100) silicon, followed by an epitaxial silicon
layer on the alloy, and to perform optical waveguide tests on the material at a
wavelength of 1.3 microns. The thickness of the alloy layer will be varied from
1 to 10 microns and x will be varied from 0.05-0.20. They hope to show from the
waveguide tests that losses are low, and the TE0 mode is not cut off at
submicron thickness. The general goals for Phase II are to build upon the Phase
I results to develop active, guided-wave electro-optic devices.