* 2400641
* Interfacial problems in data science and PDEs
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Matthew Jacobs, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Stacey Levine
* 08/31/2026
* USD 93,272.00

This project involves the development and analysis of mathematical models where
the structure of interfaces between different phases or classes is an essential
feature that arises in a range of applications. The frameworks specifically
addressed in this project are models for tumor growth and the robustness of
machine learning classification systems to malicious attackers, the latter also
known in the literature as adversarial attacks. In the case of tumor growth, the
key interface is the boundary separating the cancerous region and the healthy
cell region. Tracking and predicting the shape of this boundary has important
implications for disease treatment and prognosis. The key interfaces for robust
machine learning classification are the decision boundaries between different
classes. If a classifier has extremely irregular decision boundaries, then an
adversary can produce erroneous results by slightly perturbing the input data.
These attacks are particularly striking in computer vision, where pixel changes
that are imperceptible to human vision can fool well-trained models with high
confidence. This project will advance our knowledge in both of these
applications by studying the theoretical properties of these interfaces and by
developing new computational algorithms and software to simulate these
interfaces. This project will also involve the training of graduate students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the case of tumor growth, the project will focus on
fluid mechanical models for cell growth based on partial differential equations.
On the theoretical side, the well-posedness of these models and an understanding
of how model choice and parameter regimes affect the regularity of the tumor
boundary will be established. In addition, efficient numerical solvers will be
developed, paying particular attention to model instances that are too
challenging for the current theoretical understanding, including models where
even the global-in-time existence of weak solutions is unknown. In the case of
data classification, a better understanding of the regularizing effect that
adversarial learning has on class interfaces will be established, and these
insights will be used to guide parameter choices. Theoretical work that has
connected adversarial learning to barycenter problems with respect to optimal
transport distances will also be further developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.