* 1600118
* Bioprinting of Bone Tissue into Defect Sites on Animal Models in Surgery Settings
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/17/2015,12/31/2018
* Ibrahim Ozbolat, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Steve Schmid
* 12/31/2018
* USD 310,947.00

The goal of this project is to establish a new frontier in bioprinting science
and technology. This will be accomplished by studying the bioprinting of bone
tissue directly into a defect site on an animal model. The research in this
study will have a direct impact on the first-time bioprinting of living cells
and nucleic acid loaded in polymers in surgery settings for bone tissue
fabrication, which will benefit society by working toward the establishment of
an alternative solution for skull defects. Skull defects are devastating and
affect millions of people each year; about 7%, or 227,500, of the children born
each year in the United States are affected by birth defects in the skull.
Bioprinting in surgery settings will eventually be applied to other organs and
will considerably improve quality of life for the affected people. Broader-
impact activities will include training, education, and participation of
underrepresented populations in summer camps and workshops, as well as the
integration of next-generation bioprinting science into both graduate and
undergraduate education.

The research objectives of this project are three-fold: 1) to understand
bioprinting behavior of a composite bioink, 2) to determine the effects of
bioprinting and the bioink parameters on the release profile and the
transfection efficiency of plasmid, and 3) to understand bioprintability of
porous tissue constructs in defects and establish the relationship between the
manufacturing conditions of tissue constructs and bone tissue formation.
Accomplishing these objectives will allow the exploration of advanced
bioprinting technologies in operating rooms. In this project, the following
tasks will be performed. First, a novel composite bioink (reinforced with
collagen, stem cells, a thermo-sensitive gel, and plasmid) will be processed and
characterized to research its bioprinting behavior. Then, bioprinting of plasmid
will be studied to understand the role of bioprinting and the bioink parameters
on sequential release and transfection efficiency of plasmid. Next, in situ
multi-arm bioprinting will be studied to investigate manufacturability of
multiple tissue constructs in critical-size cranial defects in rat models.
Finally, the regenerated bone tissue, bioprinted under various manufacturing
conditions, will be characterized and quantified using tissue histology and
micro-computed tomography.