* 1600506
* GP-IMPACT: Increasing Diversity and Enhancing Academia (IDEA-2.0): Institutionalizing a framework for broadening participation in geosciences
* GEO,RISE
* 12/01/2016,11/30/2020
* Kathleen Gray, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 11/30/2020
* USD 448,458.00

The Institute for the Environment at the University of North Carolina at Chapel
Hill (UNC-IE) and the Department of Environmental, Earth and Geospatial Sciences
at North Carolina Central University (NCCU-DEEGS) are implementing a three-year
initiative - Increasing Diversity and Enhancing Academia-2.0, or IDEA-2.0 - to
broaden participation in and institutional capacity to offer career-relevant
geoscience education at both institutions. Through research and professional
experiences, a diverse group of undergraduate students is being prepared for
future work in geoscience fields. Additionally, their supervisors are being
better prepared to mentor diverse students, improving recruitment and retention
in geosciences. IDEA-2.0 represents a coordinated effort between a research-
intensive university and a historically black university to bolster
participation in geoscience education, especially the participation of URM and
women students. The institutionalization of existing, informal partnerships is
building a foundation for ongoing support of evidence-based, career-relevant
geoscience experiences for undergraduates while also better preparing faculty to
mentor diverse students. Additional partners in this effort include the
following geoscience departments at UNC-Chapel Hill: Environmental Sciences and
Engineering, Geography, Geology, Marine Sciences and the Curriculum for the
Environment and Ecology. Over time, it is anticipated that the combination of
sustained professional development opportunities for students combined with
enhanced preparation of mentors will contribute to cultural shifts within
institutions that are likely to promote greater diversity in geoscience
disciplines and the workforce. Thus, this project serves the national interest
by promoting the progress of science and advancing the national health,
prosperity and welfare.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The IDEA-2.0 program has a goal of
broadening participation in and institutional capacity to offer career-relevant
geoscience education at UNC-Chapel Hill and North Carolina Central University,
while generating useful insights into how such practices could be implemented
successfully at other institutions. Program goals are being accomplished through
the following objectives: 1. Engage up to 30 students - including
underrepresented minority (URM) and women students - in evidence-based, career-
relevant experiences that prepare them for work or further study in geosciences;
2. Prepare a subset of faculty, postdoctoral scholars and graduate students to
mentor a diverse group of students and contribute to broad understanding of how
the mentoring experience influences recruitment and retention in the geosciences
pipeline; and 3. Build capacity to sustain coordinated programming across
departments at UNC-Chapel Hill and to fund and implement new programming at
NCCU. By targeting students who are rising sophomores and juniors, IDEA-2.0
focuses on the critical juncture between high school and commitment to
undergraduate geoscience programs. The first two years of undergraduate study
are a critical time to recruit/retain STEM majors; early engagement in research
has been shown to contribute to institutional-level success in engaging URM
students in science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM). Mentoring
interactions also have been shown to reinforce students' confidence in their
ability to succeed and are associated with higher grades in STEM courses, higher
rates of degree completion, and, for STEM-focused recruitment and retention
programs, with participants' ultimate pursuit of science careers. For these
reasons, IDEA-2.0 seeks to engage mentors in an ongoing cycle of professional
development that prepares them to meet the mentorship needs of diverse students.
The explicit focus of this project is on understanding the mentoring
relationship - both its influence on student career and academic choices as well
as faculty confidence and competence in supporting diverse teams - contributing
to our understanding of how to effectively foster diversity in STEM fields.