* 1600710
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Plant traits as indicators of ecological restoration effectiveness in tropical landscapes
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2019
* Jennifer Powers, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 05/31/2019
* USD 19,500.00

The majority of tropical forests are regenerating following human disturbance.
Some landscapes are so highly degraded that active restoration, such as direct
tree planting, is necessary to facilitate forest recovery. In tropical forests
requiring active management interventions, a wide range of restoration
techniques have been employed to assist forest recovery at various stages of re-
growth, although it is not clear how to best select tree species for restoration
projects, especially given ongoing changes to the environment. This graduate
student project seeks to determine how above- and below-ground plant traits
influence the survival and growth of planted trees, to determine if plant traits
can be used to efficiently and inexpensively select the best tree species for
restoration of Costa Rican tropical dry forests (TDF). These forests are highly
endangered, cover an estimated 42% of tropical land area, and are understudied
compared to their wetter counterparts. Results from this research have the
potential to greatly advance ecological restoration theory, and to aid in the
restoration of tropical dry forests, especially those facing significant drought
stress due to ongoing environmental change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
takes a functional trait-based approach to experimentally test the efficiency of
using plant traits to select tree species for a large-scale TDF restoration
project. Field based quantification of above- and belowground plant traits, as
well as genetic analyses of fungal communities associating with plant roots,
will be combined with tree seedling growth data to determine the extent to which
above- and belowground traits can be used to predict plant performance in a
restoration setting. A 6-hectare restoration experiment will be used to
determine if species' trait syndromes, grouped by resource acquisition
strategies, predict the performance of tree species along successional
trajectories. In addition to conducting these projects, the researchers will
engage the local conservation, forestry, and farming community in a workshop on
TDF adaptive management strategies. These projects will also give undergraduate
students the opportunity to conduct independent research projects in
collaboration with the researchers. All of this research will be conducted in
direct collaboration with TDF restoration practitioners at Horizontes
Experimental Forest Station, part of the Guanacaste Conservation Area in
Northwestern Costa Rica.