* 1600638
* HBCU-UP RIA: Isolation and identification of novel chemical entities from marine microorganisms
* EDU,EES
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2022
* Glenroy Martin, Fisk University
* Standard Grant
* Carleitta Paige-Anderson
* 05/31/2022
* USD 299,953.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities-Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
Research Initiation Awards (RIAs) provide support to STEM junior faculty at
HBCUs who are starting to build a research program, as well as for mid-career
faculty who may have returned to the faculty ranks after holding an
administrative post or who need to redirect and rebuild a research program.
Faculty members may pursue research at their home institution, at an NSF-funded
Center, at a research intensive institution or at a national laboratory. The RIA
projects are expected to help further the faculty member's research capability
and effectiveness, to improve research and teaching at his or her home
institution, and to involve undergraduate students in research experiences. With
support from the National Science Foundation, Fisk University will conduct
research aimed at isolating novel chemical entities from marine micro-organisms.
This project represents a new area of research (Marine Natural Chemistry) at
Fisk University, a small liberal arts HBCU with over 94% under-represented
minority undergraduates in STEM. This project will be used to enhance teaching
and learning at Fisk across several disciplines (chemistry, biology, mathematics
(statistics) and computer science) and thus, provide experiential learning to a
wide undergraduate student population. In addition, Fisk University is
transforming its STEM pedagogies to include authentic research in course-
associated laboratories, where this work will serve as a model in both organic
and analytical chemistry courses, thus having a broader impact on the STEM
majors, their professional development, and retention.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of the proposed study is to identify new bioactive chemical entities from a
newly isolated yellow-cream Gram-negative, rod-shaped Pseudomonas stutzeri
bacteria (strain 35M3) whose identity and uniqueness was confirmed from 16S rRNA
gene sequence analysis. The specific aims of this project are to: 1) to use high
information density analytic tools to identify novel chemical entities from the
newly identified strain of Pseudomonas 35M3 and the impact on this strain's
metabolome by co-culture experiments (with Gram-positive bacteria Rhodococcus
wratislaviensis, Gram-negative bacteria Escherichia coli, and fungus
Saccharomyces cerevisiae separately) or after antibiotic selection; and 2)
extend bioactivity analysis beyond the typical assessment of bacterial and
mammalian cell cytotoxicity to include the impact of these novel compounds on
dopamine neuron development and protection against induced dopamine
neurodegeneration using C. elegans as a model system. This study has the
potential to identify 16S rRNA gene sequences of newly identified microbial
strains. The data generated from this work will inform the design of future
experiments that explore other metabolomes and/or dissect cellular pathways
central to normal homeostasis of cell development, signaling, cell-cell
communication, and other processes. This project will be conducted in
collaboration with Vanderbilt University.