* 1600325
* EAGER: Early Stage Research on Automatically Identifying Instructional Moves in Mathematics
* EDU,DRL
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2018
* Wayne Ward, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* John Cherniavsky
* 05/31/2018
* USD 299,928.00

This is an Early-concept Grant for Exploratory Research research project to
develop automated tools to aid in the development of mathematics teaching
expertise in preservice teachers. Current research on preservice mathematics
teacher instruction relies on observing preservice teachers interacting with
students and recording their mathematical interactions to provide guidance and
advice as how the preservice teachers can improve their teaching. This research
requires highly trained observers and highly trained analysts to record and
interpret the student teacher verbal interactions in order to give teachers feed
back in how to improve their instruction. The aim of this project is to automate
the observation, recording, and interpretation of student-teacher interactions.
This would result in more effective research on instructional strategies for the
preservice teachers and ultimately lead to changes in teacher professional
development when feedback only available in research environments becomes
feasible for all preservice teacher professional development.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will use as an initial basis the observation
toolkit Accountablity Talk for providing teachers with both formative and
summative feedback on their instruction. Automatic speech recognition and
natural language technologies will be used to record and interpret student
teacher verbal interactions. The results of this research have the potential to
democratize preservice mathematics teacher professional development and, over
time, provide insight into teacher learning that can result in restructuring
teacher learning environment to make them more effective in developing high
quality mathematics teachers.