* 1600919
* Research Initiation Award: Leveraging Protein Structure Determination: An Efficient Algorithmic Approach
* EHR,HRD
* 04/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Kamal Al Nasr, Tennessee State University
* Standard Grant
* Martha James
* 08/31/2019
* USD 300,000.00

Research Initiation Awards (RIAs) provide support for junior faculty at
Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs) who are starting to build a
research program, as well as for mid-career faculty who need to re-direct and
re-build a research program. It is expected that the award helps to further the
faculty member's research capability and effectiveness, improves research and
teaching at the researcher's home institution, and involves undergraduate
students in research experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Traditionally, biophysics
experimental techniques have been used to determine the structures of protein
molecules. The goal of Tennessee State University's (TSU) HBCU-UP RIA project is
to computationally predict the structure of proteins that are difficult to
determine experimentally. The project's objectives are to 1) develop efficient
algorithms to extract features from, process, and analyze the 3D cryo-EM images
of protein macromolecules and 2) model protein macromolecules using their cryo-
EM images. The educational goal of the project is to expose students to
multidisciplinary research using a hands-on approach to prepare them to compete
with their peers in industry or academia in various areas of bioinformatics. The
educational approach and assessment will strongly support the curriculum
modulation at Tennessee State University (TSU) and serve as a model for other
HBCU institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The outcome of the research has the
potential for contributions to the fields of medicine and health.