* 1600032
* New Methods in Tensor Triangular Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Paul Balmer, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Spiroff
* 08/31/2020
* USD 158,004.00

Tensor triangular geometry, the theme of this research project, bridges a large
class of specialized areas of mathematics, including stable homotopy theory,
algebraic geometry, modular representation theory, motivic theory, and
noncommutative topology. Tensor triangular geometry promises to serve as an
overarching theory that facilitates the transposition of techniques and methods
from one specialized area to neighboring ones, providing conceptual unification
among those fields. Moreover, it displays steadily expanding influence in
mathematics. For instance, via tensor triangular geometry, the subject of étale
topology in modern algebraic geometry now bears new applications in modular
representation theory, where it provides answers to longstanding problems about
the relations between representations of finite groups of order a power of a
prime number and representations of arbitrary general finite groups. This
research project aims to broaden and deepen understanding in the field of tensor
triangular geometry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project studies the geometry of
tensor-triangulated categories as they appear in several areas of mathematics.
Tensor-triangulated categories are now in common use in algebraic geometry, in
modular representation theory, stable homotopy theory, and its equivariant
versions, in motivic theory, in equivariant noncommutative topology, and beyond.
This project aims to develop new methods in tensor triangular geometry, in order
to study those many different incarnations from a unified perspective. In recent
years, much progress has been made in étale extensions (i.e., separable and
commutative extensions) of tensor-triangulated categories and on the related
theory of descent. The present project builds on these and related results and
aims to apply descent to connect the algebraic geometry of projective support
varieties with the modular representation theory of finite groups. Some
applications of these techniques can be spelled out in concrete terms without
tensor-triangular technicalities. For instance, in work on endotrivial modules
the investigator introduced "weak homomorphisms." It appears that the very same
weak homomorphisms are connected to complex line bundles on the Brown simplicial
complex of p-subgroups. Further investigation of their role in algebraic
geometry is part of the current project. Another general theme of the project is
the computation of the "spectrum" of a tensor-triangulated category. A new
general approach for such computations comes through filtering tensor-
triangulated categories and understanding the successive strata via étale
extensions. An early prototype of this method has been applied to compute the
spectrum of the equivariant stable homotopy category of a finite group. The
project aims to transport those ideas to new examples.