* 1600813
* Derived Torelli Theorems, Brauer Degeneration and Universality, and Foundations of Algebraic Vision
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Max Lieblich, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 06/30/2020
* USD 315,000.00

This award supports research on several projects in algebraic geometry and
allied fields. Focused primarily on solving polynomial equations, algebraic
geometry is an ancient subject that plays a key role in numerous fields of
mathematics, both pure and applied. It is a linchpin of modern number theory, a
heavy hammer of contemporary cryptography, and a crucial input into the computer
vision systems that are transforming geography, archaeology, medicine, the
automotive industry, and consumer smartphones. While it continues to expand its
abstract foundations in astounding new directions, algebraic geometry is also
cutting new paths into data science, statistics, and machine learning. The
questions under study in this project attack both ends of this spectrum. One
part of the project will focus on problems related to so-called Torelli
theorems, which seek to capture and quantify the essential linearity of algebro-
geometric objects, and on the Brauer group, which is an object that tightly
binds algebraic geometry to mathematical physics, non-commutative algebra, and
number theory. A second part of the project aims to broaden the algebro-
geometric foundations of computer vision, bringing new approaches to deep
problems that lie at the heart of cutting-edge applications of computer vision.

The first part of this research project concerns Torelli theorems and focuses on
Torelli-type statements for various mixtures of derived categories and Chow
theory, building on the investigator's earlier work with collaborators. This is
one way of trying to get Torelli theorems in a positive characteristic setting,
and the underlying ideas have already paid dividends related to the Tate
conjecture for surfaces over finite fields. Research on the Brauer group aims at
new degeneration methods via semistable reduction of maximal orders and
universality questions for rational Brauer groups of projective spaces. The goal
is to gain structural insight into Brauer classes and attack several old
problems, such as the cyclicity conjecture. The part of the project on computer
vision will introduce functorial methods into the study of multiview
reconstruction and resection, leading to new ways of compactifying the natural
incidence correspondences that occur in these problems. The work aims to help
lay new flexible foundations for algebraic geometry in computer vision that will
advance the relationship between the subjects.