* 1600790
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   Woody plant encroachment into grasslands: Impacts on landscape-scale patterns of soil carbon, nitrogen, and phosphorus storage and dynamics
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2018
* Thomas Boutton, Texas A&M AgriLife Research
* Standard Grant
* John Schade
* 05/31/2018
* USD 19,305.00

Lands that receive small amounts of rain or snow occupy approximately 40% of the
Earth's land surface. Large portions of these areas are experiencing a
replacement of plants that are mostly grasses with increased numbers of trees
and shrubs. This change generally increases the amount of carbon found in both
plants and soils, and impacts how other elements that are important for plant
growth, such as nitrogen and phosphorus, are used; carbon accumulation may also
impact climate. Nitrogen and phosphorus are nutrients that often limit the rates
at which plants grow, and the supply of one or the other can affect other
elements. Despite the importance of carbon, nitrogen and phosphorus in plants
and soils, very few studies have been conducted that consider all three elements
together in dry landscapes, where the numbers of trees and shrubs are
increasing. This project will measure patterns of storage of carbon, nitrogen,
and phosphorus within the soils in areas where trees and shrubs have largely
replaced grasses. The results will provide knowledge on why trees and shrubs are
replacing grasses and what these changes mean for those environments. The
information gained by this research will be used to improve mathematical models
that describe the interactions of climate and nutrient cycles that in turn can
inform the conservation and management of these dry lands. Educational materials
about the research will be prepared for the general public in cooperation with
the Texas A&M AgriLife Extension program.

Modification of soil nutrient pool sizes following woody proliferation has long
been of interest to grassland, savanna, and desert ecologists. However, most
previous studies examining nutrient dynamics following woody encroachment have
been confined to small spatial scales, limited to the uppermost portions of the
soil profile, and focused primarily on C and/or N. This research will quantify
soil organic C, total N, and total P throughout the entire soil profile in order
to make the first assessment of landscape-scale C:N:P soil stoichiometry
following woody plant encroachment into grassland. Specific objectives are: (1)
Examine whether vegetation cover change alters the 3-dimensional spatial
patterns of soil C, N, and P storage at the landscape scale; and (2) Test
whether soil P scales isometrically with respect to C and N, and whether these
isometric patterns change with soil depth in N-fixer encroached systems.
Nutrient stores will be quantified in spatially-specific soil cores taken to a
depth of 1.2 meters in a subtropical savanna landscape where N-fixing woody
plants have encroached into grasslands during the past century. Results will
offer new perceptions on the effects of woody encroachment on interactions
between C, N, and P cycles in arid and semi-arid ecosystems across the globe,
and enhance our ability to represent these interactions in linked
biogeochemistry-climate models.