* 1600990
* CS Gateways 2015:  Sustaining NSF-Supported Computer Science Education Curricula
* CSE,CNS
* 01/15/2016,06/30/2016
* Martin Gartzman, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Janice Cuny
* 06/30/2016
* USD 99,957.00

CS Gateways 2015 is a two-day workshop for selected project leaders from NSF-
supported computer science instructional material and professional development
projects. The workshop will provide an opportunity for those leaders to think
collectively about the scalability and long-term sustainability of their work,
as well as support structures for long-term implementation and growth.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broad goals of the conference are to &lt;br/&gt; --
Inspire the project leaders to think beyond the development activities of their
NSF-funded projects and to commit to taking steps that will lead to long-term
growth and sustainability once NSF funding has ended;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; --
Educate the participants about key issues that should be considered now in order
to facilitate scalability and sustainability of their work; provide models of
potential routes to scalability and sustainability; and&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;
-- Strengthen the community of CS curriculum and professional developers;
encourage collaboration and sharing of ideas and solution
strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop represents a continuation of a
series of NSF sponsored "Gateways" conferences where mathematics and science
curriculum developers met annually to share experiences, discuss challenges,
find and identify joint solutions, and build a community of educators and
leaders focused on instructional material and professional development.