* 1600168
* A Workshop for Creating a Water Education and Innovative Ecosystem
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/2016,08/31/2018
* David Reckhow, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 08/31/2018
* USD 49,950.00

1619958&lt;br/&gt;Oates&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Population growth and the
concomitant need for more food and energy are stressing the ability of cities,
regions, and nations to provide safe, abundant, and affordable water to all. The
additional uncertainty in the climate, the rapid depletion of the world's
aquifers, urbanization, and the industrialization of developing economies, all
indicate that humanity is in the midst of a water crisis. These challenges have
far reaching implications for global security, ecosystem health and economic
development, as well as the health safety of both the wealthy and the poor. The
principal investigators (PIs) propose to bring together a working group of
educators, industry partners, and government officials that will participate in
a one day planning workshop to develop a larger regional conference for the
broader New England water community. The PIs believe the workshops and
conferences will catalyze a New England Water Education Ecosystem that will
identify, address, and share solutions to improve water supply abundance, access
and safety.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The challenges of solving problems related to
safe, abundant, and affordable water supply are critical to the regional,
national, and global security. The workshops will be in the northeast
incorporating universities ready to tackle these emerging water problems, and
partners in industry are critical to the implementation and commercialization of
new technologies. In 2014, a small group of individuals incorporated the New
England Water Innovation Network (NEWIN) with the goals of serving as a common
voice for the regional water industry and identifying best practices for brining
water technologies to market. Additionally, New England Water Innovation Network
recognizes the importance of engaging and energizing the next generation of
water professionals. The New England Water Education Ecosystem will provide a
venue to bring industry partners together with educational partners. In
addition, many aspects of the water issues have significant policy components.
The State of Massachusetts recognizes the significance of these challenges and
is actively engaged in programs to foster water innovation at the both the basic
research and commercialization phases. Cultivating connections between higher
education, water industry, and government will speed the development of
solutions and help prepare students to face these complex challenges.