* 1600942
* Linear and nonlinear problems in dispersive Partial Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Rowan Killip, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2020
* USD 240,000.00

Wave dispersion, the phenomenon of waves with differing frequencies traveling
with different speeds, is the norm for waves in media. Nonlinear effects are
precisely those that generate interactions between such waves. The principal
objective of this project is to study models that combine both phenomena.
However, it has become evident that further progress on these problems requires
a deeper understanding of the purely dispersive effects; correspondingly, a
significant fraction of the project is directed toward this goal. In particular,
the principal investigator will focus on situations where the dispersive
behavior is complicated either by taking place in a region of finite extent or
in a heterogeneous medium. Although the project focuses on simple models, these
embody fundamental hurdles appearing much more broadly in the theory of wave
motion. All the models under consideration can arise as mechanical systems. It
has recently been discovered that, at least for finite systems of particles,
this places considerable restrictions on the possible behavior, far beyond those
discovered in the nineteenth century; however, the full nature of these
restrictions is poorly understood. Part of the project is to exhibit (for the
first time) such restrictions for equations modeling infinite systems of
particles, spread over an infinite volume.

The project concerns several topics in dispersive partial differential
equations, both linear and nonlinear. Strichartz estimates encapsulate much
about the linear flow in a manner well-adapted to the nonlinear theory. Further
study of such estimates in the setting of Schrodinger equations on compact
manifolds will be undertaken, building on recent dramatic advances, including
those of Bourgain and Demeter. The treatment of scaling-critical nonlinear
equations requires one to understand not just estimates for the linear flow, but
also the defects of compactness therein. Toward this direction, the principal
investigator seeks to obtain mass-critical profile decompositions for models
with nonconstant coefficients, building on some initial successes in this
direction. Turning now to truly nonlinear questions, nonsqueezing results will
be sought in two distinct infinite-volume settings. Recall that nonsqueezing is
a peculiar property of general finite-dimensional Hamiltonian flows uncovered by
Gromov saying that no ball can flow wholly into a cylinder whose (symplectic)
cross-section has lesser radius. Past work has been restricted to tori, which
aids significantly in the development of finite dimensional approximations. Due
to substantial differences in the nature of complete integrability, the low-
regularity theory of the Korteweg-de Vries equation is further advanced on the
torus than on the whole line. The project seeks to make some inroads on the low-
regularity problem for the line, building on a recently developed method for
global control of Sobolev/Besov norms that works simultaneously in both
geometries.