* 1600920
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   Mutant models reveal latent developmental potential with roles in evolutionary change
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2018
* Matthew Harris, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 06/30/2018
* USD 18,867.00

This project will investigate the genetic factors that cause elaborated bone
pattern in fish fins. Bone pattern elaboration results from increases in bone
numbers and connections, and such research is important for understanding
processes of both evolution and development. In evolution, increase in the
number of bones arranged end-to-end helped transform fins into limbs and aided
the colonization of land by extinct vertebrates. In development, normal function
and movement depends upon formation of the proper bone numbers and connections,
and defective development can lead to severe impairment. Currently, the
mechanisms that led to elaboration of the fin skeleton to form limbs are
unknown. To identify the genetic factors involved, the researchers will study
strains of the model species, zebrafish, that have genetic changes that result
in the formation of new fin bones. They will also investigate naturally
occurring variation in two species, gar and bowfin, that have different numbers
of bones extending from the shoulder. These complementary approaches will reveal
the mechanisms regulating growth and formation of the skeleton of fins and
limbs, and show how simple genetic changes can lead to the formation of limbs
from fins. Understanding the mechanisms of bone pattern elaboration and
development has implications for human health and developmental abnormalities,
and may provide clues for the evolution of life on land. Additionally, the
project will provide research opportunities for Native American undergraduates.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While tetrapod vertebrates have increased the number of
bones along the proximo-distal (P-D) axis of the limb, teleost fishes such as
the zebrafish have reduced the pectoral fin skeleton; only a single long bone is
found along the P-D axis. The researchers performed a forward mutagenesis screen
in zebrafish and isolated a novel mutant that forms supernumerary bones along
the P-D axis of the fin through a process similar to that seen in the
development of tetrapod limbs. The proposed research will extend results from
mutant analysis to natural populations to determine if the mutation is producing
supernumerary bones by activating ancestral genetic mechanisms. Transcriptome
profiling by RNA sequencing will be used to compare gene-expression levels in
the developing pectoral fins of wild-type and mutant zebrafish, as well as two
species that exhibit natural variation in P-D axis elaboration. This analysis
will reveal patterns of differential gene expression that correlate with P-D
axis elaboration. Differentially expressed genes will be tested in the zebrafish
to determine if their modified expression has an effect on fin morphology. This
study will elucidate how additive phenotypic changes arise in development and
identify candidate pathways by which additional fin/limb bones are formed in
both evolution and disease.