* 1600598
* EAGER: BACTERIOPHAGE -NANOMATERIAL INTERACTIONS IN THE ENVIRONMENT- A TOTALLY UNEXPLORED RESEARCH AREA
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2016,04/30/2019
* Ramesh Goel, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 04/30/2019
* USD 118,095.00

PI: Goel, Ramesh&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 160059&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;EAGER:
Bacteriophage-nanomaterial interactions in the environment-a totally unexplored
research area&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Engineered nanoparticles are used in many
consumer and industrial products and, eventually released into the environment
through different mechanisms. Understanding the fate and transport of metal and
metal oxide nanoparticles has been the focus of numerous studies over the past
one decade. Efforts now also include understanding the interactions of
nanoparticles with biota at different levels. Biocompatibility and antimicrobial
activity of nanoparticles have been studied widely in context of selected
bacteria. In natural and engineered systems, along with prokaryotes, other tiny
entities known as bacteriophages also exist. Bacteriophages are viruses that
infect bacteria only through their well-known lytic and lysogenic cycles.
However, nothing is known about the effect of engineered nanoparticles on
bacteriophages. The overarching goal of this Early Grant for Exploratory
Research (EAGER) project is to understand the effect of silver and titanium
nanoparticles on the infectivity of bacteriophages. The project will use lytic
phages specific for antibiotic resistant bacteria and will study the effect of
silver and titanium nanoparticles on plaque formation, oxidation of protein coat
forming the body of bacteriophages and attachment of nanoparticles to phage
particles. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has three distinct objectives; (1)
Evaluate the interactions of silver and titanium NPs with bacteriophages
isolated from natural ecosystems using microscopic techniques, (2) evaluate the
infectivity of lytic phages specific to pathogenic antibiotic-resistant bacteria
after these lytic phages are exposed to different types of NPs and, (3)
formulate a mechanistic understanding using molecular modeling.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results from this innovative research will establish a
platform for advancing scientific knowledge in the area of nanoparticle-phage
interactions. In addition, the outcomes of the proposed research will impact
other disciplines such as environmental microbiology, aquatic toxicology and
environmental nanoscience and engineering. For example, the results from this
research may guide phage mediated drug delivery systems and enable more holistic
approached for drug therapies to be developed. Also, sustainable approaches for
environmental protection can also emanate from the results of this project if
successful. In the area of science education, the PI will: 1) integrate findings
in his graduate and undergraduate courses, (2) incorporate this novel topic into
an ongoing high school summer program in order to enhance high school laboratory
research and (3) disseminate findings through conferences and peer reviewed
journal articles.