* 1600907
* Research Initiation Award: Magnetic Field Mapping of Pico/Nano/Micro-Satellites to Facilitate Refinement of their Guidance/Navigation Systems and Magnetic Cleanliness
* EDU,EES
* 06/15/2016,10/31/2019
* Sharan Asundi, Tuskegee University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 10/31/2019
* USD 299,907.00

Research Initiation Awards provide support for junior and mid-career faculty at
Historically Black Colleges and Universities who are building new research
programs or redirecting and rebuilding existing research programs. It is
expected that the award helps to further the faculty member's research
capability and effectiveness, improves research and teaching at his home
institution, and involves undergraduate students in research experiences. The
award to Tuskegee University has potential broader impact in a number of areas.
The project seeks to investigate methods of mapping the electromagnetic field
distribution of pico/nano/micro satellites (PNMSats) and aid in the refinement
of their orbit determination and control capabilities. Undergraduate aerospace
engineering students will gain research experiences by working on the project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall research goal is to develop a better
understanding of the magnetic activity of PNMSats and investigate methods of
modeling the magnetic map of such satellites. A Magnet Coil Test Facility,
designed around a 3-axes Helmholtz coil (HHC) cage and precision fluxgate
magnetometers, will be used for carrying out the research. The PNMSat specimens
will be subject to relevant on-orbit control modes inside the HHC cage. Using
the magnetometer measurements taken during the emulation of these control modes,
a harmonic understanding of the magnetic activity will be investigated. The
research will aid in the refinement of the various subsystems of a PNMSat -
particularly the operation of attitude determination and control systems, as
well as electro-magnetically sensitive instrumentation. It will further aid in
designing magnetic booms for PNMSats. This research is a stepping stone to
founding a PNMSat program at Tuskegee University and provides an opportunity for
collaboration with other Historically Black Colleges and Universities.