* 1600980
* Dissertation Research: Within-host seasonal drivers of pathogen dynamics in a fruit bat reservoir
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2016,08/31/2017
* Cara Brook, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 08/31/2017
* USD 16,301.00

Diseases often follow regular patterns: there is commonly a flu season, for
example, and regular cycles in the occurrence of measles and chicken pox are
well known. Explanations usually involve patterns of host (human) movement and
contact. This project will examine how other factors such as seasonal changes in
host status (nutritional or reproductive status, for example) influence the
spread of disease. The research focuses on bats, which are known or suspected
hosts and reservoirs for a number of diseases. Understanding more about host
tolerance to disease will be critical to predicting and preventing new
infectious diseases. Results will improve understanding of disease risk and
spread, with direct consequences for human health. The researchers will continue
to work with scientists in Madagascar, contributing to human and wildlife health
and conservation in that country. The award will advance the education and
training of a doctoral student, supporting her to develop a new measure of host
condition and improved models for disease dynamics. The doctoral student will
develop a course in modeling disease dynamics and will continue to engage
undergraduate students in the research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers
hypothesize that seasonal fluctuations in adipose tissue underlie a host's
strategy of pathogen tolerance versus resistance for a diverse suite of viral,
bacterial, and protozoan infections. Adipose tissues may mediate pathogen-
induced intracellular damage and promote repair by regulating processes of
intracellular autophagy. This regulation would promote host tolerance to
infection. During resource-scarce winters, reductions in adiposity could lead to
declining function in autophagic processes, allowing for accumulation of
intracellular pathogen-induced damage that necessitates immune resistance. The
researchers will test these hypotheses using serum samples collected during an
18-month field study of pathogen dynamics in three endemic fruit bats in
Madagascar. They will conduct enzyme-immunoassays for leptin, a neuroendocrine
signaling hormone secreted by adipose tissue, in serum samples of each
individual bat in the dataset to quantify adiposity. Data on adiposity will be
used to parameterize a new, within-host model exploring adipose tissue
contributions to pathogen damage control. Although seasonal contact patterns
often capture epidemic dynamics in human infections, they are insufficient to
explain pathogen persistence, and the observed seasonality of disease
transmission, in a number of important wildlife hosts, including bats.