* 1600131
* Coastal SEES Collaborative Research: Sustainability in Chesapeake Bay shorescapes: climate change, management decisions, and ecological functions
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2021
* Yinglong Zhang, College of William & Mary Virginia Institute of Marine Science
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 08/31/2021
* USD 941,590.00

This research examines the potential for achieving sustainability in coastal
systems where natural resources are impacted by both climate change and human
responses to climate change. Chesapeake Bay shorescapes (a shoreline zone which
includes riparian, intertidal, and near-shore shallow water areas) are used as a
test bed because sea level rise creates risks for shoreline property owners and
shoreline marshes. Property owner perception and response to the risk varies and
their choice of a shoreline protection approach (armoring, living shoreline, do
nothing) has consequences for the capacity of shoreline marshes to continue to
provide ecosystem services. Impacts on marsh services that include supporting
fisheries and improving water quality affect the larger estuarine system, with
consequences for the many users of that system. This leads to regulation by
government officials, who have their own perception of all these issues.
Modeling the decision-making process of shoreline property owners, the
ecological consequences of shoreline management decisions, and the perceptions
of officials developing or implementing natural resource policies will discover
opportunities and options for managing the combined human and natural system to
desired outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is to discover
the elements of the shorescape social-ecological system that have the greatest
influence on attainment of sustainable outcomes. The research describes the
trajectory of Chesapeake Bay shorescapes in terms of changes in amount,
distribution, and character of shoreline types. The primary drivers of these
changes are rising sea levels and actions of shoreline property owners to combat
erosion. An analysis of existing information on shoreline conditions, property
owner characteristics and property management decisions is used to model future
shoreline management choices. A series of field investigations comparatively
quantify multiple ecosystem functions (habitat provision, primary production,
nutrient and carbon storage) of living shorelines and natural marshes along a
continuum of estuarine shorescape settings and project future shifts in function
under varying management scenarios. This information is compiled in a marsh
function model that can use input from the shoreline management model. Future
outcomes then are forecast under scenarios with alternative sea level rise and
management conditions. Surveys of government officials responsible for policy
development and implementation document the operative feedbacks from the
ecological consequences of property owner decisions. Synthesis of this
information identifies the characteristics of shorescape socio-ecological
systems that enhance or detract from their ability to achieve sustainable
outcomes. Formal guidance for coastal managers and policy makers will be
developed using the results of this integrative approach to sustainability in
Chesapeake Bay shorescapes.