* 1600934
* Center for Renewable Energy Advanced Technological Education Support Center (CREATE-SC)
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2021
* Kathleen Alfano, Madison Area Technical College
* Standard Grant
* Jill Nelson
* 06/30/2021
* USD 1,648,690.00

The Support Center for Renewable Energy Advanced Technology is focused on
technician education in the realm of renewable energy. The Support Center has
grown from the collaboration of three previously funded NSF efforts: The CREATE
Regional Center at College of the Canyons, the Career Education for Renewable
Energy Technology (CERET) consortium at Madison Area Technical College, and the
Northwest Water and Energy Education Institute (NWEEI) at Lane Community
College. The PIs and their respective institutions have a wealth of experience
assisting other colleges and faculty members to establish new renewable energy
programs. By leveraging this collective knowledge and experience, the CREATE
Support Center will help others to climb the learning curve faster, cultivating
and promoting robust renewable energy programs to meet surging workforce
demands. There is a strong need to support new renewable energy programs, to
help faculty to develop as professionals, and also to provide them with high
quality instructional materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the CREATE
Support Center is to advance the field of renewable energy by supporting two-
year college renewable energy programs. This goal will be accomplished through
five key objectives: 1) Providing support and mentoring for prospective PIs that
wish to start or improve educational programs in a renewable energy technology;
2) Establishing and supporting additional renewable energy industry, business
and academic partnerships; 3) Promoting technician careers and visibility and
the public image of renewable energy; 4) Addressing technician knowledge,
skills, and competencies needed for the evolving, converging, and emerging
renewable energy technical workplace; and 5) Screening, validating, updating,
and broadly distributing exemplary renewable energy materials, curricula, and
pedagogical practices adapted or designed by ATE centers and projects and other
appropriate sources.