* 1600556
* Digitization TCN: Collaborative Research: Lepidoptera of North America Network: Documenting Diversity in the Largest Clade of Herbivores
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2021
* Anthony Cognato, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 06/30/2021
* USD 226,389.00

Lepidoptera (butterflies and moths) are one of the most diverse groups of
organisms on the planet: worldwide there are approximately 160,000 species,
including around 14,300 species in North America. Moths and butterflies are a
conspicuous component of terrestrial habitats and one of the most diverse groups
of plant-feeding animals worldwide. This group insect includes species of great
economic importance. Their juveniles feed on plants useful to humans, including
grains, cotton, tobacco, and timber and shade trees. However, many of the adults
are beneficial as pollinators and are icons of conservation as evidenced by
Monarch butterflies. Given their economic importance and sheer beauty,
butterflies and moths are one of the most abundant insect group in museum
collections, but only a fraction of the approximately 15 million specimens in
non-federal collections have had their specimen label information digitally
recorded and accessible to researchers and educators. Of those specimens that
have been digitized, fewer than 10% of the North American Lepidoptera species
have sufficient, accessible occurrence data to make reliable predictions about
habitat use, susceptibility to global change impacts, or other ecologically
important interactions. This project will digitize and integrate existing,
unconnected collections of lepidopterans to leverage the outstanding potential
of this group of organisms for transformative research, training and outreach.

The Lepidoptera of North America Network (LepNet) comprises 26 research
collections that will digitize approximately 2 million specimen records and
integrate these with over 1 million existing records. LepNet will digitize
43,280 larval vial records with host plant data, making this the first
significant digitization of larvae in North American collections. LepNet will
produce ca. 82,000 high-quality images of exemplar species covering 60% of North
American lepidopteran species. These images will enhance remote identifications
and facilitate systematic, ecological, and global change research. In
collaboration with Visipedia, LepNet will create LepSnap, a computer vision tool
that can provide automated identifications to the species level. Museum
volunteers and student researchers equipped with smartphones will image >132,000
additional research-quality images through LepSnap. Up to 5,000 lepidopteran
species will be elevated to a "research ready" status suitable for complex,
data-driven analyses. LepNet will build on the existing data portal (SCAN) in
consolidating data on Lepidoptera to the evolution of lepidopteran herbivores in
North America. Access to these data will be increased through integration with
iDigBio. Data for a broad range of research, including the evolutionary ecology
of Lepidoptera and their host plants in the context of global change processes
affecting biogeographic distributions will be generated. The LepXPLOR! program
will spearhead education and outreach efforts for 67 existing programs, engaging
a diverse, nationwide workforce of 400+ students and 3,500+ volunteers. Overall,
LepNet will generate a sustainable social-research network dedicated to the
creation and maintenance of a digital collection of North American Lepidoptera
specimens (http://www.lep-net.org/).