* 1600956
* CSEDI: Integrated seismic, geodynamic, and mineral physics studies of the deepest lower mantle
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2020
* Michael Gurnis, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 04/30/2020
* USD 396,108.00

The behavior of deep planetary materials helps drive the flows that produce
plate tectonics. Voluminous igneous eruptions driven by deep mantle sources are
thought to have caused global environmental changes. Located approximately 3000
km below the surface of the planet, the core-mantle boundary region represents
one of the most dramatic compositional and thermal boundary layers within our
planet. Gradients across this boundary exert a primary influence on the cooling
of the planet, on the dynamics of the core (and hence Earth's magnetic field),
and on the dynamics of the mantle (perhaps expressed as large-scale volcanism at
the Earth's surface). Major progress towards understanding the dynamics of the
deep Earth system within various geoscience disciplines has been made possible
through advances in experimental and computational facilities and techniques,
instrumental resolution, and deployment of the USArray. Capitalizing on these
major advancements and the team's individual expertise within seismology,
geodynamics, and experimental mineral physics, the team will study the
interaction of subducted slabs with multi-scale lower mantle structures in the
framework of mantle flow. They will mentor next generation scientists working in
their multi-disciplinary environment, which should improve understanding of how
the planet works as a global system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Seismologists have
revealed that the mantle side of the CMB is extraordinarily heterogeneous, with
km-scale fine structure that could harbor distinct chemical reservoirs. Thermal
and chemical heterogeneity, solid-solid phase transitions, elastic anisotropy,
variable viscosity, and melting are probably all required to explain this
observed complexity. With individual expertise in seismology (Helmberger and
Zhan), geodynamics (Gurnis), and experimental mineral physics (Jackson), they
will connect the atomic scale (thermoelastic properties of deep Earth phases) to
the tectonic scale (seismically observed structures and their dynamics) and link
all processes to the temporal dimension (reconstruction of tectonic plate
history). They will conduct a systematic study of the Pacific large low seismic
velocity province (LLSVP) using whole seismograms compared against synthetics
generated from existing enhanced tomographic models and compressible thermo-
chemical convection with reasonable plate tectonic reconstructions. A detailed
comparison of the Pacific and African LLSVPs will be done to test the impact of
tectonic histories, presence of seismic anisotropy, and possible compositional
and/or thermal differences. The experiments assess the sources of (1) seismic
anisotropy through inelastic x-ray scattering and diffraction experiments on
single crystals of (Mg0.22Fe0.78)O magnesiow√ºstite (2) seismic gradients and
discontinuities through x-ray diffraction experiments on mid-oceanic ridge
basalt phase assemblages. Their study will culminate with generating an updated
global map of the CMB region. The fundamental questions they will address
include: Can the presence of subducted slabs deform LLSVPs into seismically
resolvable 3D shapes? Is iron-rich (Mg,Fe)O a source of observable seismic
anisotropy, developed by flow of the mantle near subducting slabs? How do these
slabs interact and affect D? topography and chemically-distinct structures near
the edges of LLSVPs?