* 1600399
* GP-IMPACT: Early College High School Pathways to Geoscience Majors and Careers: Full STEAM Ahead!
* GEO,RISE
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Alan Fryar, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 06/30/2019
* USD 297,389.00

The University of Kentucky Department of Earth and Environmental Science (EES)
and the Fayette County, Kentucky School District's STEAM (Science, Technology,
Engineering, Arts, and Math) Academy will form a partnership to prepare students
for careers in the geosciences while in high school. As society faces a
potential shortage of geoscientists, this project is broadening the
participation in the discipline by recruiting a diverse population of future
geoscientists from underrepresented groups, and by easing their transition from
high school to college. Building a model for similar collaborations between
geoscience departments and the growing number of STEM-focused early-college high
schools such as the STEAM Academy is another goal of this project. Such schools
have been demonstrated to provide superior academic preparation, leading to
higher rates of college enrollment and graduation in the science, technology,
engineering, and math (STEM) fields. Because these schools primarily admit
students through lotteries, their student population is diverse and contains
groups frequently underrepresented in the geoscience discipline. Most STEM
students choose their major while in high school or before and these schools
specifically emphasize career paths in STEM. Currently, these schools focus on
health sciences and engineering. Lack of exposure to the geosciences prior to
the critical transition between high school and college is often cited as a
reason for the low numbers of geoscience majors. By capitalizing on a pre-
existing model of STEM recruitment, this project is testing its application to
the geosciences in both recruiting and retaining geoscience
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is testing the hypothesis that
earlier exposure to careers in the geoscience will increase the number of
students recruited into the field, and that the students will be more diverse
than current geoscience undergraduate demographics. Students are being given a
three-part opportunity to transition towards a college degree and a career in
the geosciences. All students in the STEAM Academy are participating in
geoscience-focused problem-based learning units (Exposures) designed and taught
in collaboration by faculty members of both EES and STEAM. These units are
teaching geoscience content through building scientific thinking skills, while
exposing students to potential jobs in the geosciences. Students who become
interested in the geosciences then have an opportunity to participate in a
semester-long Internship in EES laboratories during their sophomore year,
followed by a transition into a "Geoscience Career Pathway" through coursework
in EES on the UK campus during their junior and senior years, all while
continuing a discipline-specific customized curriculum at the STEAM Academy.
Using mixed-methods (pre- and post-testing and surveys using the Geoscience
Concept Inventory), changes are being tracked in students' awareness of and
attitudes towards careers in the geosciences, as well as changes in the
students' understanding of basic geologic concepts as they progress through the
three levels of the program. The project seeks to identify and address any
obstacles that the students may be encountering. The project also is assessing
the educational effectiveness of the Exposures units within the framework of the
Next Generation Science Standards and modifying them as necessary, with an end
goal of disseminating the material nationally. Longitudinal data to assess the
effectiveness of the partnership is also being collected.