* 1600448
* EAGER: A Biocultural Study of the Functional Genomics of Intensive Internet Use
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2017
* Jeffrey Snodgrass, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 12/31/2017
* USD 39,522.00

This project, directed by Dr. Jeffrey Snodgrass of Colorado State University and
Dr. Henri Dengah of Utah State University, will investigate effects of intensive
internet activity on mental and physical health. People around the globe spend
increasing amounts of time online, sometimes in alternative "virtual worlds"
where they learn a common culture and come to share beliefs and practices.
Online communities may become so important to participants that they eclipse
offline social commitments. The researchers wish to investigate the possibility
that such "internet addiction," characterized by excessive or poorly controlled
behaviors, preoccupations, and urges regarding computer use and internet access,
leads to psychological distress or impairment and that this is discernible not
only in behavior but also in the genome. Previous scientific research on
internet addiction has focused on human neurobiology, giving little attention to
sociocultural and environmental factors. In contrast, the present research will
combine cross-cultural anthropological methods with methods from functional
genomics to examine whether cultural learning and social involvement (in virtual
worlds or elsewhere) can reach deep down to shape fundamental health processes.
Findings from this research will complement neurobiological approaches and
contribute critical information to public debates about addictive behaviors, a
pressing public health and social problem.

The researchers will combine cultural consonance, social network, and functional
genomic analyses to examine how online environments become embodied in the minds
and bodies of internet users. They will focus on young adults (18-32 years of
age), a group known to be active virtual world participants and susceptible to
addictive behaviors. In the first phase of the study, researchers will collect
dried blood spot data to assess whether intensive internet use, as measured by
responses to an earlier online survey, is associated with altered functional
genomes, and if their gene expression profiles mirror profiles of other psycho-
socially distressed populations. The blood spots will be analyzed via
microarrays of RNA up/down transcription regulation in leukocytes. This will
provide insight into the biological reality of internet-related stress and
addiction processes previously documented culturally and psychologically via
ethnographic methods and informant self-reports. In the second phase, the
researchers will expand the context of this investigation to Brazil and India to
explore whether culture-specific offline norms and practices might shape problem
internet use patterns in ways that impact individual users' mental and physical
health. Together, these two phases will combine to produce a radically
interdisciplinary, innovative, and potentially transformative approach to
understanding the appeal and effects of online virtual worlds, problematic
internet use, and health differences. The research will produce a deeper
understanding of how sociocultural and biological processes combine in these
technological contexts to shape human health and well-being. This exploratory
project will also set the stage for future collaborative research between social
scientists and molecular biologists to answer basic questions about how
culturally mediated worlds become literally embodied.