* 1600754
* Collaborative Project: Addressing the Need for Innovative Education of Audio Visual Specialists
* EHR,DUE
* 01/15/2017,06/30/2020
* William Gillett, Howard Community College
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 06/30/2020
* USD 215,158.00

This is a collaborative project involving Carroll Community College (Award
DUE-1600748) and Howard Community College (Award DUE-1600754) in Maryland, and
it builds on a previous Advanced Technological Education (ATE) project (Award
DUE-0802311) at Lone Star College-Montgomery in Texas. Audio Visual Systems
(AVS) specialists are needed to support the specialized communication and
presentation needs of businesses and other organizations. AVS specialists are
employed in universities, K-12 schools, scientific research centers, conference
centers, hotels, theaters, and other venues that have integrated, high-tech
communication systems. These technicians require advanced training in industry-
specific technologies that support a multitude of presentation venues, which in
turn support educational, conference, corporate, entertainment, and other
events. The two collaborating colleges will jointly create an innovative AVS
program to prepare students for this growing, interdisciplinary field, in which
the technology continues to advance and to require deeper knowledge of concepts
in science, mathematics, and engineering. The new program will provide a pathway
for students, offering certificates, an associate degree, and the option of
transferring to a four-year program.

The AAS degree program in Audio Visual Technology Systems (AVTS) will partner
with local businesses and other organizations to offer on-the-job training, as
well as potential post-graduation employment. Students will receive hands-on
instruction in the application of electrical, lighting, and acoustical theories
and designs. The program will be led by faculty who have substantial industry
experience. Specific objectives of the project are to develop courses and
curricula; recruit students into certificate and degree programs; develop and
strengthen industry relationships; ensure smooth transitions for students from
high schools to the two-year program, and from the two-year program to four-year
programs; and disseminate the curriculum and other resources to other community
colleges.