* 1600327
* Local Inverse Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2016,09/30/2019
* Plamen Stefanov, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 09/30/2019
* USD 375,000.00

The principal investigator will study inverse problems arising in seismic
imaging, cosmology, and medical imaging. The first of these is the mathematical
problem of recovering the structure of the Earth from seismic measurements. The
project takes into account that the Earth is best modeled as an elastic medium;
that it consist of several cores, and that it is anisotropic (i.e., that the
speed of seismic signals can depend on the direction). A second problem is
motivated by applications to cosmology: to determine the stage of the early
Universe, to the extent possible, from the cosmic microwave background radiation
measurements. Finally, the principal investigator will study the mathematics of
new medical imaging methods that use two different waves to form an image: one
wave (electromagnetic, for example) is sent to the human body to excite the
cells, which creates another type of wave (acoustic, for example) that one
measures away from the body. In all the aforementioned examples, one is
especially interested in solving local problems using local information: when
measurements are done locally (say, on some part of the boundary of the relevant
domain), one's desire is to recover the object locally, as well. Indeed, in many
practical applications such measurements can only be done locally, and very
often one is interested in the object under scrutiny only in a region near the
point where the measurement is taken. The goal is to understand how much
information is included in the measured data, to determine how sensitive such
information is to noise and measurement errors, and to devise a means of using
this data to reconstruct the object.

More specifically, the project will pursue the following avenues of research:
(1) recovery of a Riemannian metric, up to isometry, on a compact manifold with
boundary near a strictly convex boundary point from localized lens/distance
boundary data; (2) recovery of a Lorentzian metric up to a gauge transformation
from boundary measurements; (3) recovery of both types of metrics from wave
equation data on the boundary; (4) solving the inverse problem for the elastic
geophysics model with piecewise smooth Lame parameters; (5) inversion of the
geodesic and the light ray transforms; and (6) solving inverse source problems
that arise in medical imaging. Theses include both linear and nonlinear
problems, from well-posed to mildly ill-posed to ill-posed. The aim is to
recover the leading term in the underlying hyperbolic equation, which determines
the geometry. Unlike much previous work in the area, this project allows for the
existence of conjugate points, albeit modulo some additional geometric
assumptions. The problem of local recovery a Riemannian metric in boundary/lens
rigidity, up to isometry, is very challenging because simple linearization does
not work, and there is inherent nonuniqueness. The principal investigator
expects to combine ideas from tensor tomography, Melrose's scattering calculus,
and other new ideas to deal with the nonlinearity. His methods would prove
global uniqueness and stability as well, under the condition that the manifold
admits a strictly convex foliation. Existence of conjugate points is not
excluded. The inverse problems in time-space, including the integral geometry
ones, lack ellipticity because only space-like singularities are recoverable.
This makes the problem ill-posed. The light ray transform is a restricted ray
transform, requiring specialized microlocal tools, not even fully developed yet
for nonflat metrics. Those problems are of interest in geometry (where they are
called rigidity problems), in the part of the theory of partial differential
equations known as inverse kinematic and inverse boundary-value problems, and in
applications like geophysics.