* 1600808
* Conference on Statistical Properties of Nonequilibrium Dynamical Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2017
* Hong-Kun Zhang, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Edward Taylor
* 12/31/2017
* USD 45,000.00

The Conference on Statistical Properties of Nonequilibrium Dynamical Systems
will be held from August 1 through August 5, 2016, at the Academy of Mathematics
and Systems Science (AMSS) of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, in Beijing China.
The conference will be an integrated, collaborative research program aimed to
significantly increase our understanding of the statistical properties of
dynamical systems of physical origin. The conference topics are central to
equilibrium and non-equilibrium physical systems, with applications to the
theory of gases, mixing of fluids, diffusion and transport phenomena. They
involve novel classes of systems and methods of analysis which have the
potential to produce significant progress in our understanding of certain
general types of stochastic and deterministic dynamical systems.

The goal of the conference is to bring together an excellent group of
researchers from around the world to discuss new research results, explore new
ideas and powerful new mathematical tools to deepen our theoretical
understanding of the dynamical underpinnings of non-equilibrium systems and
classical statistical physics. Progress in this area would significantly improve
both our conceptual understanding of physical systems and our ability to predict
their behavior. While successful collaborations have taken place among subsets
of the participants, the conference will provide a valuable opportunity for
these international researchers to gather and have face to face discussions. The
organizers will take the opportunity to encourage more young researchers and
junior faculties to work on dynamical systems and related research topics. The
conference webpage is: http://people.math.umass.edu/~hongkun/conference2016.html