* 1600415
* GP-EXTRA:Pathways to atmospheric science through immersion in geoscience research
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2016,01/31/2021
* Solomon Bililign, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 01/31/2021
* USD 546,722.00

As the U.S. becomes increasingly a nation of ethnic minorities along with
increasing numbers of women in the workforce, the Science, Technology,
Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) workforce is not as diverse and does not
reflect the change in demographics. The low numbers of African-American,
Hispanic, and Native-American students graduating with either undergraduate or
graduate degrees in the geosciences is the lowest within all of the STEM fields.
In general, the rate at which geoscientists are trained in this country will not
be enough to fill the large number of vacant STEM positions to be created in the
near future. Despite continued efforts, the geosciences community still has
difficulty recruiting and retaining students and faculty from underrepresented
groups, and there are very few geosciences programs at minority serving
institutions like Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs). Training
of geoscientists is critical for the nation since informed decisions on
important global issues related to energy, water management, climate change, and
air quality require training in the geosciences. For example, because severe
weather events have impacted the most vulnerable (low income and minority)
communities, it is imperative that students from these communities be trained in
the geosciences to help create a pool of qualified professionals who can then
address the issues of severe weather impacts in disadvantaged communities and
provide climate and severe weather literacy.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this proposal is to develop a
sustainable pipeline to undergraduate and/or graduate programs in atmospheric
sciences at NCAT through a new program design. The program design has four
components: 1) Recruitment of qualified students through competitive selection
criteria and financial support, 2) Cohort building activities based on reported
best practices, 3) Undergraduate year round research opportunity at NCAT
complemented with field trips to atmospheric sciences and meteorology facilities
in the region and the state, and 4) Short but intensive research trip to
Colorado State University and the National Center for Atmospheric Research
(NCAR).&lt;br/&gt;The proposed program will provide carefully designed problem-
based academic-year geosciences (atmospheric sciences) research experience for
cohorts of eight undergraduate students competitively selected annually (24 over
the life of the grant). The cohort will be recruited from a pool of undeclared
majors (sophomores and juniors) at NCAT, pre-service teachers and seniors from
the Early STEM College high school on the campus of NCAT. The research
experience will include topics that are socially relevant in atmospheric
chemistry and weather and climate modeling. The key mechanisms for creating an
environment of innovation will be exposure to the cutting-edge research in major
university and national research laboratories during internships. The research
experience is enhanced and enriched through short visits to Colorado State
University and NCAR and daylong field trips to local National Weather Service
facilities, NOAA, facilities, university facilities and private weather and
climate related facilities.