* 1600578
* OP: Monge-Ampere type equations and geometric optics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2021
* Cristian Gutierrez, Temple University
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2021
* USD 240,000.00

Optical devices play very important roles in multiple practical applications,
and many of these devices are built with lenses and mirrors. Traditionally, most
optical designs have been rotationally symmetric because of manufacturing
limitations and production costs. With the development of computer-controlled
precision machines, optical devices that are not necessarily symmetric, called
free-form or aspherical, can be manufactured. In particular, with the recent
advances in additive or three-dimensional manufacturing, free-form lenses can
also be made. The design of lenses and mirrors is currently made computationally
with ray tracing (i.e., by software calculating the trajectory of the light
rays), in which choices are based upon educated guesses. This project is
concerned with the development of mathematical methods for the design of lenses,
mirrors, and antennas. It provides a better understanding than past approaches
of the design problems and enables one to adapt the solutions to the needs
required for any specific application. It develops models that are physically
more accurate than earlier ones and takes into account, for example, internal
reflection. The project addresses theoretical aspects of nonlinear partial
differential equations with concrete problems in optics and photonics. In
addition, the principal investigator is concerned with the mathematical
descriptions of the loss of energy due to bending in waveguides, chromatic
aberration for lenses, and variations of refractive indices in materials, in
particular, negative refraction. A part of the research concerns the development
of an algorithm for the numerical calculation of lenses.

The problems are described by partial differential equations involving the
output and input intensities and other parameters depending on the models. The
goals are concerned with existence, uniqueness, and regularity properties of the
solutions. The methods used derive from the mathematical fields of optimal mass
transportation, optimization, and nonlinear partial differential equations of a
specific type, called Monge-Ampere-type equations. The techniques include lower
and upper estimates of various gradient maps and strict convexity analysis.
Partial differential equations appear naturally because the interface surface
one looks for has the property that the ratio between the energy sent and
received over a small area can be expressed in terms of the input and output
energy densities. This yields an equation involving second derivatives of the
unknown surface. The development of an algorithm for the numerical calculation
of lenses requires establishing Lipschitz estimates for the associated
functionals. Furthermore, as waveguides of size comparable to the wavelength of
radiation are electromagnetic in nature, the proposal blends with the study of
Maxwell's equations in discontinuous and anisotropic media.