* 1600390
* Collaborative Research:  Flag Algebra and Its Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Bernard Lidicky, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 08/31/2019
* USD 83,000.00

Extremal graph theory studies properties of very large networks. Especially with
the advent of interest in big data, such networks appear in a host of very
important applications. In this project, the researchers focus on the density of
small substructures appearing in large networks. The goal is to further develop
a powerful method based on semidefinite programming, allowing its application to
more complicated structures and longstanding problems in the field. The project
involves undergraduate and graduate students. Open-source software under
development in the project will be made readily available to other researchers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project aims to extend and develop the flag
algebra method to new models in order to solve longstanding open problems,
principally in extremal combinatorics. In prior work, the investigators and
collaborators created a stability method and a blow-up technique using flag
algebras. The stability method can be applied to solve problems, previously
impervious to attack, where the extremal construction has an iterative
structure. The blow-up technique translates questions on small graphs into the
language of graph limits accessible to flag algebras, building bridges from one
area of graph theory to another. This project will develop these techniques
further for application to a number of important topics, including crossing
numbers and small Ramsey numbers. It is expected that the work will draw on
tools from linear and nonlinear programming to obtain exact results. The
investigators will involve graduate students at their schools in the project and
will work with graduate students from other schools during annual workshops.