* 1600609
* RUI:   Algebraic and Geometric Aspects of Matroids, Polytopes, and Arrangements
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Federico Ardila, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2019
* USD 269,948.00

This research project is driven by the philosophy that many objects and
relationships in mathematics are best understood by studying the rich discrete
structures underlying them. In the last few decades, combinatorics has grown and
matured immensely as a field, in response to the mathematical needs of modern
computing and the computational needs of all fields of mathematics. This project
studies central questions in algebra and geometry where the combinatorial
structure of high-dimensional geometric objects plays a crucial role, and offers
unexpected, innovative approaches to long-standing problems. This research
program constitutes the academic backbone of the San Francisco State University-
Colombia Combinatorics Initiative, a vibrant research and training collaboration
among primarily undergraduate institutions in the U.S. and Colombia. Through
research-based courses, vertically and geographically integrated research
projects, and the biannual Encuentro Colombiano de Combinatoria, students
participate in a truly international cooperation while making substantial
scientific contributions to combinatorics. Since 2007 the initiative has trained
more than 200 pre-Ph.D. students, more than half of whom are members of
underrepresented groups in mathematics, and more than 50 of whom have gone onto
Ph.D. programs. The initiative also helps train mathematicians worldwide through
the distribution of course videos, lecture notes, and research projects.

This project studies important questions in various fields of mathematics, such
as representation theory (Kostant partition functions), enumerative geometry
(moduli spaces of curves), polyhedral number theory (Ehrhart polynomials),
Brunn-Minkowski theory (valuations of polytopes), Hopf-Lie theory (algebraic
structures on polytopes), tropical geometry (tropical linear spaces, moduli
spaces, and Hodge theory), total positivity (positroids and their algebraic
structure), and combinatorial commutative algebra (Fr√∂berg's conjecture). These
subjects are related in surprising ways, and the techniques from one field
become powerful tools in the others. At the heart of many of these questions
lies a configuration of vectors -- often a root system -- that plays an
essential role. The combinatorial theories of polytopes, (Coxeter) matroids, and
hyperplane arrangements are designed to study these configurations, and the
powerful toolkit that they offer is the unifying thread of this project.
Solutions to the problems under study will have a strong impact in combinatorics
and discrete geometry, and will further our understanding of central questions
in algebra and geometry.