* 1600897
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The relative roles of selection and constraint in convergent ear loss across the true toads (Bufonidae)
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2017
* Kim Hoke, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 05/31/2017
* USD 19,630.00

Middle and outer ear structures are used for hearing sound and are shared by
most land animals. Although frogs and toads use hearing to find a mate, many
frogs and toads have lost their middle and outer ear structures. This project
aims to discover the genetic changes that have resulted in the evolution of ear
loss in toads. Since the middle and outer ears of other land animals (including
humans) use similar developmental pathways, understanding the genetic changes
that result in ear loss in toads will illuminate potential causes of middle and
outer ear loss and malformation in other animals. The genetic data produced by
this study will help us better understand the relationships between toad species
and provide novel genetic data for future research. In addition to graduate
training, interactive museum displays will be created from the specimens and
data generated from the project, and a series of K-12 classroom exercises will
be developed to explain the ear structure evolution in
toads.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates the selection pressures
and genetic constraints that generate convergent loss and potential regain of
middle and outer ear structures across the family of true toads (Bufonidae).
Sequence data for 60 bufonid species (16 earless, 44 eared) spanning seven ear
loss events will be analyzed to identify signatures of selection and parallel
genetic changes across 50 genes involved in middle and outer ear development.
The dataset will assess the effects of various selection pressures and look for
evidence of constraint at the genetic level, complementing the large amount of
evidence for selection and constraint at the phenotypic level that has
previously been collected by the research team. Results of this project will
delineate the roles of selection and constraint in driving ear loss across
Bufonidae, and elucidate common genetic pathways by which selection can act in a
constrained, potentially costly, trait loss.