* 1600060
* IUSE: Collaborative Project: Engaged Student Learning: Design and Development, Level I: Broadening the Path to the STEM Profession through Cybersecurity Learning
* EDU,DUE
* 10/15/2015,12/31/2016
* Xenia Mountrouidou, Wofford College
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie August
* 12/31/2016
* USD 295,998.00

The significance and importance of this project resides in the diversification
and broadening of the STEM talent pipeline in cybersecurity in predominantly
undergraduate and liberal arts schools (small institutions). This is achieved by
the creation of a curriculum that accommodates students of different levels of
computer literacy, that focuses on experiential learning, and that utilizes
institutional collaboration via cloud computing. This project will mitigate the
challenges small institutions currently face in the cybersecurity area, for
example, a tight computer science curriculum and the inability to support the
expensive infrastructure required for cybersecurity education. Integrated into
this project is research as to whether using this new curriculum and the related
online projects, students will attain the same, or an increase, level of
cybersecurity learning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will address the
above challenges by creating a range of cybersecurity learning opportunities
that emphasize hands-on and realistic experimentation for students in small
institutions. First, this project will attract a diverse population of students
by introducing cybersecurity topics through multiple paths of study and
engagement. Students will be introduced to cybersecurity concepts through
manageable, stand alone course modules and laboratory exercises. Interested
students can study further by taking two cybersecurity focused courses and
cybersecurity capstone projects created by this project. Using all these
materials students can create a cybersecurity concentration. Second, the project
will use the Global Environment for Network Innovation (GENI) infrastructure in
the development of empirical labs and the capstone project assignments. GENI
offers an affordable cloud solution to small institutions that lack the
infrastructure to support sophisticated computer labs. The learning impact of
the new curriculum will be evaluated by quantitative competency assessments that
are administered yearly. Student cybersecurity persistence will be assessed by a
longitudinal study of the number of cybersecurity courses taken during a
student's course of study. Qualitative assessment of the curriculum will take
the form of student interviews and focus groups to gauge attitude towards course
modules, perception of learning gains and comfort level with the pedagogies
employed. In addition to the collaboration of three college level institutions,
this project will leverage relationships with local community colleges to
further develop a cybersecurity workforce. This partnership provides a diverse
set of students that will support the evidence-based evaluation of student
cybersecurity learning via this approach.