* 1600392
* 2016 Gordon Research Conference on Flow &amp; Transport in Permeable Media:Bridging the Gap Between Scales and Processes for Strongly Coupled Systems; Girona, Spain; July 30-31, 20
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2016
* Kathleen Smits, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 12/31/2016
* USD 30,050.00

This project will support travel and meeting registration for a group of
exceptional early career scientists to attend and network the combined Gordon
Conference/Graduate Research Seminar (GRC/GRS) on ?Flow and Transport in
Permeable media: Bridging the gap between scales and processes for strongly
coupled systems? to be held in Girona Spain July/August 2016. The Graduate
Research Seminar will proceed the GRC and will focus on understanding and
controlling material and process interfaces including flow and reactive
transport in porous media with well-known senior mentors. The GRC will cover a
diversity of common issues in porous media systems and will have broad
international attendance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Gordon Research Conference is an
intensive, dedicated meeting that will critically define not only challenges in
the subsurface flow and transport but also approaches that have the potential to
provide significant progress. The GRC will focus on nine research themes with
invited speakers for each theme will come from different disciplines, but will
address the questions so as to cut across the various disciplines. These
research themes will cover a diversity of common issues in porous media systems,
including scaling from pore to field systems, different flow regimes, new
thoughts and ideas on relative permeability in multiphase modeling, process
identification in diverse porous-media systems, coupling of porous media to free
fluid flow systems, characterization of reactive and biological systems, storage
of mass and energy in the subsurface, bio-fluid mechanics and life in bio-porous
media. This GRS will focus on understanding and controlling material and process
interfaces including flow and reactive transport in porous media. Topics of the
GRS will therefore cover the influence of interfaces between rocks and fluids,
pairs of immiscible fluids, high- and low-conductive zones, and between porous
media and the atmosphere or sea, on length scales ranging from micrometers to
kilometers.