* 1600517
* GP-IMPACT: Pathways TO RENEW: Tropical Oceanography Research Experiences for the NExt-Generation Workforce
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Maria Barberena-Arias, University of Maryland Center for Environmental Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 08/31/2021
* USD 481,509.00

I Non-Technical&lt;br/&gt;Research opportunities and professional development
are effective ways to engage undergraduate students in science and increase the
likelihood that they will stay in college and graduate in four years. While
research universities are likely to offer such opportunities to undergraduate
students, non-research colleges and universities usually have limited ability to
provide science projects for their students. To address this need, we propose to
develop an educational center that will serve students at two non-research
institutions in Puerto Rico. Through the center we will link students with
researchers who will guide them in conducting research in Puerto Rico?s coastal
lagoons. Hispanic students will be involved in a variety of activities during
the summer and academic year focusing on experiential learning in the
geosciences. Students will gain research experience and exposure to marine
science professionals through networking, internships, and travel to national
meetings. The students will also participate in geosciences professional
development activities (e.g. personal statement writing, science communication,
oral presentations, etc.). The center will foster partnerships among research
and non-research institutions and government and non-profit institutions
interested in building a sustainable and effective education center focused on
Puerto Rico?s coastal lagoons. The project includes a diverse interdisciplinary
team of scientists and educators from both the mainland United States and Puerto
Rico. The team and center are committed to increasing marine science learning
opportunities for underrepresented and underserved students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;II Technical&lt;br/&gt;In an effort to close the
opportunity gap and enhance STEM retention for underrepresented groups at
primarily non-research colleges and universities, we will establish the Tropical
Oceanography Research Training for Undergraduate Academics (TORTUGA) Center to
introduce early- through advanced-stage undergraduate students from Puerto Rico
to geoscience education and research. This center will link research and non-
research institutions to strengthen research capacity and establish educational
programs to teach research skills to undergraduates in STEM fields. Specific
goals of the TORTUGA Center are to: 1) build sustainable multidisciplinary
education and experiential learning programs focused on coastal science problems
and solutions; 2) increase access for underrepresented students to watershed,
coastal, and marine science education; 3) develop institutional structures to
assist students at critical educational junctures, increase student retention in
STEM fields, and encourage pursuit of geoscience careers; and 4) adapt this
model and strengthen its long-term sustainability. To do this we will: 1)
strengthen and expand existing cross-institutional partnerships and team science
research programs we have developed over the past five years through a series of
pilot projects; 2) provide research opportunities at minority-serving
institutions in Puerto Rico for coastal and watershed geoscience research; and
3) evaluate and assess our educational practice model in light of our program
goals and current educational pedagogy research. An anticipated outcome of this
project is a set of best practices for increasing STEM retention in primarily
non-research institutions serving underrepresented groups, focused largely on
Puerto Rican and Hispanic populations but applicable to a broad spectrum of
undergraduate experiences.