* 1600087
* Southern California Earthquake Center: Research Program in Earthquake System Science, 2017-2022
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2017,11/30/2023
* John Vidale, University of Southern California
* Cooperative Agreement
* Luciana Astiz
* 11/30/2023
* USD 16,981,680.00

This cooperative agreement funds the Southern California Earthquake Center
(SCEC) for the 5-year period from 1 Feb 2017 to 31 Jan 2022 (SCEC5). The Center
is a large consortium of institutions with a national, and increasingly
worldwide, distribution. Currently, over 1000 earthquake professionals are
participating in SCEC projects. This research program is investigator-driven and
supports core research and education in seismology, tectonic geodesy, earthquake
geology, and computational science. The SCEC community advances earthquake
system science by gathering information from seismic and geodetic sensors,
geologic field observations, and laboratory experiments; synthesizing knowledge
of earthquake phenomena through system-level, physics-based modeling; and
communicating understanding of seismic hazards to reduce earthquake risk and
promote community resilience. Southern California is data-rich and, with an
urbanized population exceeding 20 million, comprises the lion's share of
national earthquake risk. Recent research has posed crucial questions about the
current earthquake hazard of the San Andre-as fault system. &lt;br/&gt; The
strategic framework for the SCEC5 Science Plan has been cast in the form of five
basic questions of earthquake science: (1) How are faults loaded on different
temporal and spatial scales? (2) What is the role of off-fault inelastic
deformation on strain accumulation, dynamic rupture, and radiated seismic
energy? (3) How do the evolving structure, composition and physical properties
of fault zones and surrounding rock affect shear resistance to seismic and
aseismic slip? (4) How do strong ground motions depend on the complexities and
nonlinearities of dynamic earthquake systems? (5) In what ways can system-
specific studies enhance the general understanding of earthquake predictability?
These questions cover the key issues driving earthquake research in California,
and they provide a basis for gauging the intellectual merit of proposed SCEC5
research activities.&lt;br/&gt; SCEC's long-range science vision is to develop
dynamical models of earthquake processes that are comprehensive, integrative,
verified, predictive, and validated against observations. The science goal of
the SCEC5 core program is to provide new concepts that can improve the
predictability of the earth-quake system models, new data for testing the
models, and a better understanding of model uncertain-ties. SCEC validation
efforts tightly couple basic earthquake research to the practical needs of
probabilistic seismic hazard analysis, operational earthquake forecasting,
earthquake early warning, and rapid earthquake response. Moreover, the risk-
reduction problem?which requires actions motivated by useful
information?strongly couples SCEC science to earthquake engineering. SCEC
collaborations with engineering organizations are directed towards end-to-end,
physics-based modeling capabilities that span system processes from ?ruptures-
to-rafters.? SCEC connects to the social sciences through its mission to convey
authoritative information to stakeholders in ways that result in lowered risk
and enhanced resilience. SCEC's vision is to engage end-users and the public at
large in on-going, community-centric conversations about how to manage
particular risks by taking specific actions. The SCEC Communication, Education,
and Outreach (CEO) program will promote this dialog on many levels and continue
to build networks of organizational partners that can act in concert to prepare
millions of people of all ages and socioeconomic levels for inevitable
earthquake disasters.