* 1600818
* Research Initiation Award: Uncertainty Quantification of Multi-Phase Porous Media Flows on GPUs
* EDU,EES
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2021
* Arunasalam Rahunanthan, Central State University
* Standard Grant
* Emanuel WAddell
* 05/31/2021
* USD 299,208.00

Research Initiation Awards provide support for junior and mid-career faculty at
Historically Black Colleges and Universities who are building new research
programs or redirecting and rebuilding existing research programs. It is
expected that the award helps to further the faculty member's research
capability and effectiveness, improves research and teaching at his home
institution, and involves undergraduate students in research experiences. The
award to Central State University has potential broader impact in a number of
areas. The project seeks to employ a Bayesian framework on Graphics Processing
Units (GPUs) for forecasting flows of the spatial distribution of subsurface
properties, such as permeability and porosity. Undergraduate students will be
involved in the project and a new course in high performance computing will be
developed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In oil recovery, carbon dioxide sequestration,
or monitoring and remediation of aquifer contamination, it is often required to
forecast quantities such as the fraction of oil in the produced fluid, carbon
dioxide concentration, or concentration of contaminants, using subsurface fluid
flow models with limited data. In this work, a Bayesian framework on Graphics
Processing Units for forecasting flows will be employed. The main objectives of
the project are to: expand the subsurface characterization in an existing
Bayesian framework that employs a flow simulator on GPUs; improve experimental
data fitting using the Bayesian statistical framework; and extend the improved
framework to include a three-dimensional flow simulator on GPUs. To improve the
characterization, a huff-puff technique will be employed, which consists of
injecting a tracer for a short period of time into the subsurface during the
huff phase, and monitoring the tracer during the puff phase. Additionally, an
ensemble Kalman filter for integrating permeability and porosity data at
different spatial scales for reconstructing fine-scale spatial distributions of
permeability and porosity will be used. Through collaboration with industry, the
proposed Bayesian framework can be used to detect contaminants in water aquifers
equipped with sensors.