* 1600059
* Studies Involving Atoms in High Rydberg States
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2020
* F. Barry Dunning, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2020
* USD 560,993.00

The ability to manipulate the internal states of atoms and to control the
interactions between neighboring atoms is central to many recent discoveries in
science. Advances in this area have resulted in a better understanding of
quantum mechanics, the theory that describes the behavior of matter at the
microscopic level, and have enabled the new field of quantum information in
which quantum mechanics is used as the basis of new technologies related to
encryption, information processing, and computing. Manipulating the internal
states of atoms involved in chemical reactions makes it possible to produce
specific targeted reaction products. Atomic interactions also give rise to
collective atomic behavior that result, for example, in magnetism or
superconductivity. Tuning such interactions therefore provides insights into
such phenomena which, in turn, can enable the design of improved magnetic
materials for computer hard drives or improved superconductors for power
transmission. This project aims to improve our ability to control and manipulate
atomic states and to develop a better understanding of atomic interactions. In
specific, this project will heat strontium atoms in a special oven until they
boil out of a small hole, forming collimated beam to atoms and then lasers will
be used to pump energy into the atoms. After this, electric fields will be
applied to the atoms to distort them, they will be allowed to interact, and then
other lasers, electric fields, and cameras will be used to determine the
results. Similar studies will be done that are complementary to these, using a
laser to cool the atoms rather than heating them in an oven.

As a starting point, strontium atoms in well-defined initial Rydberg states
will be prepared by use of laser light. Techniques developed to manipulate the
wave functions of such atoms using a carefully-tailored series of electric field
pulses will be exploited to create strongly-interacting Rydberg systems.
Initially, a dipole blockade will be employed to create pairs of (weakly-
interacting) Rydberg atoms with well-defined separations. Their mutual
interactions will then be increased by simultaneously exciting both to some
selected higher state, the degree of interaction being tuned by choice of target
state (and atom separation). The time evolution of the product two-electron wave
packet will be examined to explore energy interchange and search for long-lived
configurations where, due to their correlated motions, the electrons remain far
apart. Measurements will be extended to include three, or more, strongly
interacting Rydberg atoms and explore the onset of many-body effects. Attempts
will also be made to create, within a single atom, long-lived two-electron-
excited states, i.e., so-called planetary atoms. In addition, control of the
interactions between ground state atoms through optical dressing with radiation
tuned near resonance with a Rydberg state will be explored. Preliminary
measurements have revealed unexpectedly large ground state atom loss rates and
the processes responsible will be identified and means to mitigate them sought.