* 1600521
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH : Species pool influences on the structure and function of fungal symbiont communities
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2018
* Tadashi Fukami, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 05/31/2018
* USD 16,900.00

In order to explain the diversity and species composition of local ecosystems it
is necessary to account for species distributions across larger areas. Processes
occurring over broad spatial and temporal scales, such as geographic isolation
and species evolution, drive these regional patterns and determine the regional
species pool, or group of species that could potentially occupy a location. This
project will use experiments to determine whether local communities or species
from large regional areas explain the number and kinds of fungi associated with
plants and their roots. Because these fungi are ubiquitous, they are globally
important drivers of nutrient cycling and ecosystem productivity. The scientific
workforce will be strengthened through support for the education and training of
a doctoral student and participation of undergraduates from underrepresented
groups. The project will contribute to improved horticulture and
conservation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The regional species pool will affect local
community assembly in multiple ways. This problem will be addressed for fungal
symbionts associated with the roots of an endemic Hawaiian plant, Vaccinium
calycinum. Using plant-fungal microcosms, experimental symbiont species pools
will be introduced to sterile seedlings, varying the number of fungal species
along with the mean age and environmental heterogeneity of the sites from which
the symbionts were initially isolated. High-throughput molecular methods will be
used in combination with physical measurements and analytical chemistry to
assess the realized local symbiont community composition within roots. Three
hypotheses will be tested: (1) older or more environmentally heterogeneous
regions will result in greater functional diversity in the regional species
pool; (2) species pools from older or more environmentally heterogeneous regions
will result in greater realized local diversity relative to the size of the
regional species pool; (3) the richness and functional diversity of the regional
species pool will be the primary driver of symbiotic function, measured as the
host plant's biomass and nutrient accumulation. The geologic age and
environmental heterogeneity of a region will be linked to local community
assembly and function via the composition of the regional species pool.