* 1600283
* Coastal SEES Collaborative Research: Climate change impacts on the sustainability of key fisheries of the California Current System
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2021
* Arthur Miller, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 09/30/2021
* USD 618,774.00

The area off the California coast supports productive commercial and
recreational fisheries such as squid, sardine, and lobster that are important to
human cultures, economies, and livelihoods. Climate change is expected to alter
the oceanic system and contribute to changes in fish populations that will
directly affect fishers' profits and behavior, as well as managers' actions in
setting limits on harvest. This collaborative Coastal SEES study brings together
oceanographers, fisheries scientists, economists, and social scientists to
develop a better understanding of interactions among the climate and coastal
ocean system, fish populations, fishers and fishing communities, and resource
management. The research team includes state and federal scientists, and results
will be shared with the resource management community. The project will support
interdisciplinary training for undergraduates, graduate students, and
postdoctoral scientists, and the investigators will participate in a number of
public outreach activities.

This Coastal SEES project assembles a diverse team of oceanographers, fisheries
scientists, economists, and social scientists to develop new, integrated
understanding of climate effects on coastal fisheries. The investigators will
examine how fishing behavior, income, jobs distribution, and livelihood
viability will be altered by climate change. The focus is on three key
commercially harvested species that are known to respond to environmental
change: Pacific sardine, California market squid, and California spiny lobster.
Each of these supports an economically important fishery and represents a
different type of organism in terms of marine habitat, latitudinal range, and
time scale of response. The approach will include global climate model
projections, regional ocean modeling, fisheries modeling, economics modeling,
plus studies of management scenarios and fisher behavior. The goal will be to
help develop sustainable management strategies under future climate scenarios
given predicted ecological, social, and economic outcomes for these three
fisheries.