* 1600140
* Student Travel Support for the 14th USENIX File and Storage Technologies conference (FAST 2016)
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2016,06/30/2016
* Donald Porter, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 06/30/2016
* USD 20,000.00

The 2016 USENIX Symposium on File and Storage Technology (FAST) will be held in
Santa Clara, CA. February 22-25. This is the leading conference in storage
systems and includes interested participants from across academia and industry.
This award is to support students to showcase and discuss their research.
Particular interest will be given to broadening participation and supporting
students who would otherwise be unable to attend the conference. Special
emphasis will be made to sponsor students having no other means of support from
their academic departments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to meeting leading
practitioners of storage systems, attending regular program sessions, this year
students will also students receiving assistance will be asked to participate in
various ways, including: serving as scribes for the conference sessions to write
summaries for a later issue of ;login: magazine. A special event is planned for
students to meet informally with senior members of the
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merits. This conference is the
premier forum for advanced professionals from academic and industrial
backgrounds to meet and discuss the latest research in systems software.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. Participation in USENIX 2016 provides
students with the opportunity to interact with senior researchers in the field,
exposes students to cutting edge advances, and is a valuable and important part
of the graduate school experience.