* 1600687
* Beyond Renormalization in Parabolic Dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Giovanni Forni, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2020
* USD 375,000.00

The theory of dynamical systems studies the long term behavior of deterministic
systems. A classical example is the motion of the planets. Dynamical systems
arise in all areas of sciences, for instance in physics, biology, and economics.
In addition, the methods of dynamical systems can be applied to study problems
in other fields of mathematics, including geometry and number theory. There is a
well-established theory of chaos that applies to dynamical systems whose nearby
trajectories diverge exponentially rapidly with time (the weather is perhaps the
most famous example). At the other end of the spectrum, there is regular motion,
characterized by slowly-evolving families of trajectories. This research project
aims to advance fundamental research on the intermediate case of weakly chaotic
systems, often called parabolic. Parabolic systems are characterized by the
property that nearby trajectories diverge at most polynomially rapidly with
time. Systems of this kind are especially important in geometry, number theory,
and mathematical models arising in several branches of physics, including solid-
state physics, celestial mechanics, and statistical mechanics. For instance, in
recent years, in number theory, and to a lesser extent, in geometry, many
questions have been reformulated (sometimes solved) as questions on the dynamics
of certain parabolic flows. In physics, the behavior of electrons at the Fermi
surface (solid-state physics), the motion of planets near a singularity
(celestial mechanics), and the motion of a confined atom (statistical mechanics)
are related to parabolic systems. This project aims to develop new approaches to
these important questions and will involve graduate students in the fundamental
mathematical research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dynamical systems can be roughly
distinguished according to the speed of divergence of nearby trajectories.
Systems with sub-exponential, polynomial divergence of nearby orbits are often
called parabolic. An extremely successful approach to some parabolic systems is
based on renormalization, which is an effective tool whenever the system reveals
itself to be at least approximately self-similar, meaning it is nearly the same
when viewed at smaller and smaller scales, possibly after changing of
coordinates. However, many fundamental parabolic systems, including most
homogeneous flows, do not seem to possess self-similarity properties, and no
renormalization method has been developed for such systems. As a consequence,
the dynamical properties of these systems are very poorly understood and are
rarely the subject of investigation. This project aims to build on recent
results by the principal investigator and collaborators to investigate non-
renormalizable systems. The guiding principle is to develop a scaling method to
generalize renormalization in the absence of self-similarity. Non-renormalizable
parabolic systems include higher-step nilflows and higher rank Abelian actions
on higher step nilmanifolds. This includes most unipotent Abelian actions on
quotients of semisimple Lie groups and billiards in non-rational polygons.