* 1600541
* Global and Local Noncommutative Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2021
* Henri Moscovici, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2021
* USD 331,691.00

A fundamental challenge of modern physics is to reconcile the treatment of
space-time as a continuum at the macroscopic level with the discrete, quantum
features observed at the subatomic scale. The search for a mathematical
apparatus capable of handling these dual aspects in a unified manner motivated
the foundation of noncommutative geometry. In this young field of mathematics,
the classical concept of a space formed of points labeled by numerical
coordinates is replaced by a qualitatively more general paradigm, in which the
algebra of coordinates consists of bounded operators (observables) that do not
necessarily commute under the natural multiplication. The geometry of a
noncommutative space is encoded in an unbounded operator, whose inverse plays
the role of the line element in classical geometry, which interacts with the
observables in a bounded fashion. With innate spatial intuition rendered
inoperative by the forfeit of commutativity, even the most basic geometric
notions, such as locality, symmetry, and curvature, have to undergo a drastic
conceptual metamorphosis. Helpful hints come from physics, where the first two
appear in quantum field theory as the high-energy limit and gauge symmetry,
respectively, while the last is the very manifestation of gravity in Einstein's
general relativity. This project aims to deepen the conceptual understanding of
the above triad of notions in the noncommutative framework, as well as to
develop effective mathematical tools for their quantitative measurement. Besides
relevance for physics, the envisaged developments hold a proven potential of
having applications in geometry and topology.

The first part of the project, building on recent work of the principal
investigator and collaborators, will apply the enhanced pseudodifferential
calculus for C*-dynamical systems to a host of problems involving curvature
calculations for concrete noncommutative spaces, such as the noncommutative tori
of arbitrary dimension. The second subproject will refine the higher index
pairing between elliptic operators and Alexander-Spanier cocycles on a closed
manifold and extend it to a pairing defined over the algebra of bounded pseudo-
differential operators. In particular, this will yield an upgraded version of
the Helton-Howe integral formula for the trace of the totally antisymmetric
commutator of an n-tuple of Toeplitz operators, promoting it to a full-fledged
index theorem. It will also extend Perrot's formula for the periodic cyclic
cohomology class of the Radul cocycle, as well as the vanishing of the periodic
cyclic cohomology class of the Wodzicki residue. The third project concerns a
new Hopf algebra K(n) that presents the advantage of acting directly on the
noncommutative space of leaves of any foliation rather than on its frame bundle.
Its Hopf cyclic cohomology captures all transverse Chern classes, but misses the
secondary classes. The goal is to construct an enhanced, topological version of
the Hopf algebra K(n), whose Hopf cyclic cohomology will serve as a universal
receptacle for all the geometric characteristic classes of foliations. In
addition, this part of the project seeks to express these classes in terms of
explicit Hopf cyclic cocycles and employ the concrete representations to derive
geometric and topological consequences.