* 1600783
* Collaborative Proposal: Designer Glass Ceramics
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2016,12/31/2020
* Jacqueline Johnson, University of Tennessee Space Institute
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 12/31/2020
* USD 319,842.00

Non-technical Description: This research creates special coatings for solar
cells that increase the amount of the sun's energy that the cells can use,
making them more efficient. The coatings also help reduce heating of the solar
cells, which wastes energy. These coatings can be used with currently-available
solar cell materials, enabling more attractive viability as a commercial
product. The coatings may also be applied to light emitting diodes, helping
control the color of light over a wide temperature range. Although not the focus
of this investigation, the coatings have additional applications in medical
X-ray imaging, non-destructive evaluation and homeland security. These research
efforts are integrated with educational activities exposing graduate students to
real world problems of energy saving as well as the full academic experience of
information dissemination in the form of writing papers and presenting research,
travel, grant writing and teaching. As part of the outreach activities, a summer
internship is available for high school and undergraduate students, which gives
a small number of students, each year, the opportunity to learn more about
scientific research, perform experiments, give presentations, and participate in
many other aspects of a scientific career. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description: The aim of this activity is to develop novel 'designer' glass
ceramics based on a modified fluorozirconate glass composition, and to explore
their luminescence behavior. The ultimate goal is to gain insights leading to
optimization of these designer nanocomposites for applications as wavelength
shifters pertaining to up- and down-converters in solar cells and light emitting
diodes. Pulsed laser deposition is used to synthesize layered nanocomposite
materials so that very fine control of the distribution of the optically-active
dopant and the nanocrystalline structure responsible for the optical behavior is
achieved, leading to the development of a glass ceramic with enhanced light
output. Systematic studies of optical behavior, as a function of parameters such
as the designed distribution of the optically-active component layers within the
glass matrix and the relative concentrations of optical dopants and
nanocrystals, enable an understanding of how energy transfer between the
luminescent dopant atoms and the nanocrystals (and thus the optical efficiency)
can be controlled. The combination of in situÂ¬ transmission electron microscopy,
ellipsometry and X-ray diffraction enables the structure-property relationships
to be visualized and linked together. For example, critical control over optimum
dopant position can be achieved by studying the diffusion paths of the dopants
during in situ heating.