* 1600233
* GP-IMPACT: Career paths for urban geoscientists: recruitment, retention, and apprenticeship
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Jonathan Nyquist, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 08/31/2020
* USD 358,773.00

The growing demand for geoscientists must be met by increasing recruitment and
retention. Given the steady U.S. population migration to urban centers, recruits
will increasingly need to come from students who were raised in cities. The
issues involved with recruiting urban geoscientists closely parallel those for
recruiting from underrepresented groups. Many students and their families are
unaware of the growing opportunities in the geosciences for careers that use
advanced technology to solve some of the most challenging problems facing
society. Urban geoscientists work on a wide range of local problems including
waste management, flood control, beach nourishment, transportation
infrastructure, land subsidence, and the environmental impact of "fracking." To
increase the size and diversity of the geoscience workforce and keep pace with
demand in the 21st century, this project is testing new strategies, assessing
what works, and sharing the model of an urban geoscience learning community with
other universities. New strategies include: developing materials highlighting
career opportunities in urban geoscience, peer coaching in mathematics to assist
students transitioning into science from other disciplines, and student
apprenticeships to boost employment opportunities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Career Paths for Urban Geoscientists initiative includes three main components.
First, student recruitment is focused on developing career information for
students and their parents to overcome misconceptions about opportunities. This
information is being provided to prospective students during visits to the
university, in general education and introductory-level courses in the
department, and to the Alliance for Minority Participation on campus. In
addition to career information, service learning modules are being included in
general education classes to inform students about applications for their new
geology skills. Second, the Urban Geoscientists initiative is focusing on
retention of new majors through a math-mentoring program. Math requirements are
often a serious obstacle for students switching from non-science majors, and a
reason many drop out of the science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM)
majors. The Math Partners program is pairing junior and senior geology and
environmental science majors who have completed at least one semester of
calculus as mentors for newly recruited majors. New students are benefiting from
one-on-one coaching by majors who have experienced their struggles and who can
help them grasp the increasingly important connections between quantitative
skills and careers in the geosciences. The mentors reinforce their own
understanding of mathematics through teaching. Working together also promotes
camaraderie within the major. The third component of the project is focused on
enhancing Career Paths for Urban Geoscientists through apprenticeship that
prepare them for the workforce. This includes a new certificate program that
teaches job skills, internship opportunities with local companies, and
undergraduate research experiences working with graduate students and faculty.
The creation of learning communities of urban geoscientists involving alumni,
faculty, undergraduate students, and graduate students in both science and
education strengthens the initiative and is an explicit goal of this project.
Assessment tools are being employed to determine the efficacy and timing of
intervention. Outcomes such as an increase in majors, fewer repeated math
courses, and retention in STEM are being assessed by demographic groupings.
Using Temple University as a model of urban geosciences, the findings of this
project are expected to be important for nation-wide recruiting through
application at other universities striving to recruit and retain students from
diverse backgrounds and prepare them for successful geoscience careers.