* 1600016
* Rapid proposal: Fires and floods: Acquisition and analysis of perishable data on the sustainability of reservoirs following wildfires
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/2015,10/31/2016
* Desiree Tullos, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 10/31/2016
* USD 83,117.00

Desiree D. Tullos A RAPID grant situation has been generated by the fire-flood
regime being experienced in the Western U.S. The combination of the extensive
burns from 2015 wildfires, followed by the forecasted severity of precipitation
under the "monster" el nino season ahead, is expected to generate substantial
failure and erosion of hillslopes, resulting in more severe sediment yields at
times that are difficult to predict. These sediment loads may generate important
impacts to reservoirs and water distribution systems, though these potential
impacts are not well understood. As the severity and extent of wildfires and
floods are forecasted to increase in the future, the need for advancing
understanding on and modeling of post-fire flooding impacts to water
infrastructure is urgent. The objective of this project is to collect perishable
data that will lead to understanding if, how, and where sediment delivered from
burned and flooded basins may reduce the functional life of reservoirs. Given
that the rainy season typically begins in late November to late December, this
is a time sensitive and field intensive study, and the PIs will deploy teams
rapidly to document the real-time responses to fires and floods.

The scope of activities includes: a) estimate the relative and absolute yields
of sediment throughout a wet water year following extensive burning,
distinguishing sediment delivered from burned and unburned tributaries in the
Mad River basin, California, to establish sedimentation generation rates
associated with fire, b) survey bathymetry of and sediment cores from Ruth
Reservoir prior to and following the flood season to calculate short-term
sedimentation rates associated with burned and unburned areas, and c) apply
models of trap efficiency and reservoir capacity to calculate long-term
sedimentation rates due to precipitation alone and due to wildfires-flood
scenarios. Results will 1) provide evidence on the processes responsible for and
the timeline at which reservoir capacity may be impacted by the changing fire-
flood regime; 2) demonstrate a methodology, and preliminary data, for conducting
this research across geographical scales; and 3) develop data necessary to
developing regionally-specific models (e.g. debris flow thresholds and sediment
yield decay) that are widely used by managers in mapping and communicating post-
fire hazards. This project will impact society by 1) advancing knowledge on
wildfire-flood impacts on water infrastructure, 2) developing that can be
applied in future studies to advance models and understanding on the landscape-
scale processes and interactions that lead a basin to be more sensitive to post-
fire sediment generation now and in the future, 3) contribute to national
database on reservoir sedimentation to support national-scale, synthetic
reservoir sedimentation studies; and 4) supporting planning for the long-term
delivery of water to communities serviced by the study reservoir.