* 1600508
* GP-IMPACT: Establishing Partnerships to Recruit Geoscience Undergraduates from Urban Chicago
* GEO,RISE
* 07/01/2016,09/30/2022
* Stefany Sit, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 09/30/2022
* USD 429,363.00

Increasing demand for Earth materials, the many impacts of climate change, and
the need to protect air, water, and soil quality are complex issues facing the
future of humanity. Within the coming decade, our nation faces a shortage of
approximately 135,000 skilled geoscientists who are able to address these
problems. Active recruitment of students into the geosciences is essential to
meet this projected shortfall. Urban centers, such as Chicago, provide large
populations of high school and community college students who reflect the
socioeconomic and ethnic diversity of the nation, and therefore provide a rich
source for recruitment of a diverse geoscience workforce. However, these
students do not typically consider geoscience as a career. They often lack
educational opportunities in geoscience, and in their daily lives, urban
students interact more with the built environment rather than the natural world.
They do not view geoscience as a possible career path and their families are
unfamiliar with the discipline. Compelling and innovative approaches are needed
to attract urban students, and in particular underrepresented minorities, into
the discipline. The aim of this project is to expose high school, community
college, and college students from the Chicago region to the aspects of
geoscience that shape their world and are essential to the economic viability
and sustainability of their future. The ultimate goal is to increase the number
of students who choose the field of geoscience as a major with the intent of
continuing in geoscience as a career. Research results from this project will
contribute to the evidence base for differing instructional models and
transitional pathways that target high school and community college students.
Longitudinal evaluation of the project will investigate the overall ability to
attract and retain those students as geoscience majors at 4-year institutions.
Broader project goals are to achieve new institutional awareness of the
importance and value of geoscience in the education and training of STEM-
oriented students and to establish model approaches for engaging students and
accelerating graduation rates that can be extended to more Chicago area
institutions and other urban-serving institutions in the
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of Illinois at Chicago (UIC) is a
public research and underrepresented minority-serving university in downtown
Chicago that draws its enrollment largely from the urban area. UIC is partnering
with five regional high schools and two local community colleges, where
underrepresented minority students constitute 33 to 99% of the enrollment. Only
two of three high school partners in the Chicago Public Schools district (Sarah
E. Goode STEM Academy, Lincoln Park High School, and North-Grand High School)
offer environmental science, and none offers geoscience classes. Maine East and
Maine South high schools in suburban Park Ridge, Moraine Valley Community
College, and Prairie State College offer introductory geology courses, all of
which could launch students into the 4-year major at UIC. Project objectives are
to 1) develop and implement dual enrollment courses and summer workshops at UIC
that introduce students to urban-relevant geoscience; 2) coordinate with all
partner institutions to establish clear transfer agreements and academic
advising to reduce the time and cost of completing a 4-year degree in the Earth
and Environmental Sciences major at UIC; 3) provide more interactions between
students and faculty, through mentoring, recruitment visits, departmental open
house events, and geoscience informational materials; and 4) assemble additional
partners including families and local employers to help support students through
their degree. Students participating in the program are expected to gain
improved knowledge and attitude towards the geosciences, be prepared to succeed
academically at UIC, and be supported by a network of peers, faculty, family,
and employers. Faculty are becoming more adept at advising students in urban
geoscience career options, and in implementing practices that help
underrepresented groups overcome barriers to success.