* 1600724
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   Mechanisms of host preference in the ectomycorrhizal symbiosis
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2019
* Kabir Peay, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 05/31/2019
* USD 20,538.00

Although mutually beneficial interactions are important in many natural systems,
it remains unclear why some involve highly specialized partners, while others do
not. This project investigates how different degrees of specificity have evolved
and function in a particular type of symbiosis - a mutualistic relationship
between a fungus and many temperate forest plants. This research will combine a
fungus with multiple, distantly related host plants to investigate how the
fungus alters its symbiotic behavior when interacting with different species of
plants. This experiment will generate insight into symbiotic plant-microbe
communication in this important mutualism, and will allow for comparison to
similar systems in pathogens. Outreach to science enrichment programs for urban
youth in San Francisco will also occur.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will use
RNA sequencing to determine the genetic basis of generalist host preference in
the ectomycorrhizal fungus Thelephora terrestris. Six plant species from four
families will be established in microcosms and inoculated with spores from
Thelephora terrestris. At symbiotic maturity, microcosms will be labeled with
carbon-13 and nitrogen-15 and plant, fungal, and symbiotic tissues will be
harvested for isotope analysis and RNA sequencing. Transcriptional data will be
combined with stable isotope enrichment measurements of plant and fungal
resource allocation and compared across different plant-fungus combinations.
Measuring gene expression in symbiotic tissues while simultaneously tracking
resource allocation will reveal which genes are associated with improved
symbiotic performance, providing a powerful link between gene transcription,
physiological function, and the stability of mutualistic interactions.