* 1600562
* GP-IMPACT: Collaborative Workforce Training in Geoscience and Social Science for Natural-Hazards Preparedness and Mitigation (HazPM)
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Patricia Gober, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 08/31/2022
* USD 481,234.00

Part 1: Nontechnical Description of the Project&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Natural
hazards exist in all parts of Earth, and pose risks to humanity, human
institutions, and infrastructure. These risks are rendered even more extreme,
more complex, and more difficult to manage by global climate change. Effective
preparation for and mitigation of natural hazards is not simply a problem for
natural scientists and engineers, but also for social sciences, since hazards
originate and occur in the interfaces between natural systems and societies.
Research has demonstrated that better-educated societies with better-educated
decision-makers are best equipped to prepare for, mitigate, and recover from
natural disasters. While hazards-related public and professional education are
common missions for many universities and colleges, the HazPM project will
improve on this model by drawing on expertise from both the social and the
natural sciences of hazards to design and implement an undergraduate workforce-
training program that integrates both realms from start to finish. Our design
plan is fully supported by current research and will result in an innovative,
fully accessible, and rigorously tested undergraduate curriculum that will be
implemented regionally and disseminated nationally. Through parallel
collaboration with faculty at regional two-year colleges that serve major
populations of Native American and Hispanic/Chicano/Latino students, the HazPM
project team will also increase access and professional opportunities in the
sciences for underrepresented minority students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2: Technical
Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of the HazPM project is to
better prepare undergraduate students in geoscience and many other relevant
fields, such as engineering, planning, management, pre-law, and sustainability,
for careers or post-graduate studies related to natural-hazards preparedness and
mitigation. Drawing on a research-based design plan that integrates natural and
social sciences and employs a nimble partnership of expert professionals and
educators from industry, government agencies, and academia, we will develop and
bring to fruition an innovative, sustainable, and readily transferable
workforce-training program that will be implemented locally and disseminated
nationally and globally to enable wider adoption. The primary deliverable will
be an innovative, online-native, fully accessible, rigorously assessed, modular
curriculum for an undergraduate certificate program. Collaboration with agency
and industry professionals will ensure program validity and relevance to career
opportunities. HazPM will also increase access and professional opportunities
for underrepresented students (including Native American and
Hispanic/Chicano/Latino students in the U. S. Southwest) by means of pedagogy
that addresses the impacts of socioeconomic inequality on vulnerability to
hazards in underserved communities; direct partnership with regional two-year
colleges that serve significant numbers of underrepresented students; and
collaboration with minority professional STEM organizations (e.g., SACNAS,
AISES, NABG) in dissemination of products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Drawing on the
diverse collective expertise of the principal investigators and collaborators,
the HazPM project will integrate geoscientific principles and current
geospatial, remote sensing, and monitoring technologies with social science
principles and practices to inculcate a far broader understanding of the human,
scientific, and engineering dimensions of hazards in students. Full
collaborative participation of agency and industry experts in curriculum
planning, development, and evaluation will ensure the validity of the program.
Formative and summative assessment will maintain academic rigor. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Partnering with regional community colleges will allow for the
recruitment of a diverse cadre of students who reflect the cultural and
socioeconomic diversity of the Southwest, and who will apply their expertise
where it is most needed, especially in underserved areas. Students will be able
to enter the program at these partner institutions and transfer to ASU to
complete their studies. Impacts of the program on diverse students will be
tracked and measured by means of institutional demographic data. The
undergraduate certificate program will be fully available and accessible online,
and formalized in the academic programs at ASU and collaborating community
colleges to ensure its sustainability. All HazPM curriculum resources and
research findings will be broadly disseminated among the academic and
professional communities by means of conference presentations, refereed
publications in journals of education research and teaching practice, and web
hosting with links to community digital libraries such as SERC, DLESE, and
UCGIS. Adoption and implementation of the program resources by other
institutions will be encouraged.