* 1600864
* Improving Research and Education of Big Data and Cloud Computing at Winston-Salem State University
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/2016,09/30/2022
* Debzani Deb, Winston-Salem State University
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 09/30/2022
* USD 307,802.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities - Undergraduate Program
provides support for projects that offer solutions to the severe
underrepresentation of African American students in computer science at the
undergraduate level. The project at Winston Salem State University will build
research capacity among faculty and students in the Department of Computer
Science by examining resource management of big data applications on cloud
infrastructure. This work will be done in collaboration with Duke University.
Undergraduate computer science majors will gain research experiences that may
further their interest in pursuing a degree in the discipline, thereby
contributing to broadening the participation of underrepresented groups in the
discipline.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project goals are: to build the big data
and cloud computing research capacity at Winston-Salem state university; to
involve undergraduate students in cutting-edge scientific research; and to
enhance educational experiences for computer science majors. The project is
exploring research centered around the estimation of a globally efficient and
cost effective resource allocation for concurrent MapReduce workloads in a cloud
infrastructure so that the configuration ensures meeting service level
objectives (SLOs) of various workloads and at the same time minimizing the
resources required to achieve this goal. The specific research aims are: to
leverage a profile and prediction subsystem in order to characterize and model
the performance of a MapReduce workload and identify them accordingly as small
jobs, periodic jobs, and delayed jobs; to investigate the parameters to be
included in the utility function that best can capture the priority, deadline,
performance characterization and heterogeneity of MapReduce workloads and the
heterogeneity and dynamics of underlying cloud infrastructure; to design and
develop algorithms and heuristics for utility-based resource management that
take advantage of the workload-specific characteristics and deploy them with the
goal of meeting SLOs and maximizing cloud utilization; and to evaluate the
proposed approach with real-life big data workloads and study their
performances, cloud rental costs, and the overall utilization of the cloud
resources.