* 1600982
* RUI:   Affine Flags, p-adic Representations, and Quantum Cohomology
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Elizabeth Milicevic, Haverford College
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 08/31/2020
* USD 128,000.00

This research project addresses problems in algebraic geometry, which studies
solutions to systems of polynomial equations, and in representation theory,
which aims to explain the basic building blocks of symmetry in mathematics and
natural science. The central objects of study in this project are groups of
invertible matrices with power series entries. Such algebraic groups over local
fields have an especially beautiful decomposition into cells indexed by elements
of a group of transformations that is generated by reflections across
hyperplanes in Euclidean space. This cell decomposition permits an approach to
understanding the algebraic geometry and representation theory of the matrix
group by employing combinatorial and geometric techniques that exploit the
abundant symmetry featured in the arrangement of the reflecting hyperplanes. The
project also provides involves undergraduate students in mathematical research
through summer research programs, year-long thesis projects, and participation
in local colloquia, regional seminars, and national conferences.

The investigator will utilize and extend surprising relationships among p-adic
representation theory, affine flag varieties in positive characteristic, the
quantum cohomology of complex Grassmannians, and the homology of the affine
Grassmannian. Concrete goals of the research include explicit type-free formulas
for dimensions of affine Deligne-Lusztig varieties, values of p-adic orbital
integrals, and products of quantum and affine Schubert classes. The primary tool
in most projects is the alcove walk model for the affine flag variety, a uniform
combinatorial platform that connects the study of affine Hecke algebras, crystal
bases, Mirkovic-Vilonen cycles, quantum and affine Schubert calculus, and
geodesics in the building of Kac-Moody groups.