* 1600884
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Investigating the Joint Effects of Phylogeny and Adaptation on Phenotypic Variation at a Continental Scale (Serpentes:Thamnophis)
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2018
* Adam Leache, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Schneider
* 05/31/2018
* USD 20,086.00

Local adaptation is a hallmark of geographically variable species with wide
distributions that span geographic barriers to gene flow. Determining the
underlying population structure upon which to place these local adaptations is a
central objective in evolutionary biology. However, the impact of evolutionary
history on inference of contemporary population structure has been largely
unexplored. This research aims to examine the effects of evolutionary history on
genetic and morphological variation among populations at regional and
continental scales. Empirical data and the results from this study will serve as
a model for teaching evolution, specifically genetic drift, in both academic and
public settings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Extensive phenotypic variation between
widespread organisms often complicates determination of taxonomic relationships.
The range of the common garter snake Thamnophis sirtalis spans all of North
America, excluding Mexico and the desert southwest. Twelve T. sirtalis
subspecies are currently recognized and defined by color patterning. One of
these subspecies, T.s. pickeringii, co-occurs with two less widely distributed
congeners (T. elegans and T. ordinoides) in the Pacific Northwest across the San
Juan Archipelago. This region was subject to multiple Pleistocene glaciation
events up until ~20,000 years ago, after which flora and fauna recolonized the
islands from neighboring mainland refugia. This project aims to investigate the
relationship between evolutionary history and contemporary population variation
by comparing simulated data of known demographic histories to genomic data from
two empirical study systems: 1) the young San Juan Archipelago Thamnophis
species assemblage, 2) a continental-scale sampling of all Thamnophis sirtalis
subspecies. These two systems occur in proximity to multiple known Pleistocene
refugia and across geographic barriers to gene flow for other North American
flora and megafauna, but it is unclear whether a generalist ectotherm will show
the patterns observed in previous phylogeographic studies. Using genomic data,
this project will test whether 1) T. sirtalis subspecies designations (and
therefore phenotypes) represent unique evolutionary lineages, 2) distinct
evolutionary lineages within T. sirtalis occur along known or novel barriers to
gene flow, or 3) the combined effects of historical vicariance and non-uniform
selective forces across different subspecies produce a signal discordant with
phenotypic variation.