* 1600969
* Research Initiation Award: Physical forces impacting the temporal variability of mesopelagic prey at the Cape Hatteras marine top-predator diversity hotspot
* EHR,HRD
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2020
* Amanda Kaltenberg, Savannah State University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 05/31/2020
* USD 282,106.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities-Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
Research Initiation Awards (RIAs) provide support to STEM junior faculty at
HBCUs who are starting to build a research program, as well as for mid-career
faculty who may have returned to the faculty ranks after holding an
administrative post or who need to redirect and rebuild a research program.
Faculty members may pursue research at their home institution, at an NSF-funded
Center, at a research intensive institution or at a national laboratory. The RIA
projects are expected to help further the faculty member's research capability
and effectiveness, to improve research and teaching at his or her home
institution, and to involve undergraduate students in research experiences. With
support from the National Science Foundation, Savannah State University (SSU)
will conduct research aimed at understanding the influence of physical dynamics
on the mesopelagic community structure and its role in top predator ecology.
This project will be used to enhance teaching and learning at SSU and thus, is
geared for increasing marketable quantitative skills in undergraduate education
and for preparing our diverse undergraduates for graduate school or the job
market. The research and educational efforts will contribute to the mission of
SSU's College of Sciences and Technology (COST) to "delivering high quality
education, scholarship, and research in STEM" by expanding its existing research
capacity. In addition, by providing the opportunities for undergraduates to
participate in cutting-edge oceanographic research and gain mentorship in
advanced oceanographic data methods, this project addresses the need to equip a
diverse student population for the next generation of geosciences, particularly
with the research and quantitative skills that will be in greatest demand in the
coming years/decades.

The goal of the proposed study is to understand the relationships among the
oceanography of the mesopelagic community and marine mammal top predators. The
specific aims of this project are to: 1) describe the temporal variability of
the physical oceanography of the region; 2) describe the temporal variability in
the mesopelagic community; and 3) determine temporal linkages among the physical
oceanographic setting, mesopelagic prey field, and vocalizing deep-diving marine
mammals. This project will result in the application of sensors in a novel way,
providing an example of the application and design of multi-sensor mooring
package specifically targeted for the measurements of complex ecosystem
interactions ranging from the physical habitat and the mesopelagic prey
community all the way to apex predators. The findings from this study will
provide a great step towards improving the study of marine top predators and
their prey, whose focus is shifting from distribution and abundance to ecosystem
interactions. This project will be conducted in collaboration with Duke
University.