* 1600081
* Additive Manufacturing:  Expanding Futures in Appalachia
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2019
* Eric Wooldridge, Kentucky Community & Technical College System
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 07/31/2019
* USD 199,507.00

Rural colleges are challenged with ways to open doors to advanced technology,
novel applications, and innovations for local industries. This project at
Somerset Community College (SCC) is designed to stimulate both technological
growth in additive manufacturing (AM), known popularly as 3D printing, and
employability of technician graduates in high-wage positions in high-poverty
rural regions of southeast central Kentucky. This project is geared toward more
than just new technologies and skills; its purpose is to create a whole new
mindset, a mindset of creative thought and empowerment. Rural entrepreneurs will
be able to create and manufacture products in ways that previously would not
have been possible. The project has a four pronged approach that simultaneously
will engage SCC and Kentucky Community and Technical College System (KCTCS)
students; SCC faculty and staff; and the community including business, industry,
local K-12 school district students/teachers, and other stakeholders. The
project will serve as a model for other community colleges in Kentucky and
across the nation to offer an accredited AM certificate. It involves long-term
outreach and sustainability with program dissemination throughout the sixteen
colleges of the Kentucky Community and Technical College System (KCTCS) and the
K-12 Kentucky Department of Education (KDE). These community engagement efforts
facilitate expansion using the existing KCTCS online network. Engagement of K-12
faculty and students in existing partner programs with Project Lead the Way and
KDE will foster AM student recruitment. Several activities are designed to
engage and recruit veterans. Due to the adaptability of AM technology, this
project will offer education and employment opportunities to physically limited
veterans re-entering the workforce. Evaluation activities will focus on
informing the project and all stakeholders about successful practices while
providing guidance about improving activities for maximum impact.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Initial activities will create a premier regional AM
Innovation Laboratory and build awareness of AM with interactive demonstrations,
hands-on workshops and presentations. A recently approved certificate program
will provide pathways for students to employment. Students preparing to be
technicians will connect with industry at college hosted workshops and
conferences. Project personnel will attend AM and educator related conferences
to facilitate awareness of AM and disseminate project results, as well as
establish networking opportunities for future expansion. Students and regional
industries will create new products, parts, and medical assisting devices in a
few hours for comparatively small material costs. The project is based on work
established by the NSF-funded National Resource Center for Material Technology
Education and Research at Edmonds Community College, (0903112, 1400619) and
current work of the college with 3D printing, scanning, and advanced modeling
technologies. The project will provide an added focus on biomedical applications
that support the advancement of technicians and existing industries in the rural
Appalachian region served by the college. In addition, the project will make a
targeted effort to recruit veterans. Medical practitioners and surgeons will
have better tools and diagnostics with which to work. Veterans will have a new
way to productively support themselves and their fellow soldiers.