* 1600228
* Interactions between Computability Theory and Model Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Uri Andrews, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 07/31/2021
* USD 255,999.00

While computability theory studies complexity of mathematical objects from a
computational point of view, model theory studies complexity of mathematical
objects from a structural point of view. This project aims to deepen
understanding of the interactions between these two different notions of
complexity. In general, one expects that the more structured an object is, the
easier it is to compute information about it. This research project aims to
elucidate how a mathematical object having an understandable theory relates to
computability of facts about the object.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In particular,
this project works towards understanding certain problems in computable model
theory: the spectrum of computable models question asks which sets of dimensions
can arise as the dimensions of computable models of some uncountably categorical
theory. The project will investigate distinguishing this problem based on the
geometric nature of the theory, with the goal of advancing understanding in the
cases where the theory satisfies the Zilber trichotomy. This project also aims
to advance understanding of the degree spectra of theories. The degree spectrum
of a theory measures how hard it is to compute any model of that theory. The
investigator aims to develop a newer notion that will highlight connections
between properties of the theory and the properties of the spectrum, providing a
further link between computability and model theory. The project also
investigates index sets of model theoretic notions; this is a computability-
theoretic way to measure the complexity of a property. Knowing the exact
complexity of a property aids in working with these properties in the most
direct and efficient manner possible, thus spurring further research progress.