* 1600434
* Developing and Deploying Flipped Classroom Resources for Electrical Engineering, Industrial Maintenance, and Renewable Energy Technicians
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Jim Pytel, Columbia Gorge Community College
* Standard Grant
* Heather Watson
* 06/30/2019
* USD 199,927.00

This award addresses a well-documented and growing workforce need for
technicians educated in electronics, mechanics, hydraulics, and motor control in
a way accessible to those already employed. The focus of this project is to
develop online educational resources to support a flipped classroom approach to
teaching technical subjects. The flipped classroom approach offers several
advantages in that students can watch lectures at the time and place of their
choosing and lecture content is always available for review. This allows a
degree of flexibility for those with work and family obligations to attend a
program of study. The benefits of the flipped classroom resources will be far
reaching because they can be repurposed for other technical programs nationwide.
The online lectures can be used to supplement or replace a textbook and cut down
on student commute time and expense. The online resources allow non-traditional
students with work and family obligations to maintain enrollment in a program of
study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Columbia Gorge Community College (CGCC) offers a
Renewable Energy Technology program that prepares students to work in the field
of renewable energy technology. Technicians use electrical and electronic theory
to design, build, repair, calibrate, and modify components, circuitry, controls,
and machinery and are responsible for operations, maintenance, and repair of
equipment at generation and transmission facilities. The content is applicable
to regionally significant renewable energy generation, electrical transmission,
unmanned aerial surveillance manufacturing, industrial agriculture, and general
industrial maintenance, and is adaptable to other programs and regions. Previous
online material developed in cooperation with the NSF ATE Center CREATE has had
an immediate impact on the CGCC's Renewable Energy Technology program by
allowing an evening electronics lab. Incumbent workers can take advantage of the
evening labs to expand and update skills while maintaining employment.