* 1600549
* I-Corps: Efficient Terrain-Based Measurement Gathering for Path Loss Inference
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2015,05/31/2016
* Joseph Camp, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* lydia mcclure
* 05/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

To address multi-fold increases in cellular network demand, carrier cell range
sizes have shifted downwards to maximize network capacity. In doing so, accurate
and fine-grained estimation of coverage becomes a critical issue for spatial
reuse, intercell interference, and smooth handoffs between cells. Historically,
in-field experimentation has been used by telecommunication companies to
estimate wireless propagation characteristics of a given region, which is costly
due to the manpower and equipment resources required. The emerging popularity of
smartphones offers a far cheaper alternative, recording in-field network
observations directly from the cellular users via crowdsourcing. However,
crowdsourcing often provides incomplete measurement coverage to accurately infer
path loss. Further complicating the issue, different sub-regions can require
differing amounts of measurements to achieve the same path loss characterization
accuracy. This I-Corps team has developed a system that uses geographical
feature information (e.g., building heights, foliage, free space) to predict
measurement collection requirements over a region using a statistical learning
framework, allowing network operators to optimize their measurement collection
strategy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work will lower the financial
barrier to and increase the assurance of coverage in rolling out new cellular
generations and/or frequency bands over a given region of users. The project
will also allow increased confidence in leveraging crowd-sourced information
from users as opposed to relying on costly drive testing, thereby saving
manpower and allowing a quicker feedback loop in terms of network performance.
The project will allow the team members to develop commercial acumen that could
increase the quality and fidelity of their research as well as train other
students at all levels that have intellectual capital that could be commercially
viable. By participating in the I-Corps curriculum, this team intends to clearly
identify the exact amount current carriers spend, and the amount customers would
be willing to pay for the proposed service.