* 1600075
* EAGER: A Novel Bioprocess for the Valorization of Waste and Biomass
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/2016,03/31/2019
* Alexander Mathews, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 03/31/2019
* USD 141,914.00

1600075 Mathews

The move to transition to a sustainable society will require a paradigm shift in
waste management. The treatment and disposal of high-strength organic wastes
involves high capital and operating cost expenditures. This project focuses on
the valorization of biomass wastes to useful chemicals using a novel low pH
microbial fermentation process that affords efficient extraction of the
products. The extracted products will provide low-cost biodegradable deicers for
applications on roads, highways, and airports for snow and ice control. This
benefits include avoidance of waste treatment costs, the generation of value-
added products, and the elimination of water and soil pollution from currently
used chloride deicers.

Considerable amount of energy and resources are expended in aerobic and
anaerobic treatment of wastes at present. The only chemical that is currently
produced at large scale from organic wastes is methane gas, a low-value
commodity chemical that is in excess supply. It is produced by anaerobic process
that is costly and complex to operate. This project is aimed at developing a
two-stage fermentation process for the conversion of biomass wastes to calcium
magnesium acetate and propylene glycol. The EAGER project will develop microbial
growth kinetics data and continuous immobilized cell fermentation data for the
conversion lactic acid to acetic acid at low pH values where product extraction
is most efficient. Novel porous supports will be used for cell immobilization.
Extraction studies will be conducted at low pH values for acetic acid
extraction. This project will develop new knowledge in the area of low pH
bioconversion, advance knowledge in the area of immobilized cell fermentation,
and advance knowledge in the area of acid extraction from fermentation liquor at
low pH values. This project is transformative as it can engender research into
the valorization of many different organic wastes and biomass to useful
products. This project will have significant social, economic, and environmental
impacts. The proposed project will enable the generation of high-value chemicals
that will provide economic benefits to society. The capital and operating costs
associated with the treatment of oxygen-demanding wastes will be eliminated.
Moreover, the biodegradable deicers that are produced will replace non-
biodegradable deicers such as sodium and calcium chlorides that are currently
used for road and airport runway deicing. Large-scale application of inorganic
salts to deice roads and highways has caused sodium and chloride contamination
of surface waters, ground waters, and soils. Society will benefit from the
health and aesthetic advantages associated with a cleaner environment and a
healthy ecosystem from the use of biodegradable deicers. In addition, these new
deicer products will prevent costs associated with automobile corrosion and
costs related to rehabilitation of buildings and civil infrastructure that are
damaged by application of conventional deicing chloride salts.