* 1600899
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   Investigating the evolution of phalangerid marsupials in Sulawesi by incorporating morphology, molecular phylogenomics and biogeographical modeling
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2019
* Larry Rockwood, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 05/31/2019
* USD 16,390.00

The island of Sulawesi has long been recognized for its highly distinctive and
endemic vertebrate fauna; however, scientists have not been able to determine
how or when many of these animals arrived on the island or what drove their
remarkable diversification. This deficit of understanding has been due in part
to uncertainty surrounding relationships among the animals themselves and the
difficulty of reconstructing the island's highly complex geological history. For
many taxa, intra-island diversification patterns remain unclear due to a lack of
sufficient geographic sampling. This study will evaluate the temporal and
geographic patterns of colonization and intra-island diversification of
terrestrial mammals on Sulawesi by using cuscus marsupials as a model system.
Reconstructing the evolutionary relationships among cuscuses across this region
will help elucidate the historical biogeography of Sulawesi. This research will
significantly broaden the professional and technical development of an early
career female scientist, who will also train and co-advise an undergraduate
student. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will test the hypothesis that
microplate tectonics during the formation of Sulawesi and habitat fragmentation
in the Pleistocene drove diversification in the Ailuropinae (Phalangeridae,
Marsupialia). Extensive inter- and intra-island sampling with be achieved by
using existing museum collections and novel methods of extracting ancient DNA.
The researchers will incorporate traditional morphological techniques to
distinguish and describe taxa along with phylogenomic methods to reconstruct
their evolutionary relationships. Biogeographical modeling will then be used to
assess the likelihood of different geographical speciation scenarios. Using
these results as a framework, the researchers will then produce a taxonomic
revision of the subfamily.