* 1600775
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: How Worker Honey Bees Detect their Colony's Size: Testing the Comb Vibration and Chemical Composition Hypotheses
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2018
* Thomas Seeley, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Elekonich
* 04/30/2018
* USD 20,922.00

Honey bees, live as a group of organisms that form a cooperative unit: a colony.
Colonies, like individuals, have a cycle of growth and development. When a
colony transitions between developmental stages, the workers must coordinate the
transition. The goal of this project is to understand the cues that non-
reproductive worker honey bees use to detect the developmental stage of their
colony and coordinate the switch between producing more workers and producing
reproductive males and females (drones and queens). This research will encourage
collaboration between researchers studying animal behavior, chemical ecology,
and electrical engineering. Current methods used by beekeepers to assess the
strength and developmental stage of a honey bee colony are based on metrics that
humans can easily determine, but are almost certainly not those used by the
bees. Honey bees are the primary pollinator of agricultural crops worldwide,
providing billions of dollars of pollination services. By identifying the
metrics that bees use to detect their own colony's development, this research
will help beekeepers determine which colonies need to be managed, and when.
Better colony management can in turn improve crop production. The outcomes of
this research will be shared through beekeeping classes. This project will also
train graduate and undergraduate researchers in behavioral ecology, chemical
ecology and engineering.

Descriptive work has shown that social insect colonies invest first in workers
(for growth) and then switch to producing reproductive individuals. Theoretical
work has shown why colonies invest as they do, but it is unknown how
developmental transitions are coordinated. The researchers recently discovered
that a threshold number of workers is the trigger that induces honey bee
colonies to invest in reproduction, but how workers detect this reproductive
threshold is unknown. The goal of this research is to test two hypotheses of the
mechanism by which individual honey bees assess their colony?s size: (1) beeswax
comb vibrations, and (2) volatile chemical compounds. Using accelerometers to
measure comb vibrations, and gas chromatography to analyze chemical compounds,
the researchers will determine whether these cues reliably change with colony
size. The cues will then be experimentally manipulated, to determine which
one(s) the workers use to detect that their colony is above the reproductive
threshold. Understanding the cues that superorganisms use to coordinate their
developmental transitions will give insights into how evolution has solved
similar problems at different levels of biological organization such as
individuals and societies.