* 1600911
* Workshop on the Feasibility of a National Brain Observatory, 16 Oct 2015
* MPS,PHY
* 11/01/2015,10/31/2016
* Narayanan Kasthuri, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 10/31/2016
* USD 47,560.00

Understanding how the brain works is arguably the largest intellectual challenge
of the 21st century. This effort requires a variety of existing and future
technologies targeted at fundamental neuroscience questions. The network of
national laboratories,one of the largest investments in science by the federal
government, already contain technologies that could make a significant impact on
neuroscience research along with the capabilities to design and deploy at scale
future technologies for brain investigation. This meeting of leading
neuroscientists will identify the specific intellectual challenges that can be
addressed in the coming decades with collaboration with the network of national
laboratories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Developing technologies to understand how the
human brain works has emerged as a major international focus of the BRAIN
initiative. It is also self-evident that the long-lasting success of the BRAIN
initiative will depend on widespread access to the technological advancements,
computational tools, and data-sets created by the initiative. However, there are
no existing mechanisms for providing national access to the increasingly
technologically and computationally oriented investigations of the brain. The PI
proposes to organize a one-day meeting to bring together neuroscientists from
the community, scientists from the National Laboratories, and private and public
funding organizations to determine the utility of creating a National Brain
Observatory. The goal of the meeting is to identifying key problem areas in
neuroscience where technologies found at national labs can be used for the BRAIN
initiative and develop a pipeline for future conversations and collaborations
between scientists from the National Laboratories and the larger neuroscience
community. Panels of neuroscientists with expertise in different experimental
approaches will identify important long-term goals that could require the
resources of the national lab system and would transform their respective fields
and drive progress across neuroscience. In addition, many important questions in
neuroscience cannot be pursued with current tools. Bringing together
neuroscientists and national lab scientists should catalyze discussions that
spur us towards transformative new methodologies.