* 1600230
* Coastal SEES Collaborative Research:  Apex predators, ecosystems and community sustainability (APECS) in coastal Alaska
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2022
* Ginny Eckert, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 07/31/2022
* USD 1,103,440.00

Humans have a long history of controlling or hunting predators which has
resulted in many of these animal populations being classified as threatened,
endangered or extinct. Recent reintroduction of some species allows for an
examination of their role in the ecosystem, potential for conflict with humans,
and possible strategies for future coexistence of humans and predators. This
project will use sea otters in Southeast Alaska as a model system, combining
ecology, economics, and Alaskan Native traditional knowledge to learn more about
the role of marine predators in coastal sustainability. Between the mid-1700s
and 1900, sea otters were hunted to extinction in Southeast Alaska for their
highly valuable fur. In the 1960s, these animals were reintroduced in the
region, and their population has grown from roughly 400 to more than 25,000
individuals. The recovery of sea otters in Southeast Alaska provides an
opportunity to understand their ecological role in coastal ecosystems, while
simultaneously evaluating their interactions with people who depend on coastal
resources for their livelihood. Because otters eat shellfish, fishermen and
people who harvest shellfish have growing concerns that the increase in sea
otters is affecting their livelihood and food resources. At the same time,
hunting pressure on sea otters has intensified from coastal Alaskan Natives who
can legally harvest sea otters for their fur. The project will involve
collaboration with Alaska Native communities and elders. In addition, it will
support a team of scientists that includes undergraduate researchers, graduate
students, two postdoctoral scholars, and two junior faculty members. One of the
graduate students is from a group underrepresented in science, and the
investigators plan to build on their track record of recruiting and retaining
students from programs for Alaskan Natives. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective
of this project is to document the role of apex predators and environmental
drivers on changes in nearshore marine resources, ecosystems, and humans using
an interdisciplinary approach that integrates ecological studies, traditional
knowledge interviews, and ecosystem services quantification and valuation. This
research examines changes in the marine environment over a period of time in
which sea otters were extinct and then recolonized. The absence and then
expansion of sea otters into different areas over time allows for a space-for-
time substitution in which the longer-term effects of sea otters can be seen in
areas occupied longer. Analyses of historical data provide an opportunity to
describe changes in kelp distribution and abundance and subsistence harvests
over the last 30-100 years. Quantification and valuation of ecosystem services
from sea otters, including seagrass, kelp, and fish, will provide information on
the potential benefits of sea otter recolonization. The integration of
ecological, anthropological and economic approaches will lead to a better
understanding of the reciprocal feedbacks between humans, apex predators and
environmental drivers. Collaborations with Alaska Native communities throughout
the project include consultation with community members and tribal elders about
project goals and results, with the ultimate goal of informing resource
management to improve the sustainability of rural coastal communities and
nearshore ecosystems.