* 1600992
* EvaluATE
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2021
* Arlen Gullickson, Western Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Connie Della-Piana
* 08/31/2021
* USD 2,037,850.00

The EvaluATE Center is an ATE Support Center dedicated to supporting and
improving the evaluation practices of approximately 250 ATE grantees across the
country. EvaluATE conducts webinars and workshops, blogs on evaluation practice,
maintains a website with a digital resource library, develops materials to guide
evaluation work, and conducts an annual survey of ATE grantees. EvaluATE's
mission is to promote the goals of the ATE program by partnering with projects
and centers to strengthen the program's evaluation knowledge base, expand the
use of exemplary evaluation practices, and support the continuous improvement of
technician education throughout the nation. EvaluATE's goals associated with
this proposal are to: (1) Ensure that all ATE Principal Investigators and
evaluators know the essential elements of a credible and useful evaluation; (2)
Maintain a comprehensive collection of online resources for ATE evaluation; (3)
Strengthen and expand the network of ATE evaluation stakeholders; and (4)
Gather, synthesize, and disseminate data about the ATE program activities to
advance knowledge about ATE/technician education. The Center plans to produce a
comprehensive set of evaluation resources to complement other services, engaging
several community college-based Principal Investigators, representatives from
selected community colleges, and evaluators in that process.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;EvaluATE's products are informed by current research on
evaluation, the National Science Foundation's priorities for the evaluation of
ATE grants, and the needs of ATE PIs and evaluators for sound guidance that is
immediately relevant and usable in their contexts. The fundamental nature of
EvaluATE's work is geared toward supporting ATE grantees to use evaluation
regularly to improve their work and demonstrate their impacts. All of EvaluATE's
products are available to the public. EvaluATE's findings from the annual survey
of ATE grantees aid in advancing understanding of the status of technician
education and illuminate areas for additional research. Implementing a mixed
methods research design the Center will investigate approaches and methods to
assess the impact of activities associated with developing evaluation capacity
building