* 1600520
* Harmonic Analysis and Quantitative Homogenization
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2020
* Zhongwei Shen, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2020
* USD 180,000.00

Partial differential equations with rapidly oscillating coefficients are used to
describe various processes in materials with rapidly oscillating
microstructures, such as composite and perforated materials. The theory of
homogenization, whose goal is to describe the macroscopic properties of
microscopically inhomogeneous or heterogeneous materials, shows that such
strongly inhomogeneous material, whose characteristics change sharply with
respect to space variables, may be described approximately via a so-called
homogenized (or effectively homogeneous) material. As a result, the theory of
homogenization of partial differential equations with rapidly oscillating
coefficients has many important applications in physics, mechanics, and
materials science. The long-term goal of this project is to establish optimal
quantitative results in the homogenization theory for a large class of partial
differential equations in various settings, most arising in materials science.
The research focuses on several challenging problems in the area and will
develop new methods and techniques. The results will provide theoretical
foundation and guidance for numerical simulations in strongly inhomogeneous
materials.

The principal investigator will continue his ongoing research program on
quantitative homogenization of partial differential equations. The main focus of
this project will be on optimal regularity estimates (up to the boundary and
uniform with respect to the inhomogeneity scale) and on sharp convergence rates
for second-order elliptic and parabolic equations in divergence form with
rapidly oscillating coefficients in bounded domains. More specifically, the
problems to be investigated include the following: (1) elliptic equations and
systems with almost-periodic coefficients; (2) systems of linear elasticity and
Stokes systems with periodic coefficients; (3) uniform regularity estimates in
perforated domains; and (4) quantitative homogenization of parabolic equations
and systems with time-dependent periodic coefficients. The research lies at the
interface of harmonic analysis and partial differential equations. Existing and
new techniques from harmonic analysis are expected to play a significant role in
the development.