* 1600116
* Large Permutations
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2020
* Peter Winkler, Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 05/31/2020
* USD 269,997.00

A permutation is an arrangement of objects in some order: cards in a deck, atoms
in a linear polymer, physical or historical events in a chronology. This award
supports research into the understanding of permutations from a mathematical
perspective, in particular permutations involving large numbers of objects.
Powerful new techniques at the interface of combinatorics and probability allow
the large-scale study of the behavior of ensembles of permutations. Experience
with other large combinatorial objects has led mathematicians to expect them to
behave in certain predictable ways. As a result, when such permutations arise in
nature and do not have the predicted properties, scientists know to seek a
hidden explanation. For example, this involves the study of the significance of
the order of genes on a chromosome, and the knowledge of the behavior of
ensembles of large random permutations may tell geneticists when to look for a
pattern.

New discoveries have made it possible to learn much more about the nature of
large permutations. In particular, the space of permutations of all sizes can be
completed by limit objects that are probability measures on the unit square with
uniform marginals. By maximizing a certain entropy integral, one can, in
principle, find the limit object that describes nearly all permutations with
certain given properties. The proposer and his collaborators will be using both
analytic and experimental techniques to exploit this variational principle. One
important objective, barely begun, is to plot the landscape of permutations with
two fixed pattern densities and determine, for each feasible point, the number
and character of the corresponding permutations.