* 1600718
* Complex Algebraic Dynamics and Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Laura DeMarco, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 08/31/2019
* USD 375,000.00

The repeated application of a function produces sequences of values whose
behavior can be quite surprising. Such discrete dynamical systems occur as
models throughout science and engineering. Polynomials and rational functions of
a single variable provide basic examples of non-invertible, algebraic, discrete
dynamical systems by iteration. Even the simplest families of examples exhibit
complicated and chaotic dynamical behavior; the most famous is the family of
quadratic polynomials where a point x is mapped to x "squared" plus a constant.
The constant can be a real or complex number. This family gives rise to the
Mandelbrot set, which continues to baffle researchers. A fundamental problem in
the mathematical study of these systems is to characterize their stability:
under what circumstances -- and by how much -- can we perturb a system while
maintaining its long-term dynamical features? The primary goal of this research
project is to explore connections between the stability of algebraic dynamical
systems and the algebraic or geometric structures that are preserved under
iteration. The first connections between the algebra and dynamics of these
models were discovered in the 19th century. This project will exploit modern
tools from arithmetic geometry and dynamical systems to strengthen these
connections and deepen our understanding of the systems themselves.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project studies: (1) the arithmetic properties of
elliptic curves and abelian varieties, with dynamical methods; (2) a series of
substantial conjectures about "unlikely intersections" in moduli spaces of
dynamical systems; and (3) the 3-dimensional Euclidean geometry of a rational
function, with curvature form equal to its measure of maximal entropy. The main
goal of this project is to build relations between the algebra and the geometry
of dynamical systems on algebraic varieties, with an eye towards applications in
Diophantine geometry. The second goal of the project is a study of rational maps
in dimension one, particularly an exploration of the canonical shape of the
dynamical system and its stability properties. In recent work, the investigator
and collaborator developed new methods of proof incorporating tools from both
complex and non-Archimedean analysis and formulated a conjecture about the
dynamics of rational maps that encompasses known results about elliptic curves.
This project aims to investigate particular cases of this conjecture while
developing the theory to connect these results to the study of the symmetries
and stability and invariants of complex dynamical systems in dimensions one and
two.