* 1600746
* Carolina Dynamics Symposium 2016-2018
* MPS,DMS
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2019
* Rachel Bayless, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 12/31/2019
* USD 30,228.00

The "Carolina Dynamics Symposium" is a continued two day weekend conference,
which will take place in April 2016 at Furman University Greenville, SC and in
April 2017 at Agnes Scott College, Atlanta, GA. In April 2018 it will be hosted
either by the University of North Carolina at Charlotte, the University of
Charleston, or by Wake Forest University. The Carolina Dynamics Symposium is a
two day conference that has been taking place for thirteen years at different
colleges and universities in the Carolinas and Georgia. In addition to the
traditional lively interaction among mathematicians from the Southeast there
have been hour talks by invited leaders in the field from outside the region.
The Carolina Dynamics Symposia feature one plenary speaker who will deliver a
public lecture on the Friday before the conference begins, as well as about
three hour-long plenary speakers during the conference weekend. All meetings
will also have twenty to thirty minute contributed talks and invited talks from
Southeastern participants. Typically a significant number of talks are given by
(graduate) students and young researchers. The conferences have led to
successful research projects and publications in the past. We are continuing a
very successful model with participants of diverse levels and backgrounds, among
those a particularly large number of female participants, speakers and
organizers. For further information on the Symposium, we maintain a webpage:
http://www.devio.us/~ppunosevac/cdynsys/pmwiki.php?n=Main.Announcements.