* 1600051
* Index Herbariorum Upgrade: A Project to Improve Access to Information about the World's Plant and Fungal Collections Assets
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2018
* Barbara Thiers, New York Botanical Garden
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 08/31/2018
* USD 77,284.00

Scientists document the earth's plant and fungal diversity through dried
reference specimens maintained in collections known as herbaria. There are
approximately 2,800 herbaria in the world today, associated with them are
approximately 10,000 biodiversity specialists. Index Herbariorum, established in
1935, is a guide to the world's herbaria and their staff. Accurate,
comprehensive information about the holdings of the world's herbaria make it
easier for scientists to answer questions about the documentation of the world's
plant and fungal diversity, namely: How many species are represented in
herbaria, and which areas of the earth are the best documented? Who are the
experts in plant identification, and how can these be contacted? Facilitating
access to and communication among herbaria will help to maintain the vitality
and relevance of these institutions and ensure that they can continue to serve
humankind. Index Herbariorum also serves as a model for how other natural
history collections can create an inventory of their members and set up an
effective collaborative network. An enhanced Index Herbariorum will empower
countries such as the U.S. to better manage their collection repositories by
providing insight into how collection resources and scientific expertise have
developed over time, how they may change in the future. The project also offers
a model for communication, coordination, and collaboration between museum
institutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;No other type of natural history collection
has a resource that approaches Index Herbariorum in its longevity and
comprehensiveness. The New York Botanical Garden has maintained this unique
resource for the past 41 years. Originally published in book form, the index
first became available as an on-line searchable database in 1997. Since then the
database has been available as a read-only, online reference. Through this
project, The New York Botanical Garden will make this already vital resource
updateable by the user community, and more easily linked to other online
databases. These changes will expand the accuracy, accessibility and
sustainability of this resource and make it easier to maintain in the future.
The activities that will be carried out to accomplish these goals include: (1)
Adjusting the data structure of IH to bring it into compliance with the emerging
Natural Collections Description standard and to increase the effectiveness of
searching key data, and indicate the status of collection digitization efforts;
(2) creating a new user interface that will allow users to input updates to the
index that will be vetted then incorporated into the index; (3) seting up APIs
(Application Programming Interfaces) to the database so the data can be fed to
other applications without human mediation; and (4) informing the user community
about the new updating procedures, and mounting a campaign to update 80% of
those entries that have not been updated since 2000.&lt;br/&gt;