* 1600494
* Algebraic Cycles and Motivic Cohomology in the Context of the Langlands Program
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2020
* Kartik Prasanna, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2020
* USD 176,600.00

This research project lies at the interface of algebraic geometry and number
theory. Algebraic geometry is the study of the geometry of shapes cut out by
systems of polynomial equations, while in number theory one is often interested
in finding explicit solutions to such systems in rational numbers or integers.
The problem of finding such solutions is a foundational question in mathematics,
having been studied for more than two thousand years, and is a central theme of
this proposal. This project will investigate higher dimensional versions of this
question in specific contexts arising from modular and automorphic functions.
Modular and automorphic functions encode deep arithmetic information and are
increasingly playing important roles in other fields, including theoretical
physics. This project aims to broaden and deepen knowledge in this fundamental
area of mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, the award involves
work on five distinct projects on algebraic cycles in the context of the
Langlands program: (i) integral period relations for Hilbert modular forms and
their analogs on quaternionic Shimura varieties; (ii) the Bloch-Beilinson
conjecture for Rankin-Selberg L-functions and in particular constructing cycles
corresponding to the vanishing of the central value; (iii) the construction of
absolute Hodge classes corresponding to cases of Langlands functoriality; (iv)
the study of the injectivity of the Abel-Jacobi map for zero cycles on surfaces
over number fields; (v) the relation between motivic cohomology and the
cohomology of automorphic forms. A theme in many of the projects is the
construction of explicit algebraic cycles or more generally elements in motivic
cohomology, whose existence is often predicted by deep general conjectures on
algebraic cycles.