* 1600558
* Regional Center for Nuclear Education and Training (RCNET)
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2023
* Kevin Cooper, Indian River State College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 09/30/2023
* USD 3,293,314.00

The Regional Center for Nuclear Education and Training (RCNET) provides programs
in nuclear energy, nuclear environmental management, and nuclear life and plant
science. RCNET brings a history of curriculum solutions and professional
development to a growing nuclear community; offering best practices in areas
including cross-training, nuclear culture immersion, soft skills development,
and the embedding of emerging technologies (including nuclear processes in
manufacturing) into the college classroom. Through this award, college nuclear
programs will have increased industry involvement and more sustainable programs,
which will result in better placement and graduation rates. RCNET addresses
critical workforce, environmental, political, and economic concerns. Nuclear
technology is embedded into multiple disciplines and is crucial to the present
and future of the United States' technical fields. Nuclear energy powers over
19% of the United States, is an integral part of the Navy, and is a critical
element in space exploration. Nuclear isotopes are used to diagnose and treat a
spectrum of medical conditions, including cancer. One-third of all environmental
management sites have a nuclear component. Nuclear technologies are even used in
a wide variety of manufacturing applications. These nuclear industries account
for more than 2.6 million jobs and $120 billion toward the United States Gross
Domestic Product. With an aging population, natural attrition, and expected job
growth, there will be over 65,000 high-paying nuclear career opportunities by
2030. By coordinating and supporting a broad network of nuclear training
facilities, capable of meeting the United States industry's needs, RCNET
eliminates the risk of a serious shortage in highly trained nuclear technicians.
RCNET will accelerate the implementation of new nuclear technologies and
facilities (ultimately facilitating the United States' quest for energy
independence); assist with the development of a domestic supply of medical
radioisotopes; provide for a cleaner, safer nation; and strengthen our nation's
manufacturing initiatives. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Regional Center for Nuclear
Education &amp; Training (RCNET) is focused on the development and
sustainability of a highly technical workforce pipeline for the nuclear fields
of power generation, environmental management, and life and plant sciences. The
six key goals are: 1) Expand and maintain a learning repository with
comprehensive standardized curriculum for power generation, environmental
management, and life and plant sciences; 2) Increase academic and career
pathways for students and technicians across nuclear STEM fields; 3) Develop,
promote, and broaden partnerships between industry and academic institutions to
increase articulation, college completion and career placement; 4) Develop and
provide access to best practices in hands-on training, affective domain
instruction, and emerging technologies through professional development; 5)
Create and disseminate educational material to increase awareness of nuclear
academic programs and careers; and 6) Promote and increase the number of under-
represented populations in nuclear STEM fields.