* 1600766
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: Development of an isotope-enabled reactive transport tool to simulate carbon transformations in karst environments
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2018
* Jessica Oster, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 04/30/2018
* USD 34,410.00

Understanding the processes that control the storage and transformation of
carbon near Earth's surface -- the zone encompassing the vegetation canopy,
through the soil, to ground water -- is essential for predicting the long-term
impacts of climate change on Earth's carbon cycle. Cave minerals are capable of
recording these processes because as they grow they record the chemistry of
groundwater seeping into the cave through time. Carbon isotope ratios in cave
minerals have the potential to provide essential clues as to how Earth's carbon
cycle responded to past climate changes. However, though carbon isotope ratios
in cave minerals are easily measured, they can be difficult to interpret given
the number of factors that influence cave systems. The goal of this research is
to use observations of water chemistry variability from the surface through the
soil and into a Tennessee cave system to construct and verify a computer model
that simulates the transport and reaction of carbon in the Earth's surface. This
software can be used to question the environmental factors that are most
important for controlling carbon isotopes in cave systems. Through this
research, a new and versatile computational capability will emerge to help
determine how climate is recorded in cave minerals. This will provide a deeper
understanding of carbon cycle response to past climate changes and thus help to
make critical predictions for the future. This project is led by two early
career female scientists and will involve the training of two new Ph.D. students
and at least two undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Carbon isotope
records of speleothem hold great potential for reconstructing past changes in
the Earth's surface response to climate change, such as transient vegetation,
soil respiration, carbon stabilization in deep soils, and/or chemical weathering
in the epikarst. Yet, because of their inherent complexity, these data often go
unpublished and un-interpreted, despite being regularly collected during more
common oxygen isotope investigations. By sampling waters from soils and drip
sites within a cave on a multi-year timescale, it is possible to observe how
seasonal environmental signals are translated and modified along heterogeneous
flow paths in the soil and epikarst. However, interpreting time-averaged
speleothem records representing climate changes occurring over years to
centuries requires integration of observational data and simulation studies that
provide a temporal bridge between long and short-term processes. The current
research tackles this problem through the development of a carbon isotope
enabled reactive transport model that is calibrated and tested in a karst
system, providing a novel tool for the investigation and interpretation of
speleothem carbon isotope records. This will be accomplished through
modification of the reactive transport model CrunchTope to accommodate three-
isotope systems to simulate stable and radioactive carbon isotope fractionation
and decay within a multicomponent reaction network. Validation of the model for
karst settings will be accomplished using data from an ongoing environmental
monitoring program at Blue Spring Cave in Tennessee. Once functionality of the
CrunchTope model has been demonstrated for the Blue Spring karst environment,
this approach can be expanded to investigate carbon isotope systematics and
speleothem carbon isotope records from a variety of cave settings and climate
regimes. Looking beyond carbon, this model will provide a versatile tool for
evaluating the partitioning and resultant distribution of numerous isotope
systems in karst settings (e.g. Calcium, Magnesium, Strontium, Uranium), and
thus the model will facilitate development and interpretation of a variety of
cutting-edge paleoclimate proxy records from cave environments.