* 1600124
* The Blessing of High Dimension: Asymptotic Geometric Analysis and Its Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2022
* Stanislaw Szarek, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2022
* USD 210,000.00

This project involves research in an area lately referred to as asymptotic
geometric analysis. Particular attention will be paid to links with other areas
of mathematics and other mathematical and physical sciences, which motivate most
of the problems being considered. Since the number of free parameters in the
underlying problem can often be related to the dimension of sets in the
corresponding mathematical model, and since real-life problems usually involve
very many parameters, the high-dimensional setting is of particular interest.
This is especially true for quantum theory, where systems consisting of just
several particles naturally lead to models whose dimension is from thousands to
billions. While classical analysis of high-dimensional phenomena often suffers
from the curse of dimensionality (the complexity of the problem explodes with
the increase in dimension so that the question quickly ceases to be tractable),
we may say that asymptotic geometric analysis exploits the blessing of
dimensionality by identifying and exploiting "approximate symmetries", which
become apparent only when the dimension is large. This project is an attempt to
implement this philosophy in selected directions of research, most notably in
those related to quantum information theory, the interdisciplinary area that
provides theoretical underpinnings for the project of building a quantum
computer, which is one of the major scientific and technological challenges of
the 21st century. Additionally, the project will involve graduate and
undergraduate students in intensive research, thus contributing to development
of human resources in science. In the same vein, one of the products of the
project will be a book surveying the interface of asymptotic geometric analysis
and quantum information theory, likewise contributing to the development of
scientific base and infrastructure and to the promotion of interdisciplinarity.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Analysis is a study of functions, or relationships between
quantities, and particularly of their regularity properties. Since very many
naturally appearing relationships are linear or at least convex, a good
understanding of convex functions and sets is a prerequisite for understanding
those relationships. The emphasis of the proposed research will be on the high-
dimensional setting. Sample research topics to be studied include: structural
properties of high-dimensional convex sets and of high dimensional normed
spaces, derandomization of various probabilistic constructions appearing in
functional analysis, and problems motivated by links to operations research.
Most notably, the project will address geometric questions related to quantum
information theory and quantum computing, for example those related to the
positive partial transpose property. The questions typically are (or can be)
expressed in the language of the geometry of Banach spaces or of high-
dimensional probability and are to be analyzed primarily by using the diverse
methods that originated or were developed in those contexts.