* 1600329
* I-Corps:  Dimensional touch: pressure-sensitive touchscreens for mobile applications
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2015,05/31/2017
* Shadi Dayeh, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 05/31/2017
* USD 50,000.00

The most common type of touchscreen - capacitive touchscreen - is capable of
detecting the location of touch, but not the amount of force. The development of
a pressure-sensitive touchscreen technology that can measure the location of
touch as well as the amount of force applied is crucial for empowering next
generation cell-phone and interactive electronics including advanced 3D
navigation, graphic design, stylus operation, and medical care. This I-Corps
team has developed a pressure sensitive touchscreen technology that can compete
with capacitive technology on both cost and performance. The proposed
touchscreen can detect where and how hard the user is touching, has the
potential to replace the capacitive touchscreen while adding new features, and
disrupt the touchscreen technology market. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Major cell
phone manufacturers can sell up to 13 million units within the first three days
of launch of a flagship device. Most recent generations of cell phones
incorporate the "3D Touch" technology that allows two-level, force-based
interaction with mobile apps, and variable range pressure sensitive touch
screens are yet to be developed. The technology currently employed causes an
increased display unit weight from 12 grams to 29 grams. The proposed technology
provides variable range pressure sensitivity and additional functionality
without increasing the display weight. The weight savings would lead to a
reduction of shipping weight by about 200,000 kilograms for the first three days
of sales, reducing transportation and energy costs, not to mention providing
enhanced user experiences. Therefore, the proposed technology would allow "3D
Touch" functionality that facilitates cheaper phone models and improved user-
phone interaction. Additionally, this technology results in more ergonomic
keyboards and reduces user fatigue. The application of the pressure sensitive
touch screen extends well beyond cell phones to virtually any remote/touchscreen
control that requires analog input of forces and pressures, including steering,
medical, mechanical, and military domains. Through the NSF National I-Corps
program, this I-Corps Team will interview 100 touchscreen industry contacts,
including potential customers, partners, and advisors.