* 1600932
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Effects of Reduced Population Size on the Genomics of Adaptation during Drosophila Experimental Evolution
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2017
* Michael Rose, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 05/31/2017
* USD 20,085.00

Reduced population size, and the inbreeding that results from it, is known to
reduce the functional response to selection. The present research measures the
genomic impact of inbreeding on selection in the common lab fruit fly. Most
animal research uses laboratory populations that are inbred, but such inbred
animals may not be good research models for species that have large population
sizes like humans. Understanding the genomic effects of inbreeding will help
elucidate the plight of small populations undergoing intense selection. This is
of great importance for such applied settings as conservation since endangered
species often have very small populations. The work will also help researchers
understand how populations adapt to novel, stressful environments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research involves sequencing pooled DNA from nearly 30
Drosophila populations maintained at small census sizes. Half of these
populations were subjected to strong selection for starvation resistance, while
no selection was directly imposed on the remainder. The functional response to
strong selection has already been shown to be impaired in these inbred flies.
Genomic analysis will reveal the genetic machinery that has impaired their
response to selection. These genomic findings will then be compared to genomic
studies of fruit fly populations maintained at much larger population sizes. The
comparison will reveal the genetic basis of reduced response to selection with
inbreeding. &lt;br/&gt;