* 1600236
* I-Corps: Fluid Volume Responsiveness Monitor to Support the Care of Septic Patients
* TIP,TI
* 10/15/2015,03/31/2017
* Bradley Plummer, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 03/31/2017
* USD 50,000.00

Sepsis is a whole-body inflammatory response to an infection, which affects more
than 1 million Americans per year and results in about 258,000 deaths. It is one
of the top four most costly conditions occurring in US hospitals, costing the
healthcare system more than $20 B annually. Sepsis is treated using broad
spectrum antibiotics. However, during treatment the heart's ability to pump
blood throughout the body is reduced which can lead to organ failure. Therefore,
intravenous fluids are used to maintain the volume of blood pumped per heart
beat. While initially, providing fluids is essential, it can be harmful when the
circulatory system cannot respond to additional fluid. Studies have shown that
the early identification of when patients no longer need fluids can reduce the
risk of death, speed recovery and decrease days spent on a ventilator. It is
therefore critical to know when to stop giving the patient fluids and switch
strategies to support blood flow. Current methods to perform these measurements,
are inaccurate, invasive, and are not conducive to the care of septic patients.
The proposed technology overcomes the limitations of current methods and can
provide the continuous assessment of a patient?s fluid responsiveness. This
system will empower emergency department and intensive care unit providers to
collect fluid responsiveness data, which physicians can use to optimize patient
care. The team envisions that optimizing sepsis care would decrease recovery
times and reduce the number of deaths associated with sepsis. In addition, the
proposed system will help hospitals achieve compliance with recently instituted
sepsis quality regulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team plans to develop a
physiologic measurement system for the accurate assessment of fluid volume
responsiveness. The proposed technology could be incorporated into a product in
numerous ways. For example, an automated, a low-profile ultrasound-based smart
sensor patch could be developed. Alternately, the technology could be integrated
with the software of existing ultrasound machines, or even a software package
could be realized that integrates data from various hospital-based information
sources. To determine the ideal solution the team intends to understand the
user-buyer-payer interaction, as well as the regulatory and reimbursement
landscape. The I-Corps program will help this team achieve this goal by
enhancing its ability to develop a sound value proposition, business model, and
commercialization strategy for our technology. Though an intensive customer
discovery process the team will discover the best way to package our technology
to meet the needs of customers.