* 1600691
* Research Initiation Award:  Quantifying the effects of ocean acidification on visual and auditory neurobiology in marine fishes
* EDU,EES
* 05/15/2016,12/31/2020
* Andrij Horodysky, Hampton University
* Standard Grant
* Emanuel WAddell
* 12/31/2020
* USD 359,998.00

Research Initiation Awards provide support for junior and mid-career faculty at
Historically Black Colleges and Universities who are building new research
programs or redirecting and rebuilding existing research programs. It is
expected that the award helps to further the faculty member's research
capability and effectiveness, improves research and teaching at his home
institution, and involves undergraduate students in research experiences. The
award to Hampton University has potential broader impact in a number of areas.
The goal of the project is to investigate how possible changes in ocean
acidification may affect visual and auditory neurobiology in marine fishes.
Undergraduate students will gain research experiences. The project's
interdisciplinary approach ensures that the principal investigator and the
undergraduate scholar-researchers will make significant impacts in this rapidly
emerging field that will be of broad interest to the marine science
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is to apply
electrophysiological techniques and morphological analyses to assay the effects
of increased carbon dioxide concentrations that are representative of projected
changes over the next century on the form and function of marine fish visual and
auditory systems. The effects of both acute and chronic aqueous carbon dioxide
exposure will be studied on the morphological development of visual and auditory
sensory structures, the functional performance of auditory and visual systems,
and the capability of a gamma-aminobutyric acid A receptor antagonist to alter
potential sensory deficits during acute and chronic acidification using fishes
from diverse phylogenies, geographic regions, and life histories. While
resulting behavioral changes have been documented, the extent to which the
physiological function of fish neurosensory systems is altered as a consequence
of ocean acidification, and the morphological changes and functional deficits it
may cause, remains largely unknown.