* 1600896
* CAREER: Approximate Computing Systems for Future Teraflops Workloads
* CSE,CCF
* 08/21/2015,12/31/2016
* Nam Sung Kim, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* tao li
* 12/31/2016
* USD 91,231.00

The performance of computers has improved tremendously in the past four decades,
which has enabled innumerable applications that have major roles in our daily
lives. However, without dramatic innovations in improving power efficiency of
computing, the continued semiconductor device scaling alone will fail to provide
sufficient performance for the future computing capabilities. For the emerging
challenge, the proposed research investigates revolutionary computing paradigms
to process, comprehend, and use abundant data in an extremely efficient way. The
novelty of the approach lies in developing power- and performance-efficient
computing systems with software support by exploiting the characteristics of
future workloads that often use complex probabilistic mathematical models of
physical phenomena. In such applications, approximate computing can often result
in satisfactory outcomes. Meanwhile, it can dramatically decrease power
consumption or increase performance by replacing complete logic functions with
simplified circuits that mimic the functions for rough calculations. To extend
the approximate computing concept to more general-purpose computing systems, the
following holistic approaches are proposed: 1) intelligent microarchitectures to
identify correctness-non-critical regions of code with compiler support; 2)
approximate computing engines to execute such regions of code power and
performance efficiently; 3) high-level morphic primitives to process a large
fraction of workloads with orders-of-magnitude greater power and performance
efficiency; and 4) flexible architectures to allow programmers and users to
trade the quality of computing with the efficiency.

The proposed research will have a specific and significant impact on the
computer architecture, circuit, and compiler communities since it requires
analysis of interesting and representative workloads; realization of state-of-
the-art circuit, architecture, and compiler infrastructure; and invention of
powerful and useful evaluation methodologies. Since most of the development and
research work will be conducted by graduate students, both industry and academia
will benefit from well-educated and trained employees as well as direct
technology transfer when students graduate and begin employment elsewhere.
Finally, the success of this research will tremendously benefit our ability to
advance human?s collective knowledge in science, technology, business, medicine,
and virtually every other field of human endeavor by allowing remarkable
improvement in computing performance.