* 1600314
* GP-IMPACT: Collaborative Research: Geoscientist Development (GEODE): Recruiting and Engaging the future Geoscience workforce
* GEO,RISE
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2022
* William Phelps, Riverside Community College District/Riverside City College
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 06/30/2022
* USD 66,931.00

The Geoscientist Development (GEODE) Program: Recruiting and Engaging the Future
Geoscience Workforce is a program designed to draw high school and community
college students in Riverside County, CA into geoscience majors and careers.
This program represents a collaboration between the University of California,
Riverside (UCR), Riverside Community College (RCC), and the Riverside Unified
School District (RUSD), with engagement opportunities for additional community
colleges and public school districts in the region. The American Geosciences
Institute predicts that the geoscience workforce faces a potential shortfall of
~135,000 by the year 2020 unless recruitment rates are improved. The GEODE
Program addresses this potential shortfall by focusing recruitment on
communities that are historically underrepresented in the geosciences and thus
represent an untapped pool of intellectual capital. Riverside County, located
east of Los Angeles County in Southern California, is densely populated (2.3
million), highly diverse (47.4% Hispanic), and home to a wide range of
geoscience career opportunities, and is therefore an ideal region in which to
recruit new geoscientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The GEODE Program has two goals:
(1) To create a range of programs designed to increase the number of
underrepresented minority students in the geosciences and successfully usher
them into the geoscience workforce, and (2) To test the efficacy of these
programs in order to determine which programs should be used to increase
recruitment and retention of new geoscientists from underrepresented minorities
in other regions and by other institutions. The GEODE Program is increasing the
recruitment and retention of a highly diverse and academically prepared
workforce by increasing awareness of career opportunities in the geosciences and
improving students' transitions through three critical educational junctures:
(1) High School to College (2-Year and 4-Year), (2) Community College to
University, and (3) University to Workforce. At each critical juncture, the
GEODE Program is creating opportunities for students to be exposed to the
wonders of the natural world through a multitude of field and research
experiences. The program also provides students with mentors, academic support
and professional development programs to ensure retention and success. By
leveraging the success of existing support programs at UCR for science,
technology, engineering, and math (STEM) students from underrepresented
backgrounds, the GEODE Program is creating a geoscience network throughout its
collaborating institutions.