* 1600519
* Analytic Low Dimensional Dynamics: From Dimension One to Two
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2020
* Mikhail Lyubich, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 05/31/2020
* USD 225,000.00

The theory of Dynamical systems (with discrete time) studies the long-term
behavior of trajectories described by a certain iteration procedure, and the way
this phase portrait depends on the parameters of the system. Very interesting
fractal objects (like Julia sets and the Mandelbrot set) may appear as phase and
parameter diagrams for such systems. In the project, the PI will focus on
complex and real low-dimensional dynamical systems described by simple quadratic
equations. Despite simplicity of the description, these systems are known to
display complicated chaotic behavior serving as a good model for various
phenomena that appear in celestial mechanics, fluid dynamics, biology, and other
branches of natural science. The proposed activity will result in deeper
insights into small scale structure of dynamical systems, in training of highly
qualified postdocs and graduate students who will apply their skills in academia
and industry, in broader interactions between experts in various branches of
real and complex dynamics, in publishing a book that would help a broad student
and research community to acquire background in the area, in promotion of
communication in the field by organizing conferences and scientific programs,
giving mini-courses, and maintaining a dynamics web site
(http//www.math.stonybrook/dynamics).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will conduct a
broad research program on several intertwined geometric themes of complex and
real low-dimensional dynamics, making a gradual transition from the one-
dimensional to the two-dimensional world. The PI will work on the Dynamics of
dissipative complex Henon maps and attractors for typical dissipative real Henon
maps. Specific themes include exploring the problem of existence of wandering
domains, building up puzzle techniques, and the study of local dynamics near
semi-Cremer fixed points. The PI will keep pursuing several one-dimensional
projects unified by the idea of renormalization, a powerful tool of penetrating
into small-scale structure of dynamical objects aimed towards completing their
classification. They include the Siegel Renormalization Theory, scaling of
Mandelbrot limbs, and a priori bounds for primitively infinitely renormalizable
quadratic polynomials. The PI will finish the first volume of a book "Conformal
Geometry and Dynamics of Quadratic Polynomials".