* 1600120
* Science and Social Justice Think Tank
* EHR,DUE
* 12/15/2015,11/30/2017
* Regina Stevens-Truss, Kalamazoo College
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 11/30/2017
* USD 48,481.00

Kalamazoo College has received an award through the Improving Undergraduate STEM
Education: Education and Human Resources program to hold a conference entitled,
"Science and Social Justice Think Tank." The purpose of this working conference
is to bring together (1) postsecondary STEM educators, (2) scholars, scientists,
and public health professionals, and (3) higher education STEM thought leaders
to consider, discuss, and plan for the inclusion of social justice issues in
science. The conference includes several keynote addresses by leaders from
various sectors who have expertise in science and social justice issues. These
presentations are followed by small discussion groups composed of participants
who have been working at the intersection of science and social justice. The
participants will be tasked with articulating what science and social justice
means, thinking about ways to extend and broaden the conversation, and
developing a detailed plan for disseminating the products of the conference.

There has been significant attention to ethics in the natural sciences and
considerable attention to the introduction of social justice topics in the
undergraduate curricula in disciplines such as economics. However, there has
been little consideration of issues of social justice, such as distribution of
wealth, opportunities, and privileges within society, in the practice of the
natural sciences. By tackling such considerations and how they can be integrated
into undergraduate STEM education, the conference will contribute to the
preparation of future scientists, as well as the education of a STEM-literate
citizenry, providing them with the ability to evaluate STEM research in the
context of its impact on society. Results of the conference will be shared
through the Science and Social Justice Praxis website hosted at Kalamazoo
College.