* 1600988
* Research Initiation Award: Functional Characterization of Arabidopsis RmlC-like Cupins Superfamily Proteins
* EHR,HRD
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2021
* Sanju Sanjaya, West Virginia State University
* Standard Grant
* Emanuel WAddell
* 05/31/2021
* USD 339,868.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities-Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
Research Initiation Awards (RIAs) provide support to STEM junior faculty at
HBCUs who are starting to build a research program, as well as for mid-career
faculty who may have returned to the faculty ranks after holding an
administrative post or who need to redirect and rebuild a research program.
Faculty members may pursue research at their home institution, at an NSF-funded
Center, at a research intensive institution or at a national laboratory. The RIA
projects are expected to help further the faculty member's research capability
and effectiveness, to improve research and teaching at his or her home
institution, and to involve undergraduate students in research experiences. With
support from the National Science Foundation, West Virginia State University
(WVSU) will conduct research to provide in-depth knowledge on the molecular
mechanisms that regulate seed storage compounds, including the identification
and characterization of genes that regulate the storage of lipids, starch, and
proteins in seeds. This project will strengthen WVSU's plant biosciences
research program, ensure student achievement in research, and the creation of a
pipeline of graduates who will go on to pursue STEM careers in the plant
sciences. In addition, this project will enhance intra-and inter-institutional
interdisciplinary research collaborations and provide collaborative mentoring of
students.

The objective of this project is to elucidate the mechanisms of action of cupins
and their associated gene networks in plant nutrient metabolism and storage
pathways using the Arabidopsis model. Specifically, this study aims to: 1)
determine whether cupins are required for seed storage compound regulation in
Arabidopsis, 2) determine if ectopic expression of cupins in Arabidopsis alters
the production of seed compounds and plant physiology and growth, and 3)
characterize the transcriptome signature of wild-type and cupin mutant
Arabidopsis plants that produce varying levels of seed storage compounds.
Findings from this work will determine whether cupins, a previously unidentified
network of proteins, are master regulators of seed storage compound metabolism.
Cupins may significantly reduce the negative effects of current agricultural
practices on the environment, including overuse of arable land and water and
increased use of fertilizers and pesticides. This work will be conducted in
collaboration with the University of Nebraska-Lincoln. The research and
educational activities will advance the academic mission of WVSU.