* 1600636
* Artihmetic Geometry:   Iwasawa Theory, the Bloch-Kato Conjecture, and the Birch and Swinnerton-Dyer Conjecture
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Xin Wan, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2019
* USD 0.00

Number theory is a subject in mathematics that has been developing very rapidly
in recent years. This research project studies Iwasawa theory, a branch of
number theory. It relates integral and rational solutions of polynomial
equations to certain analytic objects known as L-functions. The project exploits
novel approaches to this study, which combine new tools from the Langlands
program and algebraic geometry. The new approaches have been used to prove that
a majority of elliptic curves satisfy the Birch and Swinnerton-Dyer conjecture,
whose general truth is still a challenging open question in number theory. This
research project aims to expand the set of elliptic curves known to satisfy the
conjecture.

More concretely, this project studies the relationships between special values
of L-functions and certain arithmetic objects, namely the Selmer groups of
Galois representations. For a prime number p the main problems under study are
the Iwasawa main conjectures and p-adic Bloch-Kato conjectures. The project
develops a new approach towards non-ordinary Iwasawa theory: first to study
Greenberg type Iwasawa main conjectures that are accessible to proof due to
their ordinary nature, and then to relate them to non-ordinary Iwasawa theory
using explicit reciprocity laws of special cycles. The ultimate goal is to
prove, for all GL(2) modular forms (of any weight and possibly with ramification
at p): the p-part of the Birch and Swinnerton-Dyer formula in the case when
analytic rank is 1 or 0; the Iwasawa main conjecture; and that the vanishing of
central critical L-value implies the corresponding Selmer group has rank at
least 1. The project also aims to study these problems for higher rank motives,
especially those associated to cusp forms on unitary groups.