* 1600845
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Connecting Cognition, Signaling, and Female Choice in Wild Birds
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2016,12/31/2018
* Carrie Branch, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 12/31/2018
* USD 15,597.00

It has long been proposed that female animals use various external information
containing signals to assess male quality when choosing mates. However, the
connection between a male's level of intelligence and external traits that
females can assess has been difficult to measure. Here the researchers will
assess spatial memory ability, an intelligence trait thought to increase
survival in wild food-storing birds, and two overt male signals, feather
coloration and song production, to address the question of whether or not female
mating choice is associated with these traits. The researchers will conduct the
experiments with free-living birds using arrays of programmable 'smart' bird
feeders that can track which individuals are using these feeders to test spatial
learning ability. The researchers will then test whether individual variation in
learning is associated with variation in communication signals and with mate
choice. Findings from this work can be applied to a wide variety of species,
including humans, that must make important decisions when using information that
isn't always easily assessed or tangible. All of the results and findings will
be widely available to a variety of audiences through publication in peer-
reviewed journals and participation in professional conferences. Additionally,
this work will support the research experience of undergraduate students and the
equipment used in this project will also be used in public outreach activities
in the community, including creating a museum display at the University of
Nevada's Museum of Natural History that illustrates the differences in human and
non-human.

Signals are universally used across taxa to convey a diverse range of
information, including social status, foraging locations, and predator presence.
Several hypotheses have been proposed regarding how sexual signals of quality,
in particular, have evolved to be honest as these signals are only useful
insofar as they reflect some fitness associated trait(s) of the sender.
Cognitive ability is one such fitness-related trait, yet direct evidence linking
cognitive ability, signaling, and associated fitness consequences of female
mating choices have historically been difficult to assess. Using wild birds
fitted with passive integrated transponder leg bands and radio-frequency
identification technology, the researchers will directly test whether (a)
individual variation in a cognitive ability is associated with variation in two
modes of signaling perceivable by females and (b) whether variation in cognitive
ability and these two signals reflect female mating choices via production of
extra-pair offspring. By doing so, the researchers will connect a cognitive
trait thought to increase survival, with song production and plumage
reflectance, to female mating choices in wild food-caching birds. These birds
inhabit differentially harsh environments creating differential selection
pressures on spatial memory ability used to retrieve cached food. Using this
system the researchers will be able to directly test the assumption that signals
reflect individual quality, an assumption that has been somewhat intangible in
the past.