* 1600685
* On the Automorphic Discrete Spectrum of Classical Groups: Constructions and Characterizations
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2019
* Dihua Jiang, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 05/31/2019
* USD 336,000.00

This project concerns research in number theory, a branch of mathematics that
has connections to many other subjects, including data security and physics.
Automorphic forms, which play an important role in modern number theory, are
functions with abundant symmetries. In applications, these symmetries serve as
guidelines to understand the intrinsic structures of objects in our universe. In
mathematics, these symmetries are common ground for many different subjects,
including geometry, number theory, mathematical physics, algebra, and analysis;
the modern theory of automorphic forms provides the organizing principle for
further research in these areas. This research project aims to investigate basic
structures of automorphic forms and to advance understanding of the discrete
spectrum of automorphic forms, with potential applications to fundamental
questions in number theory and arithmetic. Graduate students are involved in the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project investigates a set of
fundamental questions on square integrable automorphic forms, as well as the
corresponding local problems in the representations of complex, real, and p-adic
groups. The goal is to understand refined structures of automorphic forms and
their connections to harmonic analysis and number theory. The investigator
intends to construct explicit modules for cuspidal automorphic forms. In
addition, the project aims to develop the local theory, relating it to basic
problems in harmonic analysis of p-adic groups. The long-term goal is to
understand the general local-global-automorphic principles in the theory of
automorphic forms, which reflects one of the basic principles in arithmetic and
number theory.