* 1600727
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   The functional basis of whole-organism trade-offs between locomotor economy and physical competitive ability
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2018
* David Carrier, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 06/30/2018
* USD 14,364.00

This study will examine the characteristics of limbs, muscles and physiology of
male mice in order to identify the underlying factors leading to a possible
trade-off in locomotion versus physical competition. Locomotion and physical
competition are critically important activities for most species. However,
anatomical and physiological traits that improve performance in either of these
behaviors may impair performance in the other. In socially dominant male house
mice, those with greater ability to gain and control territories containing
females do so at the cost of less efficient locomotion. This trade-off is likely
associated with specific anatomical and physiological traits. The results of
this study will increase understanding of animal function and conflicting
evolutionary pressures. Additionally, this study will be involved in several
public engagement projects, including a science lecture series at correctional
institutions in Utah, informal science communications events at the Natural
History Museum of Utah, and other programs that bring locally-relevant science
to Utah residents. This project will also provide research, presentation, and
outreach opportunities for undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research will investigate underlying factors that influence locomotor economy
and physical competitive performance by comparing the following traits in
dominant versus non-dominant male mice: 1) skeletal proportions and anatomical
mechanical advantages, 2) muscle mass distribution of the trunk and limb
muscles, and 3) muscle fiber types of the proximal and distal forelimb and
hindlimb using antibody-based histochemistry. These data will be combined with
previously collected data on competitive ability in semi-natural enclosures and
locomotor economy using open-flow respirometry in a fully enclosed treadmill.
Together, these data will allow the identification of which traits at what
levels of biological organization underlie the locomotion-competition trade-off.
Additionally, because traits that confer the greatest advantage during male-male
contests are also typically those that are the most sexually dimorphic, the same
hypotheses for differences between dominant and non-dominant males will be
applied to male-female differences. This research will help to answer long-
standing, unanswered questions at the intersection of natural and sexual
selection.