* 1600945
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   Investigating Genomic Signatures of Range Shifts and Demographic Change in Migratory Hummingbirds
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2018
* John Klicka, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* ashley dowling
* 03/31/2018
* USD 15,995.00

Range shifts and changes in population size are thought to be common features of
evolution in animals, in part because most species are older than recent ice
ages and have persisted through dramatic changes in global climate and land
cover. Migratory birds present particularly interesting case studies in this
context: they are capable of crossing huge geographic areas in search of newly
suitable habitats, but their potential for adaptation to new areas may be
limited by genetic cues determining the direction and timing of migration.
Recent efforts to forecast species' ranges under an assortment of climate change
scenarios suggest that most bird species in North America will need to shift
their ranges in order to persist in the climatic conditions they experienced
during the past century. Understanding the dynamics of range shifts and their
long-term impacts on species' evolutionary potential is thus an important task
for biologists in the 21st century.

This project is focused on uncovering the temporal and spatial dynamics of
shifts in demography and range in the Bee hummingbirds, a young radiation
including all migratory hummingbirds breeding in temperate North America.
Hummingbirds are good subjects for studies of range and demography because their
extreme physiologic constraints, nectivorous diet, and high dispersal abilities
suggest that they are sensitive to shifts in regional climate and phenology. In
addition, two of the project's focal species - Selasphorus rufus and Calypte
anna - have experienced dramatic range shifts over the last 100 years, offering
a chance to study the process of colonization and expansion in contemporary
time. This project applies population-genomic analyses of reduced-representation
DNA sequencing libraries to examine response to environmental change by (1)
determining the role of founder effects and gene flow in establishing
populations in novel ranges over the last century, (2) testing for genetic
divergence and reduced gene flow across migratory divides, and (3) comparing
demographic responses to Pleistocene climate change in a multispecies
comparative framework along a latitudinal gradient.