* 1600221
* RAPID: Studying the Effects of Disturbance in a Complex Socioecological System
* SBE,BCS
* 12/01/2015,11/30/2016
* Mark Moritz, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 11/30/2016
* USD 17,710.00

This research asks a significant scientific and humanitarian question: what
happens when a smoothly functioning and sustainable socio-ecological system is
disturbed by refugees from an external political crisis? The question is timely
as well as scientifically important. A valuable opportunity to investigate it on
a small and thus manageable research scale is provided by the crisis in
Northeast Nigeria. In the last two years, thousands of pastoralists have fled
the insecurity caused by Boko Haram in Nigeria and moved with their livestock to
the Logone Floodplain in the Far North Region of Cameroon. In earlier research,
the researchers, Dr. Mark Moritz (Ohio State University) and his team, found
that the mobile pastoralists who were already using the Logone region were
sustainably managing these grazing resources without conflict. They had
developed a decentralized and flexible system in which access was open to all,
regardless of ethnicity, nationality, seniority, or socioeconomic status. This
baseline research plus the disturbance provided by the refugee newcomers gives
the researchers a rare opportunity to see how resilient a previously documented
system is to an extreme perturbation. Will the ethos of open access survive when
the influx of newcomers doubles the population the system must
support?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cumulatively, the human, animal, and natural
elements of the Logone plain comprise a complex adaptive system in which, even
though there is no central authority, individual decision-making results in an
ideal free distribution of grazing pressure over the available grazing
resources. Now the researchers will look to see if there is still an ideal free
distribution of pastoralists; if the influx of refugee pastoralists has affected
the ethos and practice of open access; and what other changes the influx has
brought about. They will use GPS/GIS technology to map the locations of
pastoralist camps; document at intervals the current distribution of vegetative
resources by using the Normalized Difference Vegetation Index, a remotely sensed
vegetative index that is refreshed frequently; document transhumance orbits to
look for changes; and interview both Nigerian and Cameroonian pastoralists about
their strategies. The urgency of this project, and hence the need for a RAPID
award, is that at this particular moment the pastoral system is under the
greatest stress, which allows the researchers to study in real time a socio-
ecological system as it adapts or collapses.