* 1600902
* EAGER Collaborative Research: Exploring dust impacts on terrestrial ecosystem processes using an innovative and integrated approach
* GEO,EAR
* 11/15/2015,10/31/2017
* Alexandra Ponette, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 10/31/2017
* USD 36,586.00

Mineral dust constitutes a critical nexus between the geosphere, atmosphere,
biosphere, and hydrosphere. One of the most abundant atmospheric aerosols by
mass, mineral dust can influence numerous ecosystem processes through its
effects on climate and biogeochemistry. Dust supplies essential limiting
nutrients as well as toxic pollutants to ecosystems, with long-term implications
for elemental cycling. This project will address the considerable uncertainties
regarding dust influence on terrestrial ecosystem processes, including wet dust
deposition, carbon uptake, and evapotranspiration. It will maximize financial
and societal return from publicly available data, provide training for the next
generation scientific workforce, and broaden the participation of
underrepresented groups in science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This highly
interdisciplinary project will develop the foundation for testing an integrative
framework for conceptualizing dust events, dust sinks, and ecosystem
interactions during a period of historic drought. It will: (1) characterize dust
events during a period of widespread severe to exceptional drought; 2) analyze
the chemical composition and quantify the magnitude of wet dust deposition; (3)
quantify the influence of dust events on ecosystem light use efficiency, water
use efficiency, and carbon sequestration. The project integrates research and
education with students at all levels, including a concerted effort to recruit
underrepresented students. The team will produce a lecture and laboratory module
on drought and dust in arid and semi-arid regions. The project will contribute
to the career development of one early career and one postdoctoral scholar (both
female and Hispanic).