* 1600403
* GP: EXTRA Plugging the Leaky Geoscience Pipeline: Bridging the Transition from Community College to University in Oregon
* GEO,RISE
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2020
* Shanaka de Silva, Linn Benton Community College
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 12/31/2020
* USD 285,684.00

Geoscience's workforce lacks the participation of under-represented groups
because of significant challenges to entering the field. Two-year colleges (2YC)
are the main entry point for individuals from underrepresented groups into the
geoscience career pipeline. However, many of these students drop out of
Geoscience degree programs as they transfer to 4-year universities (4YU) because
they face several challenges early in their transition. The goal of this project
is to plug the leaky geoscience career pipeline through an extracurricular
?bridge? program between Linn-Benton Community College (LBCC) and Oregon State
University (OSU). We call it LBOS-GeoBridge. The very nature of this project
addresses broader impacts of increasing diversity in STEM and the Geosciences in
particular. Specific long-term broader impacts of this project are a stronger
pipeline from 2YC to 4YU in geology/earth science in Oregon, more students from
2YC entering the geoscience workforce, and an improved model for improving
success of community college students in geoscience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Each
year, six LBCC geology students (18 students during the 3-year period of the
program) will enter this program to prepare them to navigate the academic,
social, and institutional barriers transfer students to Oregon State University
(OSU) face. During the Spring and Summer terms prior to transfer, students will
participate in program activities designed to address transfer shock and build
their cognate science knowledge and skills to lay the scaffolding for success in
upper-level coursework. Using an existing network developed through earlier
efforts, LBOS-GeoBridge will involve the student with a cohort and support
system that is based on a mentored research project. Recruitment for this
project will not be GPA-based but will focus on at risk transfers who meet the
entrance requirements for OSU, many of whom are underrepresented. Our prior
efforts suggest that with opportunity and access, these students can perform as
well as their more privileged peers, and part of our research will be to assess
if intervention at this critical juncture leads to future success in upper-level
geoscience coursework, degree completion, and employment in the geoscience
workforce.