* 1600641
* Reactive Processes, Mixing, and Fluid Dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2016,09/30/2016
* Andrej Zlatos, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Edward Taylor
* 09/30/2016
* USD 120,000.00

Reactive processes such as forest fires, nuclear reactions in stars, or burning
in internal combustion engines are ubiquitous in nature, science, and
engineering. Mixing due to motion of a liquid or gaseous medium in which
reactive processes occur is frequently an important component in their dynamics,
and is also relevant to other processes, such as reliable manufacturing of
glasses and alloys. This motion may be subject to fluid turbulence, the effects
of which are of paramount importance in many areas of physics and engineering.
The central aim of this project is a better understanding of the long term
behavior of these physical processes through the analytical study of their
mathematical models, which are expressed in the form of partial differential
equations. The main questions addressed will be the question of dependence of
the speed of spreading of reactive processes on the properties and structure of
combustive media in which they occur; the question of how an underlying mixing
process can enhance this speed and which types of mixing are most efficient at
achieving this; and the question of spontaneous development of turbulence and
unexpected singular behaviors in the motion of fluids. The goal is to obtain
mathematically rigorous results which can also shed further light on the
dynamical behavior of the actual physical processes being modeled.

This research project studies mathematical models of several important physical
processes, which include reactive processes, fluid dynamics, and mixing. The
models are given by linear and nonlinear partial differential equations, in
particular, by reaction-diffusion equations, transport equations, and equations
of fluid dynamics. The main interest is in the long term dynamics of their
solutions as well as in the formation of singularities. The goal of the
reaction-diffusion portion of the project is the understanding and description
of long term dynamics of reactive processes spreading through inhomogeneous
media in one and several dimensions, including existence of traveling fronts,
asymptotic convergence of general solutions to them, and homogenization of
solutions in random media. The goal of the mixing portion of the project is the
study of mixing efficiency of flows and the search for those which are best at
mixing substances advected by them. The goal of the fluid dynamics portion of
the project is the study of turbulence, particularly creation of small scales
and finite time singularity formation in models of fluid and atmospheric motion
in two dimensions. Another goal of the research is the study of active
combustion, where all three of these processes come together due to a direct
feedback of the reaction on fluid motion via the buoyancy force. Models
incorporating such feedback involve reaction-diffusion equations coupled to
fluid dynamics equations, and the focus will be on existence and stability of
traveling fronts and on gravity-induced mixing. To address these questions, the
research will make use of techniques recently developed by the investigator and
collaborators, as well as the development of new methods capable of further
advancing understanding of the dynamical behavior of reactive processes.