* 1600139
* Collaborative Research: Calderon-Zygmund Operators in Highly Irregular Environments, and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2021
* Serguei Treil, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 05/31/2021
* USD 390,000.00

Calderon-Zygmund operators are mathematical objects that play an important role
in the understanding of many physical phenomena, ranging from heat transfer to
turbulence in dynamical systems. The classical theory of these operators was
designed to work on smooth functions. However, nature often provides us with
very irregular media with which to engage. This creates the need for a very low-
regularity form of the theory of singular integrals, which the principal
investigators on this project have constructed. A consequence of the low-
regularity theory is that through the action of Calderon-Zygmund operators on a
set in a Euclidean space of a very high dimension, one can sometimes conclude
that the set itself is of a much lower dimension than the ambient space, an
important piece of information from the perspective of data science. To refine
this approach to data analysis is one of the main goals of this project.

This project considers several problems in nonhomogeneous harmonic analysis,
geometric measure theory, and spectral theory. The common theme uniting the
problems is the behavior of singular operators with very good (Calderon-Zygmund)
kernels in very bad environments (e.g., on sets with no a priori structure, in
spaces with matrix weights). Specifically, the project will pursue the following
avenues of research: (1) the David-Semmes problem to characterize the
rectifiability of sets and measures in high-dimensional Euclidean space in terms
of the boundedness of the corresponding Riesz transforms; (2) the geometry of
reflection-less measures; (3) the geometric characterization of higher-
dimensional analogues of positive analytic capacity; (4) two-weight estimates
for very simple singular operators in the non-Hilbert setting; and (5) sharp
estimates for classical operators with matrix weights. Singular integral
operators with respect to bad measures and very irregular sets appear naturally
in many problems of analysis. One of the reasons for their increasing interest
in recent years has been the study of analytic capacity. While the theory for
the two-dimensional case (i.e., the Cauchy transform on the complex plane) and
the theory of analytic capacity that emerged as its by-product are now very well
understood, the analogous theory in higher dimensions has not been fully
developed. The main roadblock here is the lack of geometric tools in higher
dimensions. Additionally, in higher dimensions, nonhomogeneous situations arise
more often than in the plane and more often one might expect. For example,
boundary value problems in (otherwise smooth) domains with cusps lead to
nonhomogeneous problems, because, unlike what happens in the two-dimensional
setting, surface measure on the boundary of such a domain is non-doubling. This
becomes an even more vexing problem if one wants to consider harmonic measure
estimates for domains on whose boundaries "surface measure" is practically
arbitrary. This is an important issue that the project seeks to confront.