* 1600763
* Digitization PEN: The addition of OrthopNet to SCAN
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Jon Gelhaus, Academy of Natural Sciences Philadelphia
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 06/30/2019
* USD 174,861.00

The insect collection of the Academy of Natural Sciences of Drexel University
holds one of the world's most important collections of grasshoppers. The Academy
proposes to digitize and make accessible information associated with
approximately 54,000 of its grasshopper specimens from the southwestern United
States. These data will benefit the general public and research scientists, as
they will facilitate the understanding of grasshopper distribution, the
identification of pest species and species new to science, and contribute to
understanding how species respond to environmental change. Field notebooks
documenting geographic and associated species information will be scanned and
made available on the World Wide Web. The notebooks are important beyond the
specimen information they contain. They include observations from the early 20th
century regarding vegetation, climate, land use, animal communities, native
peoples and their life styles. This information potentially informs other
disciplines including ecology, history and anthropology. This project
establishes a collaborative framework involving Academy researchers, college
students, and high school students, including individuals from groups under-
represented in STEM, with an interest in the biodiversity
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Academy of Natural Sciences of Drexel
University (ANSP) has partnered with the Symbiota Collections of Arthropods
Network (SCAN) as a Partner to an Existing Network (PEN) to build OrthopNet. The
OrthopNet project will capture specimen level data from approximately 54,000
specimens of southwestern Acrididae (grasshoppers) and serve this data to SCAN.
These data will aid in understanding grasshopper distributions, identify pest
species and species new to science, and inform global biodiversity issues. The
Academy of Natural Sciences is the oldest natural history museum in the
Americas, founded in 1812. The Academy's Acrididae (grasshopper) collection is
one of the best and most comprehensive in the world. The targeted collection was
accrued by Academy researchers surveying grasshoppers in the southwestern United
States starting in the early 1900s. The Academy's archives also contain field
notebooks associated with these southwestern US collecting expeditions. These
documents will be imaged following the Smithsonian Libraries Macaw metadata
collection protocol, and hosted on the World Wide Web by the Biodiversity
Heritage Library. Mining these notebooks for additional locality information
will aid in georeferencing specimen records, linking field notes and other
specimen information, further enhancing the value of the collection. The
historical information obtained from the field notebooks will inform other
disciplines including ecology, history and anthropology. Funding for Academy
researchers, university students, and underserved high school students is also
provided. Products generated from the project will be available at
http://symbiota4.acis.ufl.edu/scan/portal/.