* 1600728
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   Investigating species interactions across 15,000 years of extinctions and invasions: an isotopic approach
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2016,03/31/2018
* Elizabeth Hadly, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 03/31/2018
* USD 20,464.00

The highways and shipping routes that crisscross our planet are eroding the
boundaries that once separated biological communities by introducing non-native
species. These invasive species have come at an economic and ecological cost for
the US, harming agriculture, fisheries, and our iconic landscapes. On islands,
these invaders are even more detrimental, often competing with or eating native
species to the brink of extinction and thus irreversibly damaging biodiversity
hotspots. In this project, researchers will take an innovative approach to
understand the consequences of invasive species by combining data from
15,000-year-old fossils and modern specimens alike. Using fossils excavated in
the Dominican Republic, researchers will reconstruct the ecological interactions
of native mammal species (such as sloths, monkeys, and rodents) before and after
the arrival of prehistoric humans (6,000 years ago), as well as after the
arrival of Europeans (500 years ago) and the invasive species that accompanied
them. A baseline of how native species respond to extinction will provide
context for understanding where invasive species fit within the modern
ecosystem. For example, do invasive herbivores such as goats consume vegetation
similar to what was consumed by extinct native sloths? This research integrates
paleontology with conservation science to directly inform ecosystem restoration
efforts. The lessons learned from this research will be broadly applicable to
species invasions on islands and continents alike. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
researchers excavated a cave deposit extending from the modern day back across
the Late Pleistocene-Holocene transition, a period known globally for climatic
changes and megafaunal extinctions. This fossil record provides ecological
snapshots of species interactions through evolutionary time. Using stratigraphic
layers and radiocarbon dating, the researchers will establish a temporal
framework for the fossil remains, describing which mammalian species were
present at what time periods in the past. This chronology permits researchers to
test ecological hypotheses of how species respond to environmental and
anthropogenic perturbations through time. Food webs, species interactions, and
changes in resource use can be reconstructed using stable isotopes of carbon and
nitrogen. Through applying these isotopes, researchers will assess the trophic
position and niche breadth of each native species in response to extinction and
invasion events, thereby testing broad ecological concepts such as competitive
release and niche contraction. They will also evaluate the longstanding
assumption that invasive species have wider niche breadths relative to native
species in the ecosystems they invade.