* 1600188
* Relativistic Gravitation and Astrophysics
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Clifford Will, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 08/31/2019
* USD 200,002.00

The recent detections of gravitational waves by the LIGO observatories in the
USA have demonstrated a new way of "hearing" the universe using ripples in
spacetime, and have provided stunning new tests of Einstein's theory of general
relativity. Observations by astronomers of the motions of stars and gas near
supermassive black holes, such as the one at the center of the Milky Way, have
opened the possibility of testing Einstein's theory in realms where the warping
of spacetime is extreme. Yet in order to test Einstein's great theory, it is
essential to know what it actually predicts for real measurements. This project
continues a program of research to provide concrete links between the abstract
beauty and complex mathematics of Einstein's theory and the real world where
measurements are made by physicists and astronomers. These links are established
by finding approximate, yet accurate solutions of the equations in forms that
are practical and usable. The solutions developed in this research will be used
by data experts at the gravitational-wave observatories to perform better tests
of general relativity using newly detected signals, and will be used by
astronomers to probe how the warped spacetime near massive black holes affects
stars orbiting such objects. Einstein's theory is a topic that fascinates the
general public, and the PI will continue to give public lectures on topics
related to this research, bringing understanding of Einstein's ideas to the
broader community.

Specifically, this project will contribute to the ability of ground-based
gravitational-wave observatories such as the LIGO-Virgo network to test general
relativity, by computing the equations of motion for binary star systems, along
with the emitted gravitational waveforms, as predicted by an important
alternative theory, known as scalar-tensor gravity, to high accuracy in the so-
called post-Newtonian approximation. It will provide accurate waveforms
predicted by this theory in a format that can be adapted to LIGO-Virgo data
analysis methods. The approach extends a method known as Direct Integration of
the Relaxed Einstein Equations that has been developed over many years by the PI
and his collaborators. The possibility of testing general relativity in the
vicinity of the massive black hole in the center of our galaxy using future
infrared telescopes, proposed by the PI in 2008, will be investigated further.
The effects of general relativity on the structure and long-term evolution of
clusters of stars around massive black holes will be studied using analytic
means based on the post-Newtonian approximation.