* 1600803
* CAREER:  Closing the Loop on Walking:  From Hybrid Systems to Bipedal Robots to Prosthetic Devices and Back
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Aaron Ames, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 05/31/2016
* USD 135,144.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant provides funding for
contributions to the foundations of hybrid systems through the
anthropomorphically motivated study of dynamic walking of bipedal robots, with a
special focus on behavior unique to hybrid systems and applications to
prosthesis design.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Bipedal walking is a quintessential
example of complex dynamically stable behavior. Hybrid systems---systems with
both continuous and discrete behavior---provide a modeling paradigm in which to
capture the behavior of highly complex systems, resulting in new phenomena not
found in continuous and discrete systems. Bipedal walking robots are naturally
modeled as hybrid systems, and it is the confluence of these two areas---bipedal
walking and hybrid systems---that affords a unique opportunity to further the
understanding of each of these areas. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project uses
studies of human walking to obtain accurate and anthropomorphic hybrid models of
bipedal robots, designs control laws that yield human-like walking through the
use of geometric reduction, formally studies the stability and robustness of the
resulting hybrid systems, and uses this cumulative understanding of bipedal
walking to design prosthesis devices. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The applications of
the ideas underlying this project are far reaching, providing new research
directions in hybrid systems and a new understanding of the fundamental
mechanisms underlying walking. &lt;br/&gt;Applying this understanding to the
design of prosthesis devices could have a dramatic impact on the quality of life
of the millions of lower body extremity amputees. Furthermore, the
anthropomorphic nature of bipedal locomotion has wide appeal to people of all
ages and demographics, greatly facilitating outreach and education.