* 1600376
* GP-IMPACT:  Engagement of Students and Faculty at Community Colleges to Enhance Recruitment to 4-Year Geoscience Programs
* GEO,RISE
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2020
* Sally Horn, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 03/31/2020
* USD 415,988.00

This project addresses the need to expand and diversify the geoscience workforce
in the United States by developing a model partnership between the University of
Tennessee (UT) and three community colleges to improve recruiting and success of
students transferring from 2-year community colleges to 4-year geoscience
programs and geoscience careers. UT geoscience faculty are partnering with
geoscience faculty at Pellissippi State, Roane State, and Volunteer State
Community Colleges in east and middle Tennessee to offer enrichment activities,
including outdoor experiential learning and collaborative research that will
boost interest in the geosciences as a major and a career. Enrichment activities
include students and faculty from both types of institutions, along with recent
geoscience graduates from UT. These activities are helping community college
students develop support networks that can reduce the social barriers that are
often encountered when transferring to a large state university. Faculty mentors
at UT are advising community college students on transfer courses and connecting
them with research and internship opportunities. This project is expected to
lead to greater diversity in student populations in 4-year geoscience programs
at UT because of the more diverse student body found at the partner community
colleges. The colleges typically have higher percentages of first-generation
college students, rural students, and African-American students than UT. The
project may also lead to greater career success and economic benefits for
transfer students, because of the strong demand for professional geoscientists
and the relatively high salaries offered for these positions. The project is
expected to serve as a model for other partnerships between major research
universities and community colleges; lessons learned are being shared widely to
encourage and strengthen similar partnerships at other institutions and in other
science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM) disciplines.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this model partnership are to: a) increase
the number of community college students transferring to geoscience programs
(Geology and Physical Geography) at UT; b) improve the rate of success of
transfer students at UT, by getting them excited about geoscience education and
careers, and providing a higher level of university mentoring prior to their
transfer; and c) increase diversity in the 4-year geoscience programs at UT,
through effective recruiting from the more diverse pools of students that attend
area community colleges. UT faculty are working with their community college
partners to recruit students from introductory geology courses during their
freshman year. Approximately 15 community college students and 5 UT students are
invited to participate with faculty from the partner institutions in a 5-day
residential field geoscience workshop at the Great Smoky Mountains Institute at
Tremont each summer. The workshop includes experiential learning activities on
geoscience topics that are expected to resonate with freshman students,
including water quality, fossils, landslides, meteorology, and climate change.
Students who are engaged in the summer workshops are invited to participate in
additional enrichment activities during their sophomore year. These include
field trips to geologically significant sites in the region and visits to UT,
where community college students have opportunities to meet peers, tour research
labs, and be assigned a faculty mentor. Mentors provide information on course
transfers, scholarships, and career prospects, as well as help arrange research
or internship opportunities at UT, at the community colleges, or at other
locations, such as Oak Ridge National Laboratory. Through this project, the
community colleges are receiving enrichment funds and access to UT labs and
equipment for collaborative student research. UT and community college faculty
are also working with administrators to improve transfer procedures and methods
of tracking success of community college transfer students. The project
coincides with ongoing efforts at UT to improve institutional data on metrics of
success for transfer students. Faculty participants are guiding this effort to
ensure that aggregated institutional data are collected and presented in formats
that can be used by departments in planning revisions of curricula and in
developing more effective mentoring methods. The efforts to improve the
procedures for transfer students, together with the personal and professional
ties that are expected to develop between UT and community college faculty
members, will ensure that the impact of the project extends beyond the duration
of funding and leads to enduring institutional change. Evaluation activities
will help build the evidence base regarding what practices are most effective
for developing partnerships to improve community college student recruitment,
transfer and success in 4-year geoscience programs.