* 1600117
* EAGER: Cultural Produced Resources for Resilience
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2016,08/31/2018
* Charles Price, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 08/31/2018
* USD 24,967.00

One of the more challenging scientific questions for anthropologists and
psychologists has been whether resources that human beings draw upon for their
survival and resilience are situationally and culturally specific, or conform to
universal patterns. One way to test this question is by asking whether there are
temporal or spatial differences among a group of individuals with respect to
their resilience to similar stressors. This exploratory project examines whether
the development of cultural (collectively produced) resources and practices for
resilience vary geographically and across generations. Having a better
scientific explanation for the variables that influence resilience will help
scholars and policymakers understand whether these systems are sustainable or
dangerously stressed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Charles Price and Dr. Dorothy
Holland of the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill will explore elicit,
record, and analyze the cultural resources that African-American men in the
United States use to enable their resilience in managing the difficulties that
emerge from socioeconomic inequality. Resources for resilience are defined as
the cultural knowledge, strategies, identities, people, and institutional
supports that Black men summon to negotiate what they see as challenges to their
well-being. The researchers will employ life narrative interviews, prompted
group discussions, participant observation, ethnographic community-based tours,
and personal document elicitation to document this knowledge and to determine
where the men learned or developed these resources. The study will focus on
comparative cohorts of young and older Black men from Hartford, Connecticut, and
Greensboro, North Carolina. The research is collaborative, engaging study
participants in the development of research questions, and is designed to answer
social scientific questions about the importance of race and identity in
African-American men's resilience and about the extent to which cultural
resources are historically and spatially specific. Ultimately, the research
should advance our understanding of resilience and race in the United States. A
social scientific purpose of immediate application is to determine whether Black
men's individual and collective know-how for resilience can be identified and
supported. In addition to broadening the participation of underrepresented
groups in the sciences, the responds to emergent interests in durable
inequalities and race in the United States, exemplified by My Brother's Keeper
Task Force Report to the President (2014), and innumerable nonprofit
initiatives. The research will aid researchers and stakeholders in understanding
the generational, spatial, and cultural nature of resilience in relation to
Black men during current times. The research will produce knowledge useful to
government agencies, scholars, and educational and clinical practitioners.