* 1600422
* Spectral Theory of Periodic and Quasiperiodic Quantum Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2016,10/31/2017
* Ilya Kachkovskiy, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Edward Taylor
* 10/31/2017
* USD 67,974.00

The main goals of this research project are to develop and study mathematical
models of quantum particles in periodic and quasiperiodic media, such as
crystals or quasicrystals, based on spectral theory of Schrodinger operators.
Periodic media correspond to crystalline structures, such as metals or
semiconductors, which can conduct electrons freely at certain energies. It is
proposed to study mathematically rigorous models of electron transport near the
edges of the "forbidden zones" and develop new approaches to the effective mass
approximation. Quasiperiodic operators are examples of disordered systems which,
depending on the regime, can look like pure crystals, or crystals with random
impurities, while being completely deterministic. One of the models under study
demonstrates random-like behavior at arbitrarily small disorder and can
potentially be a suitable replacement for a random environment without having to
employ a large parameter space. Special emphasis will be given to multi-
dimensional and multi-particle models, with possible applications to quantum
spin systems and quantum information theory. The project provides research
opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
activities of this research project fall into several groups distinguished by
the classes of the operators under study and the types of their spectra. In the
area of Anderson localization for quasiperiodic operators ("random-like
behavior"), the project studies multi-particle models with analytic potentials
at perturbatively large disorder and low regularity models, with the latter
results expected to be non-perturbative. The methods here include operator
theory, harmonic analysis, real algebraic geometry, and large deviation theorems
for subharmonic or piecewise-monotonic functions. In the area of absolutely
continuous spectrum ("crystalline behavior"), the project investigates the
relation between low regularity reducibility of Schrodinger cocycles and strong
ballistic transport for the corresponding Schrodinger operators, which, in turn,
is related to transport properties of quantum spin systems. In the area of
periodic operators, it is intended to study possible singularities of the Bloch
varieties at the edges of spectral bands, both in 2D and 3D cases. Finally, on
the more abstract side, the project aims to develop a quantitative
classification of almost commuting matrices in topologically non-trivial cases,
which demonstrates connections both with Cantor spectra for quasiperiodic
operators and with some quantum spin systems.