* 1600220
* Conference on Advances in Geometric Representation Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2017
* Thomas Nevins, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 02/28/2017
* USD 35,000.00

The conference "Advances in geometric representation theory" will be held May
8-13, 2016 at the University of Michigan. Geometric representation theory is the
study of symmetry via geometric spaces. It is an expanding branch of mathematics
with wide-reaching applications and connections to other fields. The timing of
the conference has been chosen in anticipation of the first results emerging
from the 2014 program in geometric representation theory at the Mathematical
Sciences Research Institute in Berkeley, as well as intensive semester programs
in Canada and Sweden. The conference will provide a venue to disseminate major
new results in this rapidly developing field of mathematics and make the
corresponding new methods and points of view available to a broad range of
researchers. In particular, the organizers will make specific efforts to include
graduate students and post-docs, as well as members of underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Classically, problems of classification of
representations have been attacked with a wide variety of algebraic, analytic,
and combinatorial methods. Since the more recent discovery of equivalences with
geometric objects such as D-modules, the door has been opened to the application
of powerful tools from geometry, such as Hodge theory and the decomposition
theorem. The conference will focus on these recent developments. New categorical
techniques and relationships to physics and algebraic geometry will draw the
participation of researchers from those fields, which will contribute to further
interdisciplinary interactions. The conference website is http://www-
personal.umich.edu/~snkitche/Conference/.