* 1600458
* Counteracting flatness with affine measures and related problems in harmonic analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2019
* Betsy Stovall, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 05/31/2019
* USD 180,000.00

The field of harmonic analysis grew out of an effort to study and encode natural
signals by breaking them into their fundamental parts. In this project, the
principal investigator will endeavor to understand, in a quantitative way, the
effects of curvature on such decompositions. For example, in medical imaging,
X-rays are passed through a body, and one reconstructs the density function of
the body by measuring how much of the X-radiation is absorbed or scattered.
Mathematically, this process is represented by an operator, known as the X-ray
transform, which averages functions along straight-line paths. The principal
investigator is working on a project that seeks to understand what happens when
averages are taken along curved paths. It is known that sufficient curvature of
the paths leads to greater stability of the output, and the project aims to
quantify the stabilizing effect in an intermediate case where the paths are
curved, but may have flat regions. As another example, the Fourier transform
expresses a natural signal as a superposition of constant velocity waves. If the
velocities lie on a plane, then they are all aligned, and, like ocean waves
formed by a steady breeze, the signal does not decay. But if the wave velocities
lie on a curved surface, such as the surface of a ball, then there is some
decay. Precisely measuring this decay is an important question in harmonic
analysis, the answer to which is unknown. The principal investigator's research
lies at the interface between these situations, when the velocities lie on a
surface that is nearly planar in some regions and curved in others, and she
seeks to precisely quantify the rate of decay. Such questions have potential
implications to partial differential equations that arise in the study of
quantum mechanics.

The principal investigator will study curvature-related problems arising in
Euclidean harmonic analysis, as well as some applications to dispersive partial
differential equations. This work will encompass three directions. One is to
prove new, curvature-independent bounds for the restriction of the Fourier
transform to manifolds whose curvature vanishes along some nonempty set; another
is to prove analogous results for averaging operators; finally, she will study
extremizer problems and concentration compactness techniques, some having
applications to partial differential equations. As part of this project, the
principal investigator will organize conferences to facilitate the dissemination
of mathematical knowledge and will make a dedicated effort to improve graduate
training in harmonic analysis and to increase the participation of
underrepresented groups, especially women.