* 1600313
* Democratizing Access to the Technology of Neuroscience
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2022
* Terrence Sejnowski, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Angel Garcia
* 08/31/2022
* USD 1,510,780.00

The success of the BRAIN initiative will depend on widespread access to the
technological advancements, computational tools, and data sets created by the
initiative. However, there are no existing mechanisms for providing national
access to the increasingly technologically and computationally oriented
investigations of the brain. The barriers to entry are both financial and
structural: not only is technologically intensive neuroscience costly, it
requires an investment in physics, engineering and computer science beyond the
scope of individual laboratories. This prevents the community's efficient
utilization of current technological capabilities and limits the questions and
hypotheses that will drive the next generation of innovation. Thus there is a
need to counteract the widening gap between the small fraction of laboratories
developing and utilizing the most recent technology and the remaining majority
of neuroscientists. The successful removal of the gap will require a
sophisticated national clearing house to ensure that the correct physics,
engineering, and computer science tools are vetted and freely accessible for
measurements of brain structure and functions. Successful accomplishment of
these goals will require an iterative process whereby specific needs of the
neuroscience community will be identified and either paired with the appropriate
scientific, technological and computational resources or pipelined for potential
future innovation. The model for the operation of this project will be a user
facility, housed at Argonne National Laboratory (ANL), and leveraging the
existing resources of their science facilities. This award provides funding for
seed grants for infrastructure development, conferences, education, and
outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team will enlist the Physics of Living
Systems community, most specifically the young scientists therein, to join the
neuroscience research effort by connecting to the graduate research network led
by the NSF Physics Frontier Center for Theoretical Biological Physics. In order
to engage and train a broad community, several annual conferences will be held
that will cover a broad range of topics in imaging and quantitative
neuroscience. The team will augment the program run by the UC Neuroscience
Institute to teach Neuroscience to local 7th/4th graders. Almost all of the
students in the target schools are African American and live in the local South
Side community. ANL will partner with this endeavor by support through its own
educational programs, but for the first time broaching the technology of
neuroscience.