* 1600701
* Structure of Mappings in Several Complex Variables and Cauchy-Riemann Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2021
* Peter Ebenfelt, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2021
* USD 194,454.00

The study of invariant geometries is an important part of mathematics. Different
types of invariant geometries arise in different areas of mathematics, e.g., in
several complex variables (SCV), partial differential equations (PDE), and
algebraic, complex, and differential geometry. In this research project, the
principal investigator Peter Ebenfelt will investigate a particular geometry
that arises in the study of SCV, and which has also deep connections with
contemporary topics in mathematical physics such as quantum field theory and
string theory, as well as applications in, e.g., systems engineering and control
theory. Tools that are needed for this study come from a variety of different
areas in mathematics, such as complex analysis, PDE, and differential geometry,
and the techniques and tools developed in this study influence these areas as
well. Ebenfelt expects that the project will also provide interesting research
topics for graduate students and postdocs. The seminar activity that results
from the project should be stimulating for both students and other
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this mathematics research project
by Peter Ebenfelt is to study geometric, analytic, and algebraic aspects of
generic real submanifolds in complex varieties (more generally, of Cauchy-
Riemann (CR) structures) and their mappings. Ebenfelt will consider questions
regarding existence, uniqueness, and regularity of CR maps, as well as related
questions that arise in connection with this study. He will consider the context
of CR maps of a Levi nondegenerate hypersurface into a nondegenerate
hyperquadric of higher dimension. This study will enhance our understanding of
the CR submanifold structure of the hyperquadrics, which constitute the flat
models in the theory of Levi nondegenerate hypersurfaces. The proposed work
should also provide insight into how the local CR geometry of such hypersurfaces
(in principle completely encoded in the CR curvature tensor) affects various
properties, such as notions of nondegeneracy and rigidity, of their CR maps.
Ebenfelt will also continue his study of CR maps between generic submanifolds of
infinite type by investigating the prolongation of the system defining CR maps
to a singular Pfaffian system on the jet bundle. He will, in particular, focus
on understanding the recently discovered phenomenon that for infinite type
hypersurfaces the biholomorphic, formal, and smooth CR equivalence
classifications are different. He will also study a conjecture regarding finite
jet determination of local automorphisms. These investigations are expected to
shed new light on the nature of CR maps between infinite type manifolds, and
lead to a better understanding of the Pfaffian systems arising in this context.
Ebenfelt will also continue his work on normal forms for infinite type
hypersurfaces in complex 2-space. Finally, Ebenfelt will study CR invariants on
unit circle bundles over Kähler manifolds, specifically Cartan's umbilical
tensor in the 3-dimensional case and those arising in the expansions of the
Bergman and Szegö kernels. He intends to develop new methods for detecting
umbilical points on general 3-dimensional CR manifolds, and resolve an open
problem regarding existence of umbilical points on compact CR manifolds embedded
in complex 2-space.