* 1600965
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   The evolution of major life-history transitions: a transcriptomic analysis of developmental shifts in echinoids
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2018
* Richard Grosberg, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 05/31/2018
* USD 20,258.00

This project will investigate the genetic basis of alternate types of larval
development. Many ocean-dwelling animal species have a free-living larval stage,
which is generally one of two major types. They are either long-lived, feeding
larvae that develop over the course of months to years, or short-lived, non-
feeding larvae that develop in a matter of hours to days. Larval type (feeding
or non-feeding) has many important ecological and evolutionary ramifications, as
it influences the size of species' ranges, connections between populations, and
the potential for speciation and extinction. Although evolutionary transitions
from feeding to non-feeding larvae occur frequently, we know little about the
genetic changes that underlie these transitions. This project will test the
hypothesis that larval development type depends upon certain maternal effects:
messenger RNA (mRNA) in the eggs. The researchers will collect mRNA sequencing
data from eggs of sand dollar and sea biscuit species to determine if differing
developmental types are associated with different maternal mRNA. In addition,
the project will support the training of minority undergraduate researchers and
the creation of a public exhibit at a nature center.

Preliminary research on two closely related species of echinoderm sea biscuits,
which exhibit different larval developmental modes, demonstrated that larval
developmental patterns are strongly driven by maternal factors. Although such
maternal effects also drive the developmental patterns of larvae in several
other systems, the underlying cause of this maternal effect remains unclear.
This project will test the novel hypothesis that the strong maternal effect on
development is due to differences in maternally deposited mRNA. The researchers
will sequence the maternally deposited mRNA from unfertilized eggs of several
closely related species pairs of sand dollars and sea biscuits that have
alternate larval types. These data will also be used to create a time-calibrated
phylogeny to correct for phylogenetic signal. Using these data, the project will
determine how maternally deposited mRNA differs in eggs of feeding and non-
feeding echinoderm larvae, and how those differences influence the evolution of
alternate developmental pathways.