* 1600554
* Renormalization: From One- to Two-Dimensional Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Marco Martens, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 08/31/2019
* USD 180,001.00

Dynamics studies time evolution of systems. The areas of application range from
the solar system, global weather on earth, to the future and past of the cosmos
and everything between. Although there is an enormous variety of systems, one
often observes common features. The role of mathematics in dynamics can be found
not only in fundamental contributions to geometrical and probabilistic aspects
of dynamics but also in concrete algorithms for predictions. We are still very
far from a global understanding of dynamics. Generally speaking we only
understand the dynamics of real world systems by numerical simulations. Refined
theories are only available in specific and relatively simple systems. The
degree of complexity one can expect increases with the number of observables
involved and the dimension of the system. Among the most refined areas of
dynamics are those where the underling space is an interval or the real line.
This is what is called "one-dimensional dynamics". Although one-dimensional
dynamics is the simplest of the simplest, the one-dimensional theory is
extremely rich. The central tool in one-dimensional dynamics is renormalization.
It connects the combinatorial structure of the system with its geometrical and
probabilistic behavior. One step up, is the theory of two-dimensional dynamics
where the underlying space is the Euclidean plane or a piece of it. This area of
research is still wide open. The main goal of this project is to introduce
renormalization into two-dimensional dynamics and to explore its consequences
for the development of a theory for two-dimensional
dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Henon maps play a crucial role in understanding
transitions observed in general smooth dynamics. The most famous example is the
transition to chaos in dissipative dynamics. Renormalization plays the central
role in understanding these transitions. This has been fully developed for
general one-dimensional dynamics and for the transition to chaos in two
dimensional dissipative dynamics. This success of renormalization inspired this
project. The main goal of the research is to extend the period doubling
renormalization theory. In particular, it will introduce Generalized
Renormalization which is able to describe systems with general combinatorial
structure and the corresponding transitions observed in Henon families.
Secondly, it will continue the development of a theory for the dynamics of Henon
maps at transition to chaos. Renormalization theory gives us invaluable insights
into universality features of dynamical and parameter-regions. It should become
an intrinsic part a comprehensive picture of two-dimensional dynamics.