* 1600705
* Conference: Harmonic Analysis, Complex Analysis, Spectral Theory and All That
* MPS,DMS
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2016
* Tadeusz Iwaniec, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kitchens
* 12/31/2016
* USD 49,200.00

The conference "Harmonic Analysis, Complex Analysis, Spectral Theory and All
That" will be held at The Mathematical Research and Conference Center (MRCC) in
Bedlewo, Poland, July 31-August 6, 2016. The conference enter belongs to the
Institute of Mathematics of Polish Academy of Sciences - International Banach
Center. It is expected that about 100 participants will come from Canada,
Finland, France, Germany, Israel, Norway, Poland, Spain, Russia, Sweden, USA and
other countries. A significant number, about 30, of the participants will be PhD
students and postdoctoral fellows. One of the aims of the conference is to bring
graduate students to geometric harmonic analysis where there are a wide range of
applications. The conference organizers aim to reach the critical mass of young
scholars, women and men, that will intensify interdisciplinary interaction
already in their post-doc phase with senior researchers.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This conference, in major part, focusses on recent advances in
harmonic and complex analysis with numerous connections and important
applications in mind. The aim is to strongly promote linkages between the modern
theory of 2D-geometric analysis (in its various manifestations, including
holomorphic dynamics, inverse conductivity problems, partial differential
equations, geometric measure theory calculus of variations, fractal geometry)
with other possible developments, thereby bringing new ideas and results to each
field. The organizing committee's background and experience affirm those
goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More information can be found on the conference
website: http://bcc.impan.pl/16Harmonic/