* 1600320
* RAPID:   The Effects of Civic Education and Electoral Observation on Voters During Violent Elections
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2019
* Tsering Youdon, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 07/31/2019
* USD 184,974.00

Politicians in democratizing countries often use violent tactics to win
elections. This project investigates whether democracy promotion programs
typically supported by international donors like the United States - namely,
civic education and election observation - can affect citizens' democratic
attitudes and political behaviors in countries where violence has become a
routine part of the electoral process. This is the context found in C么te
d'Ivoire, which will be holding its first presidential elections since a civil
war erupted after the previous election results were disputed. In the run-up to
the presidential election, the project will be collaborating with the Coalition
of Civil Society for Peace and Democratic Development (COSOPCI) to conduct a
civic education program in selected communities in four regions of C么te
d'Ivoire. The project will conduct a survey among voters both before and after
the election to assess how their perceptions of the election's credibility,
their assessment of parties that employ violence, and their willingness to vote
are shaped by exposure to civic education and electoral
observation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study has the potential to advance social
science research on the relationship between political violence and mass support
for democracy. There is little research that explains how electoral violence
affects citizens and whether programmatic interventions can mediate how citizens
engage with violent electoral processes. The project will test experimental
treatments through a panel survey among randomly selected voters across both
treated and control communities. Conducting a panel survey with experimental
components before and after the election will enable us to assess whether
citizen perceptions vary systematically with exposure to the civic education
program conducted in randomly selected communities as well as to gauge whether
the treatment effects persist after the election. Additionally, the panel survey
will include experimental treatments that randomly vary information concerning
the presence of election observers as well as information from local observers'
assessment of the election. To our knowledge, this study will be among the first
to assess whether interventions like civic education and election observation
might interact in shaping important outcomes such as citizens' engagement in the
electoral process and political support for perpetrators of violence. In
addition, this study has the potential to provide new insights to help
policymakers reevaluate democracy-building programs in violence-prone countries.
Understanding how violence affects citizen behavior - and how such behavior
might be influenced by civic education - may enable policymakers to craft
interventions better suited to enhancing support for democracy in such
countries. Toward that end, the principal investigators will seek to disseminate
our findings by publishing them in political science and policy-related
journals, conducting seminars with policymakers and civil society stakeholders
in the United States and C么te d'Ivoire, including providing radio interviews in
C么te d'Ivoire, and making the data produced publicly available.