* 1600353
* GP EXTRA:  Geoscience Educational Opportunities and Career-Oriented Research Experiences (GEOCORE)
* GEO,RISE
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2020
* Marianne McNamara, Suffolk Community College
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 03/31/2020
* USD 298,688.00

Despite regional and national demand for geoscience graduates at all workforce
entry points, educational institutions have struggled to increase enrollment,
leading to only 240 individuals earning an associate's and only 3,800 earning a
bachelor's degree out of roughly 28,000 enrolled undergraduates nationwide
(American Geoscience Institute, Status of Recent Geoscience Graduates 2013).
Currently accounting for over 50% of the nation's undergraduate population,
community colleges are a crucial pipeline to the geosciences workforce. However,
several barriers impact the recruitment, retention, and graduation of community
college geosciences majors, including the diverse nature of students with
respect to academic preparedness, economic standing, sense of support and
awareness of career opportunities - making recruitment and persistence
challenging for two-year geoscience programs. To meet the employment demand, an
increased number of students must enroll, persist and graduate from two-year
geosciences programs. Suffolk County Community College (SCCC) proposes to
address barriers to entry to geoscience careers through a new program, entitled
GEO CORE (Geoscience Educational Opportunities &amp; Career-Oriented Research
Experiences), which will expand evidence-based pedagogical concepts to
extracurricular activities in order to allow greater participation for majors
and prospective majors of geology, marine, and atmospheric sciences. This
project will build on ongoing collaborations by bringing the community college
together with three regional high schools, Stony Brook University, the National
Oceanic &amp; Atmospheric Administration, the U.S. Geological Survey and private
industry partners. This project seeks to increase enrollment and student success
in geosciences, particularly for students underrepresented in the discipline, by
enhancing student learning experiences, and increasing transfer rates and job
placements to support the regional workforce needs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Suffolk County Community College (SCCC) is developing a
new program entitled GEO CORE (Geoscience Educational Opportunities &amp;
Career-Oriented Research Experiences). This GEOPATH: EXTRA project will build on
ongoing STEM collaborations established through SCCC's highly successful, state-
funded Science &amp; Technology Entry and Liberty Partnerships programs, and its
NSF S-STEM Scholars Program, by bringing together three regional high schools,
Stony Brook University's Department of Geosciences and its School of Marine and
Atmospheric Science, the National Oceanic &amp; Atmospheric Administration, the
U.S. Geological Survey - Water Resources Division and private industry partners
to provide a pathways from high school to college and into the geoscience
workforce. The goals of the GEO CORE project are to: 1) increase enrollment
within the geosciences, particularly for students underrepresented in the
disciplines; 2) enhance student learning experiences and outcomes; and 3)
increase transfer rates and job placements to support regional workforce needs.
Through the GEO CORE program, SCCC is instituting the following collaborative
activities: 1) implementation of a summer institute for graduating high school
and first-year community college students led by geoscience professionals and
academics that incorporates research-oriented fieldwork experiences that
highlight the interconnection between the geosciences and the regional
environmental and economic concerns; 2) creating a GEO CORE Student Ambassador
Program which prepares and supports second-year geoscience students who serve as
peer mentors and academic tutors to foster success among first-year students; 3)
establishing a career-based training program that includes hazardous materials
training and certification to ensure that graduating geoscience students have
the skills necessary for immediate employment and/or success upon transfer to
four-year colleges and universities; 4) forming a community of practice for
professional and peer networking opportunities among government agencies,
industry, higher education institutions and high schools; and 5) encouraging the
integration of GEO CORE activities into high school classrooms to serve as a
bridge between secondary schools and the community college to help grow the
geoscience education pipeline. Project success is being measured by comparing
student outcomes to established baselines, and tracking the academic success,
graduation, transfer, research experiences and career advancement of each annual
cohort served by GEO CORE.