* 1600272
* On some problems of infinite-dimensional Hamiltonian type
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Adrian Tudorascu, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 07/31/2020
* USD 139,622.00

For the last quarter of a century or so, the theory of Optimal Transport (whose
initiator, Gaspard Monge, had a very particular application in mind, far more
limited in scope than what was to be discovered Optimal Transport could achieve)
has been one of the most dynamical areas of Mathematical Analysis, and the main
reason for that is its versatility in the analysis of certain large classes of
Partial Differential Equations (PDEs). The PI employs Optimal Transport to study
the Semi-Geostrophic System (and another, related model) arising from
Atmospheric Science, and which is now recognized as a powerful prediction tool
in Meteorology. Mathematical rigor is important for understanding predictability
of weather systems and informs decisions made in operational modeling. Also at
the center of this project is the analysis of the non-conventional (infinite-
dimensional) Hamilton-Jacobi equations arising from Mean Field Games; this has
applications to Economics and models interactions between large numbers of
players/agents whose individual effect on the system is
negligible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will focus on some systems of PDE from
Fluid Dynamics and Plasma Physics, and on Hamilton- Jacobi equations in metric
spaces of probability measures. The PI has done significant work on problems
arising from a need to further validate and analyze these mathematical models,
and the present proposal will outline plans to further investigate such issues.
Herein is a brief description of the proposed research. The Semi-Geostrophic
(SG) and SG-Shallow-Water equations are difficult to analyze, with the basic
question of existence of solutions in physical space still open. A physical
change of variables has transferred the problem to the so-called dual space, yet
pulling the solutions back to physical space has only very recently been
achieved and only in special cases (first Lagrangian, then Eulerian in an even
more restrictive setting, with little hope to extend the approach to the general
case). Instead, a weaker solution (relaxed Lagrangian solution) has recently
been obtained in full generality by the PI and a collaborator. Building on this
previous work, the PI lays out a plan to prove existence and weak stability of
weak Lagrangian solutions in full generality. Dimensional blow-up limits of
Hamilton-Jacobi equations in finite-dimensional spaces, or the limits of large
systems of such equations (as appearing in Mean Field Games) lead to Hamilton-
Jacobi equations in metric spaces of probability measures. Various notions of
differentiability in the Wasserstein space have been circulated, and it is
unclear how the corresponding notions of viscosity solutions are related. This
issue may come from a loose interpretation of what viscosity solution means in
this infinite-dimensional context. The PI will introduce the notion of
consistent Hamiltonian and argue, backed by examples from applications, its
ability to provide both uniqueness and a solid meaning for viscosity as related
to vanishing viscosity. The embedding of finite-dimensional Euclidean spaces
into the space of Borel probability measures used successfully by the PI in
earlier collaborative work has provided important insight into the asymptotics
of various PDE systems of nonstandard Hamiltonian type.