* 1600971
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   Phylogeny and evolutionary exploration of the C3-CAM phenotypic space in Calandrinia (Montiaceae)
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2017
* Erika Edwards, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 05/31/2017
* USD 20,792.00

Crassulacean Acid Metabolism (CAM) photosynthesis is a complex set of traits
that improves water use and photosynthetic efficiency in plants under drought
and temperature stress. Calandrinia (Montiaceae) is an ideal lineage in which to
investigate the evolutionary assembly of CAM photosynthesis. This research
integrates phylogenetics, anatomy, ecology, physiology, greenhouse experiments,
and gene expression studies to unravel the incremental assembly of CAM
photosynthesis in Calandrinia. In light of ongoing global change and the
increasing acidification of the global landscape (~40% of terrestrial Earth is
already considered arid, semi-arid or sub-humid), CAM photosynthesis will likely
play an important role in the future of carbon sequestration, sustainable
biomass production, and food-crop security. With such imminent change ahead, it
is more important than ever that we understand the evolutionary underpinnings of
CAM photosynthesis, which may guide current efforts to engineer this syndrome
into food and biofuel crops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will conduct a
comparative gene expression study across species that represent C3, CAM, and
CAM-intermediate types. They will use a comparative transcriptomic approach to
answer the following questions: 1) how does differential gene expression of key
CAM genes vary across the potentially intermediate types, 2) which gene copies
are being recruited into new CAM function, 3) are there parallel nucleotide/
amino acid changes in gene copies recruited to perform CAM, and 4) how can
transcriptome data help us to better differentiate and define these C3-CAM
intermediates? Results from this study will yield the first lineage-based model
of CAM evolution.