* 1600689
* Pathways for Alternative Energy Automotive Technicians
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2016,12/31/2019
* Steve Levin, Columbus State Community College
* Standard Grant
* John Jackman
* 12/31/2019
* USD 587,687.00

There is a growing need for well-educated highly skilled technicians with
practical knowledge of alternative energy automotive systems. The Columbus State
Community College (CSCC) "Pathways for Alternative Energy Automotive
Technicians" project addresses local workforce needs for technicians that are
knowledgeable about such systems. Given innovations in the automotive
alternative energy industry and the increased computerization of automotive
systems, the traditional training of automotive technicians must be updated to
equip them for today's industry needs. Areas of need include conventional
hybrid, plug-in hybrid, all-electric vehicle technologies as well as biodiesel,
propane, ethanol, compressed natural gas, liquefied natural gas, and fuel-cell
vehicles. This project will also address an impending workforce shortage among
automotive dealers in central Ohio who have a need for new 21st Century
technicians to meet an upcoming wave of retirement among today's mid-career
mechanics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the project, CSCC will be developing a new
career pathway and new curricula in Alternative Energy Automotive Technology
with the help of a dedicated industry-based leadership team. The rigorous
curriculum will include key topics from the sciences, automotive technology,
engineering and mathematics, all essential for the preparation of the future
technical workforce. As technicians must have strong hands-on diagnostic skills,
project-based learning will be employed liberally throughout the curriculum. In
addition to the new curricula at the college level, pre-college faculty will be
exposed to emerging trends in alternative energy automotive technology to aid
the recruitment of high school graduates. Additionally, from a safety
perspective, first responders will be trained to deal with hazardous aspects of
hybrid and alternative fuel technology. CSCC will be working in collaboration
with several partners in the region including Clean Fuels Ohio, the Center for
Automotive Research at The Ohio State University, local high school districts
and technical centers and industry partners. The project will build upon the
results of previously funded NSF project at the Center for Aviation and
Automotive Technical Education using Virtual E-School (CA2VES) at Clemson
University and the South Carolina Advanced Technological Education,
National&lt;br/&gt;Center (SCATE).