* 1600716
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Origins of alternate ecosystem states - effects of drought on postfire tree regeneration and shifting dominance of western conifers
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2017
* Monica Turner, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* karina schafer
* 05/31/2017
* USD 19,890.00

This doctoral dissertation research seeks to understand how drought following
wildfires affects the establishment of two widespread Rocky Mountain tree
species, lodgepole pine and Douglas-fir. In Yellowstone National Park, warming,
drying conditions are leading to increased frequency of severe wildfires that
kill existing trees and trigger regrowth of the forest. These trends are
expected to continue. Many tree species in Yellowstone are well adapted to fire.
Yet, early and abundant seedling establishment after fire is critical for
forests to recover. Tree seedlings are particularly sensitive to drought, and
evidence suggests that sufficiently dry postfire conditions could cause the
widespread death of tree-seedlings, with consequences that may last decades.
This research will determine how seedlings from two tree species respond to
drought conditions expected in the mid-21st century and will identify the
mechanisms that influence seedling response to dry conditions. The results of
this study will advance understanding of how forests in the western United
States will respond to environmental change over the coming decades and provide
useful information for western land managers who are grappling with increased
wildfires. In addition to providing important scientific knowledge, the study
will provide opportunities for undergraduate students to experience research in
the field of forest ecology. Researchers will also engage local residents of the
Greater Yellowstone area by presenting an exhibit of science art in local shops
that features photographs of the research. A handout will accompany the exhibit
that presents the study findings to residents, such as how changing forests may
influence recreational opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will
address the questions: How will 21st century drought alter postfire regeneration
of a widespread western conifer? Will future climate conditions favor an
alternate dominant tree species of non-forest cover? A greenhouse experiment
will be conducted, where a combination of projected growing season daily
temperature and soil-moisture conditions will be simulated to determine how
expected drought will influence rates of postfire tree-seedling establishment in
different soil types. The experiment will be conducted in a unique facility at
the University of Wisconsin-Madison in which environmental conditions can be
controlled at sub-daily resolutions, and the work will complement an ongoing
field-based experiment in Yellowstone. Results will be integrated into process-
based models to explore consequences of drought and increased fire activity at
landscape and regional scales.