* 1600669
* CNS: CSR: Small: Runtime System, Architecture, and Technology Codesign Approach for Heterogeneous Many-Core Processors and Clusters
* CSE,CNS
* 08/21/2015,08/31/2016
* Nam Sung Kim, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2016
* USD 222,526.00

The performance of computers has improved tremendously in the past four decades,
which has enabled innumerable applications that have major roles in our daily
lives. However, without dramatic innovations in improving performance and power
efficiency of computing, the continued semiconductor device scaling alone will
fail to provide computing capabilities needed for future applications. One of
the main performance bottlenecks of traditional computing systems has been the
high cost of communications between central processing unit (CPU) and graphics
processing unit (GPU). The on-chip integration of CPU and GPU dramatically
reduces the cost of communications, but it also worsens power, thermal, and
bandwidth issues for chip design. Nonetheless, it also allows new approaches to
be explored that previously were not practical. Given the potential and
challenges of on-chip integrated CPU+GPU processors, this project undertakes a
multidisciplinary effort to improve performance and power efficiency of
computers. Specifically, the project aims to (i) develop runtime algorithms for
scheduling workload and memory accesses under power, thermal, bandwidth
constraints; (ii) explore micoarchitectures for improving memory system
performance under bandwidth constraints; and (iii) optimize heterogeneous
technology choices for integrated CPU+GPU processors.

This project is expected to have significant impact on the technology, circuit,
architecture, and runtime system communities, and it is leading to state-of-the-
art research infrastructure. The project also contributes state-of-the art
workforce training. The outcomes of this project benefit economic growth through
technology advances that will provide increased computing capability at a lower
cost.