* 1600012
* Coastal SEES:   Enhancing sustainability in coastal communities threatened by harmful algal blooms by advancing and integrating environmental and socio-economic modeling
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Christine Kirchhoff, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 08/31/2020
* USD 1,996,139.00

The management of coastal ecosystems for long term sustainability requires an
enhanced understanding of the interplay among social, biological, and physical
systems. Anticipating and managing future changes is a unique challenge
requiring accurate representation and integration of climate drivers,
biophysical responses, economic impacts, and adaptation decisions, but also the
production of model outputs that are usable for decision making. To enhance
usability, this project uses collaborations between scientists and stakeholders
to foster mutual learning and the production of information that can support
real-world decisions towards sustainability. In particular it focuses on
advancing understanding of (1) the coupled human-natural system and (2)
knowledge co-production, using harmful algal blooms (HABs) in the Great Lakes as
a test case. As HAB events have been increasing globally over the past decade
and directly impact ecosystem services for coastal communities (e.g., drinking
water provision, fishing and recreation), understanding, predicting and
alleviating this water quality issue is a problem of great societal relevance.
The location of the study will be western Lake Erie because of the ability to
build upon previous research and existing datasets and the team's previous
involvement the region's policy networks. This integrated modeling approach is
transferable and the results will be applicable to other coastal areas where
stakeholders are attempting to manage complex ecological systems. The results
will be communicated widely, leveraging the fact that team members are actively
engaged in regional and trans-national policy networks to purposefully
disseminate the approach and lessons learned. The project will train a cohort of
four graduate students and five postdoctoral fellows in an integrated
interdisciplinary context.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work is organized around the
overarching question: How does climate influence the biophysical dynamics of
freshwater ecosystems and ecosystem services, and how can scientist and
stakeholder co-production of information enhance coastal decision-making and
sustainability? It will advance the fundamental knowledge of (1) the role of
precipitation change and how uncertainty in climate model precipitation affects
simulations of phosphorous loading, (2) the role of cold season processes on
climate and phosphorous loading, (3) primary climate versus anthropogenic
drivers that alter phosphorous loading, (4) the drivers over time and space
controlling the size and location of future HABs, (5) how humans and the
valuation of ecosystem services respond to HABs, and (6) information usability,
by better understanding drivers of use and the kinds of decisions that may
emerge from the co-production process. Four stakeholder sectors will be engaged:
water treatment, beach management, recreational fishing and agricultural
management and policy. Workshops will develop decision-relevant information for
and feedback from those responsible for preventing future HABs (considering
watershed loading simulations) and those required to adapt to current HABs
(considering HAB forecasts).