* 1600186
* Logic and the Mathematics of Quantum Physics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Martino Lupini, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2019
* USD 94,269.00

Quantum information theory is the mathematical theory underlying the use of the
quantum mechanical states of physical systems for the purposes of information
transmission and manipulation. Many questions in quantum information theory can
be naturally studied within the mathematical framework of operator systems. The
recent realization that operator systems can be regarded as quantum analogs of
graphs has stimulated work with impact in the theories of both operator systems
and quantum information. At the same time, classical notions and results from
first order logic have been generalized within the framework of continuous logic
to the setting where continuous structures, such as operator systems and other
objects arising from quantum physics, are considered. The main goal of this
research project is to build upon these developments to extend results from
discrete mathematics and classical computing to the quantum setting. The
investigator will pursue this project in collaboration with students at the
graduate and undergraduate level. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first part of the
project aims at obtaining feasible quantum algorithms to test isomorphism of
operator systems. The next step in this direction is to determine the complexity
of testing isomorphism of operator systems from the perspective of quantum
computation. This question is of significant current interest for its
implications for quantum physics and theoretical computer science. More broadly,
the goal of the investigator is to extend classical descriptive complexity
theory to the quantum setting, working within the framework of continuous logic.
This research has the potential to address fundamental questions about quantum
computing, including characterization of problems for which quantum computing
provides a super-polynomial speedup over classical computing. Further aspects of
the project involve the development of the theory of noncommutative Choquet
simplices within the framework of operator systems, and the use of tools from
model theory to build examples of C*-algebras that are not accessible via
standard constructions.