* 1600987
* Research Initiation Award: Development of Carbon-Carbon Bond Forming Strategies in the Synthesis of O-, N-Heterocycles
* EHR,HRD
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2021
* Fenghai Guo, Winston-Salem State University
* Standard Grant
* Emanuel WAddell
* 06/30/2021
* USD 319,695.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities-Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
Research Initiation Awards (RIAs) provide support to STEM junior faculty at
HBCUs who are starting to build a research program, as well as for mid-career
faculty who may have returned to the faculty ranks after holding an
administrative post or who need to redirect and rebuild a research program.
Faculty members may pursue research at their home institution, at an NSF-funded
Center, at a research intensive institution or at a national laboratory. The RIA
projects are expected to help further the faculty member's research capability
and effectiveness, to improve research and teaching at his or her home
institution, and to involve undergraduate students in research experiences. With
support from the National Science Foundation, Winston-Salem State University
(WSSU) will conduct research aimed at understanding organic synthesis which is
important for therapeutic purposes, agricultural, oil field and other industrial
applications and broadening the participation of underrepresented students in
the nation's STEM workforce by integrating undergraduate research with
education. This project will greatly improve the quality of undergraduate
research and education in Organic Chemistry at WSSU. The high-quality research
experiences in organic synthesis at WSSU will be extremely valuable for minority
students who are interested in careers in STEM. These research experiences will
further prepare students to obtain graduate degrees and thus broaden the
participation of minorities in the Nation's STEM workforce.

The goal of the proposed study is to develop carbon-carbon bond formation
strategies in the synthesis of highly functionalized heterocycles such as
biflavonoids, pyridines and bipyridines. The specific aims of this project are
to: 1) develop efficient copper and rhodium catalyzed carbon-carbon bond
formation reactions for heterocycle synthesis utilizing inexpensive and readily
available aromatic compounds; 2) develop a merged 2 carbon-carbon bond formation
catalyzed by copper and rhodium catalyst complex; 3) synthesize bisteppogenin
and diphysin from biflavonoid family; and 4) develop a versatile synthetic
approach to pyridines, bipyridines and their analogs. This study will result in
the first synthesis of these heterocycles and thus advance new knowledge, and
tactical approaches in the C-C bond formation arena for the synthesis of
heterocycles. This project will be conducted in collaboration with faculty from
the department of Chemistry, Biology and the Biomedical Research Infrastructure
Center (BRIC) at WSSU.