* 1600177
* GP-EXTRA:   Engaging and retaining students in the geosciences at two-year colleges (2YC) through undergraduate research
* GEO,RISE
* 06/01/2016,02/28/2022
* Kusali Gamage, Austin Community College
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 02/28/2022
* USD 307,242.00

Though research has been recognized as a high impact, inquiry-based practice to
engage and retain undergraduate students, it is largely underutilized in the
first two years of instruction. At two-year colleges in particular, students
have even fewer opportunities to participate in authentic research projects. The
Austin Community College (ACC) project includes the development and
implementation of: a Summer Undergraduate Research Experience Course (SUREC) and
a field activity that engages students in research experience focused on
scientific ocean drilling in their first two years of higher education. The
significance of the project is that it will capture the attention of incoming
undergraduate students by engaging them in a research-based field activity
during the school year and further their research experience through an intense
inquiry-based learning in the summer. This will advance the mission of the
National Science Foundation's Improving Undergraduate science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) Education - GEOPATHS program by promoting and
supporting students to continue in geosciences at the critical
junctures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through a partnership with the University of
Texas at Austin, the SUREC program will be open to students in their second year
of study. ACC students will conduct research at a laboratory in the department
of Petroleum and Geosystems Engineering (UT PGE). The research experience will
begin with guided scientific ocean drilling investigations supported by class
explanation, group meetings and related scientific reading assignments. As
students identify research topics, lab equipment and procedures, student teams
will research more independently. Students will present their research in-lieu
of a final exam and also have opportunities to present their work at a local
and/or national conference. SUREC and its evaluation materials will be developed
over eight months, followed by two years of implementation and evaluation. The
field activity will be open to both ACC science and non-science majors in their
first or second year of higher education. Through a partnership with Texas
A&amp;M University, students enrolled in introductory geoscience courses will
take a field trip to the Gulf Coast Repository, where over 100 kilometers of
core from the Pacific Ocean, the Caribbean Sea and Gulf of Mexico, and the
Southern Ocean are located. Prior to the activity, students will complete pre-
field activities including reading articles from scientific journals and
exercises that related to the repository. After the visit, students will
integrate findings to produce a term paper. The field activity will include four
months for development of exercises and evaluation material, followed by two
years of implementation and evaluation. By the end of the project, at least 24
second year students will have participated in the SUREC program and 150
first/second year non-science and science majors will have participated in the
field activity.