* 1600670
* The Combinatorics of Macdonald Polynomials and Symmetric Function Operators
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* James Haglund, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 08/31/2019
* USD 209,999.00

Symmetric functions, long important in algebra, are playing an increasing role
in recent years in many other areas of mathematics including algebraic geometry
and mathematical physics, algebraic combinatorics, statistical mechanics and
representation theory. There are many examples in mathematics and science of
polynomials which depend on several variables, and which have important
applications. In this project the combinatorics associated with these
polynomials will be investigated. Macdonald polynomials, which are multi-variate
symmetric functions which satisfy an orthogonality relation and play a central
role in algebraic combinatorics with applications to special functions,
algebraic geometry, and statistical mechanics. Recently, Macdonald polynomials
have arisen in mathematical physics and the study of knot invariants connected
to string theory. There has been a lot of recent progress on the combinatorics
of these objects, especially for special knots known as torus knots, but many
important questions remain open. These questions involve both Macdonald
polynomials and various operators which act on them, and this project will
further develop the theory of Macdonald polynomials and their operators. It
seems likely that Macdonald polynomials will play an increasing role in
mathematical physics, representation theory, and combinatorics over the coming
years, so results on Macdonald polynomials and their operators arising from this
project will likely have applications to many areas of mathematics.

Macdonald polynomials, which depend on a set of variables, a partition, and two
parameters, are closely connected to the study of the Hilbert scheme, and arise
in the study of knot invariants and character formulas. This project seeks to
build on previous results on the combinatorics of Macdonald polynomials and
character formulas described via operators applied to a Macdonald polynomial. A
particularly important example is the character of diagonal harmonics. The
recently proved ''shuffle conjecture'' gives a nice combinatorial expression for
this character. A central focus of this project is to study a recent
generalization of the shuffle conjecture called the Delta conjecture. A number
of interesting applications of this conjecture to combinatorics have already
been found, and a proof would significantly expand our understanding of
Macdonald polynomials, and character formulas connected to the Hilbert scheme
and knot invariants. Two other projects involve combinatorial objects connected
to diagonal harmonics such as Tesler matrices and LLT polynomials (a family of
symmetric functions introduced by Alain Lascoux, Bernard Leclerc, and Jean-Yves
Thibon), as well as the study of Demazure characters and atoms. These last three
projects will involve more direct combinatorial analysis and classical symmetric
function theory.