* 1600765
* Employing Symmetry in Commutative Algebra
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2019
* Claudiu Raicu, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Janet Striuli
* 07/31/2019
* USD 159,000.00

The project pertains primarily to the field of commutative algebra and is
concerned with the study of systems of polynomial equations: these equations
should be thought of as the algebraic relationships between the set of
parameters in some model. Oftentimes mathematical models of natural phenomena
come equipped with a large group of symmetries, and the main goal of the current
project is to develop techniques that employ the symmetry in order to reveal
both qualitative and quantitative features of the models. The questions and the
methods are strongly influenced by classical algebraic geometry, which analyzes
the models from a geometric perspective, by representation theory, which is an
algebraic study of symmetry, and by D-module theory, which is an algebraic
perspective on the infinitesimal study of the models. Computer experimentation
is important for the success of the project. The investigator, together with
students and collaborators, will develop and disseminate the necessary computer
algebra software and will make available the results of experimentation that are
of general interest.

This research project investigates a number of open questions concerning
fundamental invariants associated to algebraic varieties endowed with a large
group of symmetries, by analyzing the implications of the symmetries to the
structure of the invariants. The main emphasis will be on the study of syzygies
and local cohomology groups, with a view towards understanding further
invariants such as regularity and projective dimension, cohomological dimension
and arithmetic rank, or Lyubeznik numbers and Bernstein-Sato polynomials. The
project will combine methods from commutative algebra and classical algebraic
geometry, as well as techniques from representation theory and the theory of
D-modules. For instance, the investigator will explore the D-module structure of
the local cohomology groups associated to natural stratifications of the spaces
of binary forms. On a separate note, the investigator will research the
connections between syzygies of ideals in rings of polynomial functions on
spaces of matrices, and representations of general linear Lie superalgebras.