* 1600525
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   Assessing multi-scale drivers of pollinator assembly and plant-pollinator network architecture in the context of prairie restoration
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Mark Mort, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 08/31/2019
* USD 19,404.00

Pollinators are key to the maintenance of Earth's biodiversity because almost
90% of flowering plants rely on animal pollinators to reproduce. Pollinators are
also a vital component of global agriculture, and pollination services by
insects are worth hundreds of billions of dollars annually. Given their
importance, it is critical that we develop an understanding of how insect
pollinator communities interact with plants across complex landscapes that are
often heavily modified by humans. Researchers have recently begun using
"network" approaches to study plant-pollinator interactions across entire
ecological communities. A plant-pollinator network can be visualized as a "web"
of all interactions between pollinators and plants at a given place. By building
and evaluating plant-pollinator networks, researchers can, for example, assess
whether pollination at a given site will remain stable in the face of
disturbance or loss of species. This is especially relevant, considering that
human-induced stressors, such as habitat loss and pesticide use, are causing
pollinator declines worldwide. This research will use a new genetic approach to
determine which plant species are pollinated by which bee species in ten Kansas
prairies. Data will be used to construct plant-pollinator networks to assess the
potential effect of disturbance and loss of pollinator species on pollination
services across human-modified landscapes. As part of this project, the research
team will conduct pollinator ecology workshops for middle- and high school
students aspiring to be first-generation college graduates.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plant-pollinator networks are typically constructed from
observations of insects landing on flowers (i.e., "visitation networks"). Few
researchers have evaluated these insects for the presence and species identities
of pollen carried between flowers; doing so based on pollen morphology is
especially time-consuming. In this project, investigators will use metabarcoding
to identify pollen carried by native bees collected across ten study sites.
Several structural properties of the resulting pollen transport networks will be
compared to the properties of networks based on visitation data alone.
Investigators predict that: A) pollen transport networks will exhibit greater
network-level specialization than visitation networks, and B) pollen transport
networks will be less nested than visitation networks, indicating that plant-
pollinator interactions could be more susceptible to species loss than the
visitation data, alone, would suggest.