* 1600017
* I-Corps:  A Tissue-engineered Nipple-Areolar Complex
* TIP,TI
* 10/15/2015,09/30/2016
* Bruce Bunnell, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 09/30/2016
* USD 50,000.00

Currently, there are more than 230,000 women diagnosed with breast cancer every
year in the United States; and there are approximately 180,000 female
mastectomies that occur each year due to cancer. These patients, mostly women,
have several options in the way they could have their nipple-areolar complex
(NAC) reconstructed. These options most commonly include the plastic and
reconstructive surgeons, surgically creating a structure that looks like a
nipple, out of skin from the chest area or from other part of the body, such as
the thigh or under the arm; or a tattoo of a image of NAC can be done after the
reconstructions phase of the breast; or a combination of tattoo or surgical
methods. For these NAC reconstructions, the outcome is contingent on many
factors: surgical skill, skin thickness, blood supply to the reconstructed
nipple-like structure, tattooing skill, fading of tattoo, etc. As an alternative
to these current standard methods to reconstruct the NAC this I-Corps team has
have developed a graft that would regrow the patient's NACs. As an overall goal
to this concept, an off-the-shelf ready NAC graft would be made available to the
plastic and reconstructive surgeons. During the breast reconstruction phase,
after a mastectomy, the surgeon would then engraft one of these NAC grafts in
position onto the patient's reconstructed breast. The patient's body would then
use this NAC graft as a building frame to regenerate their own NAC. Materials
similar to these have been used in surgeries for more than 30 years; by
reimaging these materials and their processing, it has allowed us to apply well-
established processes and reconstruction methods to the regeneration of NACs for
women who have undergone mastectomies.

There exists a need for a reproducible off-the-shelf ready graft for Nipple-
Areolar Complex (NAC) reconstruction, for the approximately 180,000 mastectomies
that. There are more than 2.8 million breast cancer survivors in the United
States, many of who have undergone reconstructive surgery. Approximately 36% of
patients with early stage diagnoses and 60% of patients with late stage
diagnoses undergo mastectomies. Moreover, immediate breast reconstruction
following mastectomies has become more common, significantly increasing at from
20.8% in 1998 to 37.8% in 2008. This increasing trend is not surprising as there
is evidence to suggest that NAC reconstruction affects psychological wellbeing
of female patients who have undergone mastectomies. Evidence also suggests that
woman are more comfortable with getting a mastectomy if the nipple can be spared
during the mastectomy procedure, or if nipple reconstruction is possible if a
nipple-sparing mastectomy is not an option. Current strategies for NAC
reconstruction are limited to surgical techniques that create a NAC-like
structure from existing local tissue, secondary site grafting, or 3D tattooing,
or a combination of surgical reconstruction with tattooing. Generating a tissue
engineered, biocompatible NAC graft for use in place of surgically created NAC
structures is a promising approach to NAC reconstruction following mastectomies.
To date, no tissue engineering strategies have been targeted towards the
regeneration of the NAC structure. By isolating a biological-derived collagen-
rich acellular NAC scaffold, the NAC native micro and macro structural
components are maintained. The goal of this overall project is to provide the
plastic and reconstructive surgeons an off-the-shelf ready NAC graft, that could
be onlay grafted onto the patient during breast reconstruction, allowing for
patient resident skin-cells to repopulate the scaffold, thereby regenerating the
patients' NAC.