* 1600742
* Probabilistic and Extremal Combinatorics
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Bela Bollobas, University of Memphis
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 08/31/2019
* USD 405,000.00

Random geometric graphs can be used to model many large scale networks, such as
the Internet and social networks. Such graphs are particularly suited to the
modeling of large-scale sensor and transceiver networks, which are becoming more
common as electronic devices become smaller and cheaper and are interconnected
in very large networks. Modeling the behavior of these networks is becoming more
and more important, and the analysis of the behavior of these networks when they
become extremely large is becoming increasingly relevant in practical
applications. This award supports research on the properties of these large-
scale networks, as well as training of graduate students and early-career
researchers in the mathematics of random graphs.

The study of random geometric graphs originated with questions about the way
fluids seep through porous media. More recently, the study of large-scale
electronic and communication networks has prompted many questions about random
geometric graphs. The basic model of random geometric graphs was proposed by
Gilbert over fifty years ago: take points randomly in the plane according to a
Poisson point process of unit intensity, and join two whenever they are within a
prescribed distance of each other. The central question concerning this model
is: for what values of the prescribed distance do we obtain an infinite
connected component? Surprisingly, even after fifty years, only rough upper and
lower bounds are known for the critical value of the prescribed distance. Some
properties of this Gilbert model are known, but many other questions still
remain unanswered. This research project addresses some of these questions, as
well as other questions about related models of random graph inspired by both
percolation theory and large-scale communication networks.