* 1600655
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Quantifying the tempo of genome theft in polyploid, female-only Ambystoma salamanders
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2017
* Harold Gibbs, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 06/30/2017
* USD 17,490.00

This project will test a hypothesis to explain how a lineage of female-only
salamanders has been able to persist for millions of years. Most animals
reproduce sexually even though there is a high evolutionary cost of making
males. Males compete with females for resources and decrease the genetic
resemblance between a female and her offspring. Few animal species reproduce
without mating and most only live for a short evolutionary time. However, an
all-female lineage of salamanders (the oldest known all-female vertebrate in
North American) has been able to persist for approximately 6 million years.
Because the persistence of asexual animals is rare, they can provide valuable
clues about the costs and benefits of sexual reproduction. Sometimes these
female-only salamanders are able to obtain new genetic material from males of
closely related species. Thus, they may gain the benefits of both sexual and
asexual reproduction. To test this idea, the researchers will measure the
importance of genetic contributions from sexual species into the all-female
asexual species over evolutionary time. In addition, the project will include
the training of undergraduate and graduate students and outreach activities such
as museum displays and social blogs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will
quantify the rate and evolutionary history of genome leakage from sexual species
in to the unisexual Ambystoma lineage, which will allow us to test the
hypothesis that recurrent genome contribution accounts for the greater lineage
age of unisexual Ambystoma as compared to other gynogenetic taxa. The
researchers will use genome-scale data and evolutionary demographic modeling to
evaluate multiple evolutionary scenarios ranging from no genetic contributions
from sexual species, to recent (but limited) genome contributions only, or
ongoing genome contributions. This will be accomplished by using custom
bioinformatics tools to sort genetic variation among the multiple genomes of
unisexual salamanders, comparing this variation to that of the genomes of sexual
species thought to be the source of novel genetic variation in unisexuals and
then using statistical genetic models to estimate the magnitude and timing of
genetic exchange between unisexual and sexual salamanders.