* 1600410
* Collaborative Research GP-EXTRA:   Engaging Diverse Two-Year College Geoscience Students: Expanding Opportunities Through Undergraduate Research and Mentoring
* GEO,RISE
* 10/01/2016,03/31/2020
* Sara Rutzky, Wake Technical Community College
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 03/31/2020
* USD 228,990.00

Promoting student involvement in the geosciences is of utmost priority for
geoscience educators at all levels, as the broader community is experiencing
mass retirement and a shortage of qualified individuals to replace them in the
workforce. The geoscience community is also struggling to diversify its
workforce. Much research demonstrates that undergraduate geology students who
are exposed to geoscience research early in their education are much more likely
to pursue geoscience careers than their peers who did not have this exposure.
Wake Technical Community College (Wake Tech) is addressing these issues by
providing its diverse population of introductory geology students with paid
summer geoscience research opportunities at partner institutions: North Carolina
State University (NCSU) and the North Carolina Museum of Natural Sciences
(NCMNS). Students who participate in the summer internships also are being
integrated in an ongoing program of mentoring and professional socialization
through multiple opportunities to present their research projects to various
audiences, including at professional meetings, to other undergraduates, to high
school students, and to the public. The project is creating broader impacts
beyond the immediate research experiences for students in the program, because
of the potential of outreach by a more diverse group of students for attracting
additional students from underrepresented groups as they consider their own
choice of major.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Wake Tech, located in Raleigh, North
Carolina, has a large and flourishing introductory geology program consisting of
diverse freshman and sophomore students who are looking to transfer to four-year
institutions. This project is working to: 1) increase the number of students,
including those from groups underrepresented in geosciences, transferring from
community college to geoscience programs at four-year colleges and universities;
2) provide three cohorts of 12 Wake Tech students with engaging, cutting-edge
geoscience summer research internship experiences at partner institutions (NCSU
and NCMNS); 3) demonstrate the effectiveness of early research experiences for
community college students; and 4) engage more than 1300 Wake Tech geoscience
students each year in a greater number of inquiry investigations based on
current NCSU/NCMNS geoscience research. Students completing the summer research
internship are also involved with promoting a better understanding of geoscience
careers and issues among the broader population of Wake County through
participation in the Wake Tech Student Chapter of the Association of
Environmental and Engineering Geologists (AEG) and outreach to local high
schools, Wake Tech students, and NCMNS visitors. The strong partnership between
Wake Tech, NCSU, and the NCMNS ensures the highest quality of research
experiences and mentoring with careful attention to mentoring students from
their initial interest through acceptance in a four-year college geoscience
program.