* 1600711
* Forty-six Years of Statistical Signal Processing
* CSE,CCF
* 11/01/2015,10/31/2016
* Ali Pezeshki, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 10/31/2016
* USD 6,800.00

Forty-Six Years of Statistical Signal Processing&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
influence of geometrical ideas in statistical signal processing dates to the
inception of the field. Linear subspace ideas have had enormous impact and their
success has led to exploitation of increasingly sophisticated geometrical
structures, such as Grassmannian manifolds of linear subspaces, as domains for
statistical reasoning about signal detection, parameter estimation, and
inference. There is a trend in recent statistical signal processing research
(and in related areas, such as statistical learning) toward exploitation of low-
dimensional structure in data presented in ambient spaces of much higher
dimension. This development continues to bring new geometrical machinery into
the foundations of the field. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the forty-six years since
completing his doctoral studies at the University of Washington, Louis Scharf
has brought geometrical insights to almost every aspect of statistical signal
processing. Because his work in the discipline has been so widespread,
contributing significantly to almost every major topic within the field,
building this workshop around the theme of his career?s influence on statistical
signal processing provides a natural framework for a snapshot of the history of
the field and how key geometrical insights continue to shape it.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The organizers anticipate that this workshop will promote
awareness of the power of the geometrical perspective advanced by Scharf?s work
in shaping the forefront of today?s research. They believe this is a
particularly important message to upcoming researchers and practitioners in the
field at a time when geometrical ideas beyond linear subspaces are becoming
increasingly relevant in signal processing. And holding the workshop in
coordination with the Asilomar Conference on Signals, Systems, and Computers,
where many Ph.D. students and early-career researchers in statistical signal
processing from the western U.S. attend regularly, provides the workshop access
to this audience.