* 1600414
* Concluding conference of the Special Program on Nonlinear Equations:  Progress and Challenges in Nonlinear Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 03/01/2016,11/30/2017
* Shing-Tung Yau, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Edward Taylor
* 11/30/2017
* USD 50,000.00

This award provides funding to help defray the expenses of participants in the
"Concluding Conference of the Special Program on Nonlinear Equations: Progress
and Challenges in Nonlinear Equations" that will be held April 8-10, 2016, on
the campus of Harvard University.

The Center of Mathematical Sciences and Applications (CMSA) at Harvard
University will host a Special Program on Nonlinear Equations during the
academic year 2015-2016. This program will include a large cohort of expert
visitors from around the world in the areas of partial differential equations,
including experts in general relativity, geometric analysis, and nonlinear
equations. Harvard University will host a three-day capstone conference to
conclude the activities of the Special Program. The conference will include both
speakers who are participating in the program and outside speakers. The dates
were chosen to reflect the highest concentration of visitors to the CMSA in
order to provide a rich research environment for conference attendees. The goal
of the conference is to facilitate collaboration among experts in various fields
of analysis, with the goal of making progress on some of the most fundamental
open problems in mathematics and physics. The conference program provides ample
opportunity for graduate students, postdocs, and other young scientists to
present their work.