* 1600595
* GP-EXTRA: Increasing Minorities in the Atmospheric
* GEO,RISE
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2022
* Mehri Fadavi, Jackson State University
* Continuing Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 09/30/2022
* USD 485,041.00

Jackson State University (JSU) is a research intensive Historically Black
College and University (HBCU) and the first of only two HBCUs in the southeast
U.S. with an Atmospheric Science program. JSU is the largest producer of African
American B.S. degrees in Atmospheric Science (NCES, 2014). JSU has a four-year
graduation rate of nineteen percent, which suggests either students are not
being well-prepared prior to college or there is a greater need for support
services for incoming students. Although graduation rates are low, 75% of HBCU
students are low-income students and the HBCU graduation rates of these students
outperforms those at all other institutions (USBE&amp;IT, 2015). In 2014,
understanding the need to develop students with career relevant competencies and
skills, Jackson Public Schools created the Academy of Scientific Innovations at
Provine High School with a division in atmospheric science. The introduction of
the division was in direct response from our Associate Dean and the fact that
Provine is within a mile from JSU Meteorology Program. Through this program
students will: increase their understanding of the interdisciplinary nature of
the geosciences; acquire hands-on geoscience teaching experience; and be exposed
to possible careers in the geosciences (including teaching); while acquiring
real-world, geoscience workforce skills. The goal of the project is to establish
a geoscience pipeline in the high school to increase the number of students in
geoscience disciplines, and thus the diversity of the geoscience workforce.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Increasing Minorities in the Atmospheric Sciences through
the Geoscience Experiences (IMAGE) project is a three year partnership between
the Jackson State University (JSU) Department of Physics, Atmospheric Science
and Geosciences (DPAGS) and Provine High School. The project also collaborates
with the National Weather Service offices in Shreveport, LA and Memphis, TN and
the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration?s National Weather Service?s
Operations Division. The project leverages JSU?s demographic and institutional
services to research, assess, and evaluate the effectiveness of a multilayered,
academic year experience to increasing the number and diversity of students
within the geosciences. The program targets a cohort of pre-college, first-year,
transfer students and undergraduate geoscience majors. The cohorts will be
supported academically, socially and professionally via a series of effective
and evidence-based strategies including a summer bridge program; a mentored
geoscience teaching experience; and internships. These activities will be aimed
at achieving the program?s goals of increasing the number and diversity of STEM
students, preparing students well to participate in science for tomorrow, and
improving students' STEM learning outcomes. The program will test the
effectiveness of preparatory courses, tutoring, student services support, and
undergraduate research experiences on the target audience to facilitate
students? academic and social integration during their critical transition stage
into a four year college.