* 1600463
* GP-IMPACT: Increasing Geosciences Enrollment through Research Experiences, Mentoring, and Curriculum Interactions With Community Colleges and High Schools
* GEO,RISE
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2021
* Gilbert Hanson, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 08/31/2021
* USD 409,289.00

This program focuses on enhancing undergraduate research skills, encouraging
matriculation in geoscience majors, recruiting and mentoring students at local
community colleges and several high schools with large numbers of minority and
high-needs students, and promoting the relevance of geoscience careers as viable
career paths in academia, government service, and private industry. By
developing ways to effectively engage a diversity of students, including under-
represented minority (URM) students in geoscience disciplines and careers, this
project is helping to address the United States' needs for producing more
students well versed in geoscience and thus further enhancing the country's
economic competitiveness. This project involves collaborations within the School
of Marine and Atmospheric Sciences, the Department of Geosciences and the
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Math (STEM) Smart program housed in the
Department of Technology and Society. Off-campus partners include Nassau and
Suffolk County Community Colleges and several high schools on Long Island, all
of which are within close geographic proximity of the Stony Brook University
(SBU) campus. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main features of this project include:
(1) Expanding summer research experiences for community college students
interested in the geosciences, with a strong focus towards URM students; (2)
Collaborating with community colleges and high schools during the academic year
with joint club activities, seminars, and mentoring of students by SBU faculty,
senior undergraduates, and graduate students; (3) Collaborating with the local
community colleges to develop curricular units that result in a smoother
transition for students from 2-year to 4-year institutions, such as SBU; (4)
Providing scholarship support to students transitioning from community colleges
to SBU geoscience majors, including URMs, by incorporating them into several
existing academic and support structures available at the University, including
the Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (LSAMP); (5) Providing
increased internship and research opportunities for minority high school
students and undergraduates in the geosciences at SBU and at other nearby
locations (e.g., Brookhaven National Laboratory); and (6) Collecting data for a
longitudinal study that gauges the awareness of, and reasons for, students
pursuing geoscience majors or leaving the program part way through. The programs
being implemented have potential for being adapted to other institutional
contexts, thereby expanding access to and excellence in geoscience disciplines.