* 1600717
* Soficity, Dynamics, and Operator Algebras
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* HanFeng Li, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 07/31/2020
* USD 144,000.00

This project concerns two mathematical fields. One of them studies the shape of
geometric objects such as spheres using a tool that was originally invented by
John von Neumann to study quantum mechanics in physics. The other field studies
the long-time behavior of systems under evolution (e.g., the state of the solar
system one billion years in the future) and, more generally, symmetries of
systems. Although these two fields might appear to be quite different, in the
last several years some surprising connections between them have been
discovered, especially about those "infinite" symmetries that can be
approximated by finite symmetries. These connections have led to applications in
both fields. The principal investigator plans to deepen and broaden such
connections. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal investigator seeks to deepen
the recently-found connection between the theory of invariants for manifolds via
group von Neumann algebras and the theory of dynamical systems by introducing
various relative invariants. This includes the connection between von Neumann-
Lueck rank in the former theory and mean topological dimension in the latter and
the connection between torsion-type invariant in the first theory and entropy in
the second. The project will shed new light on the geometry and dynamics of
various spaces and algebras. The newly-created theory of invariants for sofic
group actions, including both entropy and mean dimension, is developing rapidly.
The project will provides a better understanding of this theory. It will also
deepen the interplay between different fields of mathematics. Operator algebras
have become a powerful tool in the study of algebraic actions of nonabelian
groups, replacing the commutative algebra tool that is used in the study of
algebraic actions of abelian groups. The parts of the project on the connection
between mean dimension and von Neumann-Lueck rank and on the connection between
entropy and torsion-type invariants have already found applications to both the
mean dimension and entropy theory of such group actions. Discoveries made in
this project will lead to more applications and will strengthen one's
understanding of a variety of mathematical phenomena.