* 1600605
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: How will eco-evolutionary dynamics contribute to the range shifts of plants under climate change?
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2016,12/31/2017
* Janneke Hille Ris Lambers, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 12/31/2017
* USD 15,999.00

If climate has a large effect on natural communities, climate change should
result in the loss of cold-adapted species at the expense of warm-adapted
species in local communities. These predictable results do not always occur,
however. Some communities do not change in response to climate warming. This
project will compare historical data from two Pacific Northwest National Parks
with current surveys to determine why some plant communities resist the effects
of climate change while others do not. The project will contribute to our
understanding of the consequences of climate change and communicate this
information to National Park Service and other resource managers in the Pacific
Northwest. Student training will strengthen the scientific workforce.

This project will make progress on the problem of predicting change in plant
communities with climate change given apparent stasis, despite the inherent
challenges of differentiating drivers with similar expected outcomes. The
project will determine how strongly climate influences plant communities in the
mountains of the Pacific Northwest. Hypotheses on relations of community
composition and bioclimatic variables will be tested using resurvey data sets of
plant community composition originally collected over 30 years ago in two
National Parks (North Cascades National Park and Mount Rainier National Park),
newly developed joint species distribution models, and high resolution climate
data. Analyses of historical and resurvey data and, separately, seeding
experiments will be used to assess whether trends of change indicate resilience
or sensitivity to climate change. The project will develop strategies in
collaboration with the National Park Service to incorporate this knowledge into
long-term planning for resource managers. Training of future scientists will
occur at graduate and undergraduate levels.