* 1600961
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   Soil resource variability as a driver of interactions within, and emergent properties of, tritrophic ecological networks
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2018
* Sharon Strauss, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 05/31/2018
* USD 19,198.00

A key goal in ecology is understanding how and why environmental variation
shapes species interactions. Food webs describe the feeding relationships
between organisms, and illustrate the ecological roles of plants and animals in
natural communities. Food webs also describe how the entire suite of feeding
interactions might function. Understanding how and why food webs differ between
places is important because it can help predict ecological impacts of
environmental change such as species loss or habitat change. In this project,
researchers will study how changes in soil nutrients cause differences in food
webs. The research focuses on the feeding interactions between plants and
caterpillars, and between caterpillars and their predators. By documenting "who
eats whom" in Northern California soils of low versus high fertility, this
project will be able to describe complex food webs and ask how these webs are
different across soil types. Because most of our understanding of this topic
comes from agricultural ecosystems that have soils impacted by fertilizer, this
project will provide new insights as it is based on soils that naturally vary in
fertility. This research will involve several undergraduate students and an
ecology club. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Variation in soil resources is a ubiquitous
form of environmental heterogeneity, with strong direct and indirect effects on
organismal traits and species interactions. Multiple theories address the
effects of resource level on trophic interactions: the Resource Availability
Hypothesis (RAH) suggests that resource availability should shape plant traits
and, consequently, their quality to herbivores; in turn, the Slow Growth, High
Mortality (SGHM) and High Performance, High Mortality Hypotheses (HPHM) relate
plant quality to interactions between herbivores and natural enemies. Based on
these theories, this research will disentangle the interacting roles of
predation and nutritive and defensive plant traits in shaping plant-caterpillar-
top predator tri-trophic interactions. Using a natural mosaic of low fertility
serpentine and higher fertility non-serpentine soils in California, this project
will build exclusion cages to assess how top-predators affect plant-caterpillar
interactions across different soil types. Plant nutritive and defensive traits
will be measured simultaneously to disentangle the relative importance of traits
and predation in driving food web structure across different resource contexts.
Together, these experiments will advance our understanding of how and why
species interactions vary across heterogeneous landscapes.