* 1600542
* GP-EXTRA:  Using professional career experiences to strengthen pathways into the geoscience workforce
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2016,04/30/2020
* Judith Haschenburger, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 04/30/2020
* USD 423,122.00

The predicted national shortfall of 135,000 geoscientists by 2022 will have
major consequences for the provision of energy and water resources and the
quality of the environment, necessities that sustain a strong economy and ensure
the health and welfare of all Americans. This project is addressing the
personnel shortfall by testing a comprehensive program of career-related
extracurricular activities that aims to improve retention and achievement levels
of students earning four-year college degrees in the geosciences and increase
the number and diversity of these skilled scientists that succeed in the
workforce after graduation. The best practices defined from evaluating the
success of the program are being used to build a model that can be followed by
other universities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is examining the effect of
experiential learning opportunities on higher student retention rates in the
geosciences, improvement in academic performance, and successful career
placement. A diverse group of 18 undergraduate geology majors at the University
of Texas at San Antonio (a Minority-Serving and Hispanic-Serving Institution)
are engaging in a sequence of three internships in different geoscience fields
to provide multiple career-related work experiences. Each student is completing
an academic internship involving research and teaching activities on campus,
followed by two placements in the energy resources, geo-environmental
assessment, and water resources fields. The four career trajectories have clear
pathways into the local employment market through private companies and
governmental agencies. Students are also participating in a suite of academic
and professional workshops to enhance competencies and skills in preparation for
their careers. A multi-level mentoring strategy that promotes personal and
professional growth and an integrated scheme of networking opportunities aims to
smooth the transition into the geoscience workforce. Program activities are
being assessed through a systematic plan of surveys, interviews, and external
reviews. The project seeks to improve undergraduate education to address the
projected shortfall in geoscientists, promote the participation of
underrepresented groups in both geoscience majors and careers, and contribute to
research on strengthening partnerships between higher education institutions and
external geoscience organizations. The project will increase the number and
diversity of skilled workers entering the geoscience workforce and lead to best
practice strategies that can be implemented at other universities to impact
meaningfully on the retention, education, and career trajectories of geoscience
majors.