* 1600417
* EARS: Development of tunable frequency selective limiters based on novel magnetic nanomaterials for RFI mitigation in a crowded spectrum environment
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/14/2015,08/31/2020
* Ioannis Papapolymerou, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Mohammod Ali
* 08/31/2020
* USD 475,000.00

The tremendous demand on the radio spectrum has come as the consequence of
breakthroughs in the applications of wireless technology over the past 20 years.
Accessibility to the radio spectrum has become a necessity in the 21st century
for commercial as well as for scientific applications. It is the first time in
the history of humankind that not only professionals depend on radio frequency
(RF) signals and systems, but also people in their daily lives for accessing
emails, surfing the web, making travel reservations, "skyping" their friends,
tele-navigating while on the road, communicating with home sensors and security
systems, and sharing social events. With ever increasing demand for the RF
spectrum, the spectrum is becoming more and more crowded with increased level of
RF interference among the various systems and applications. Concurrently, we
still depend heavily on remote sensing systems for aerially exploring our
planet, monitoring environmental changes and their impact on our lives, as well
as weather prediction and early warning of natural disasters. These remote
sensing systems, which typically try to receive and detect weak RF signals, are
vulnerable to deliberate RF interference or even random RF sources including
commercial communication systems. Mitigation of unwanted RF signals is becoming
of utmost importance in modern wireless systems for both remote sensing and
commercial wireless communication applications. Enhancing access to the existing
RF spectrum will not be possible without addressing the RF interference issue,
especially since demand on the bandwidth of RF systems is growing rapidly and RF
receivers are becoming more sensitive.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
address the RF interference issue by focusing on the development of composite
magnetic nanomaterials that can be deposited as thin films on a variety of
substrates and provide a tunable RF signal rejection device called a Frequency
Selective Limiter (FSL). This device will significantly attenuate any signal
above a specific power level at a given frequency which is close to the
operational band of the system to be protected. Thus, the FSL acts as a self-
adapting filter depending on the strength of the interference. A fundamental
understanding on the interaction and relationship between material composition
and RF response (rejection frequency, rejection level, rejection bandwidth, DC
magnetic field bias) will be pursued in order to tailor the FSL for rejecting a
targeted RF interference in any remote sensing or wireless communication
application. An important objective is to achieve compact and planar RF devices
with such performance in the 1-20 GHz range for integration in System-on-Chip
(SoC) or System-on-Package (SoP) RF front ends. To do so, the following
objectives will be pursued: (1) understand how to control the Ferromagnetic
Resonance (FMR) of the nanomagnetic materials; (2) understand how to control the
rejection bandwidth and threshold power level; (3) understand the effect of the
DC bias field strength and direction; and (4) demonstrate the feasibility of
robust, planar RFI rejection devices by creating planar RF circuits with
magnetic nanomaterials that exhibit the response of an FSL in the 1-20 GHz
range. This topic also lends itself to exposing students to nanotechnology and
RF hardware technology that so many of them use today. Undergraduate students
from underrepresented groups will be recruited in this project to participate in
various research training and outreach programs.