* 1600585
* GP-EXTRA: Stimulating Hispanic Participation in the Geosciences (SHIP-GEO)
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Jude Benavides, The University of Texas Rio Grande Valley
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 08/31/2021
* USD 464,959.00

Geoscience is vital to understanding and solving crucial global threats such as
shortages of water, energy and food, and mitigating natural hazards in the
coming century. However, the geoscience workforce in the US is facing not only a
serious shortage for the coming decade, but the field struggles to keep pace
with the changing national demographics. Of all of the STEM fields, geoscience
has the least ethnic diversity, with Hispanics accounting for only ~3%,
suggesting a clear consequence of the historically low enrollment of Hispanic
students in geoscience fields. The University of Texas Rio Grande Valley
(UTRGV), with its rapidly growing Environmental and Earth Sciences (EES)
program, is the nation's second-largest Hispanic-serving institution with
~29,000 students (~90% Hispanic). UTRGV's strategic location along the
international border with Mexico, as well as its founding principles, make it an
ideal hub to nurture geoscientists from South Texas and
beyond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of "GP-EXTRA: Stimulating Hispanic
Participation in the Geosciences (SHIP-GEO)" at UTRGV are to contribute to
reducing the US geoscience workforce shortage predicted for the coming decade
and to increase Hispanic participation. SHIP-GEO aims to double, within five
years (two years beyond NSF support), the annual number of graduates from the
Environmental and Earth Sciences program. These goals are being achieved by
hosting activities geared toward student recruitment and retention while
building a mentoring network of students and alumni. The alumni mentors are
helping to direct the students in their career and future success. The project
has four objectives: (1) grow the existing EES program at UTRGV with the
specific aim to recruit and retain students in geoscience; (2) increase
community awareness of Earth systems; (3) guide community college and high
school students into geoscience careers; and (4) expose undergraduate students
to research as a path to graduate school. These objectives are being achieved
through: pairing undergraduate majors with alumni who are working in the field
of interest of the student; encouraging the transfer of community college
students into the EES program at UTRGV through field trips, guest speakers, and
an annual alumni career day; and expanding undergraduate research opportunities
by engaging students in ongoing projects. The project also is awarding fifty
scholarships to five cohorts of students over three years. SHIP-GEO contributes
to the NSF's goal of increasing diversity in the geoscience pipeline by
attracting, supporting and preparing Hispanic students for careers in
geosciences in South Texas, and is expected to become one of the best-known
programs in the nation for producing quality Hispanic geoscientists.