* 1600143
* 3D ImPACT: Integrated Project Approach to College Teaching
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Wayne Merrell, Eastern Iowa Community College
* Standard Grant
* John Jackman
* 07/31/2021
* USD 604,793.00

Eastern Iowa Community College is meeting a need for highly trained technicians
in additive manufacturing (AM) by developing AM content across a set of programs
as well as adopting multidisciplinary project-based instruction within courses.
Faculty will collaborate with industry to develop AM content for welding,
computer numeric control machining, mechanical design technology, logistics,
information technology, and engineering technology. Incorporating problem-based
instruction will promote students working together as well as developing
critical thinking skills. A professional development webinar for high school and
community college faculty will also be developed. Advanced manufacturing is
Iowa's largest industry contributing $28 billion to the state's economy,
representing 18% of Iowa's GDP and representing 13.5% of Iowa's employment. Most
growth is in cutting edge applications of big data, the Internet of Things, bio-
based products, advanced materials, AM and electronic design. Broad
incorporation of additive manufacturing content within the programs will result
in increased skilled workers in advanced manufacturing, and the use of the
integrated project-based learning method will result in workers with increased
critical thinking and problem solving skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
the Integrated Project Approach to College Teaching (3D ImPACT) project is to
increase the number of skilled workers in AM through curriculum development; an
integrated, project-based capstone course; and professional development for
faculty. Activities include 1) collaborating with business and industry to
conduct a Job Task Analyses and develop AM curriculum; 2) using the Digital
Manufacturing and Design Innovation Institute training programs; 3) developing a
project-based capstone course to allow students from different programs to work
together to improve learning, performance and industry skill acquisition; 4)
providing professional development for college and high school faculty; and 5)
developing a project website. In addition, the project will help advance
understanding of the circumstances under which integrated project-based learning
methods will increase critical thinking and problem solving skills in a diverse
workforce.