* 1600570
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   Investigating patterns, processes, and the role of mimicry in the phenotypic evolution of Tyrannini flycatchers
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2019
* John Klicka, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 06/30/2019
* USD 20,085.00

The Tyrannini group of flycatchers contains 34 bird species, some of which are
among the most common and conspicuous birds of the Americas. Several unrelated
Tyrannini lineages are strikingly similar in appearance while varying greatly in
body size. This makes them an important system for studying the biological
processes that cause distantly related species to resemble each other. This
research will foster graduate student training at the University of Washington,
international collaborations between scientists in the United States and Latin
America, and public science education and outreach at the Burke Museum of
Natural History and Culture in Seattle.

Phenotypic convergence can be explained by common ancestry, chance, parallel
selection, or mimicry. Disentangling these alternatives requires concurrent
analyses of phylogenetic history, character evolution, and behavioral ecology.
Interspecific social dominance mimicry (ISDM) is a two-party mimicry system
mediated by interference competition in which the model (the species being
mimicked) is also the signal receiver. This research explores the patterns,
processes, and the role of ISDM in the phenotypic evolution of Tyrannini
flycatchers. The researchers will construct a species-level phylogeny of
Tyrannini using sequence capture, investigate patterns and correlations between
visual and acoustic phenotypes using phylogenetic comparative methods, and
evaluate ecological evidence for ISDM and alternative mimicry hypotheses using
behavioral field experiments.