* 1600429
* GP-IMPACT: Leveraging Adoption of the Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS) and Improving Geoscience Education in the State of Iowa
* GEO,RISE
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Brian Witzke, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 07/31/2021
* USD 458,252.00

The State of Iowa adopted the Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS) in 2015.
Earth Science was not previously a required course in the State curriculum, and
Iowa high schools must now meet the challenge of achieving NGSS Earth Science
proficiency objectives in a state with very few K-12 educators certified or
endorsed in Earth Science. What few Iowa high schools do teach Earth Science
typically present it as a 'remedial science' instead of as the integration and
application of all of the science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM)
disciplines. The recent adoption of NGSS in the State, the critical need to
train K-12 educators statewide in Earth Science, and the need to incorporate
more rigor in the presentation of Earth Science provide an opportunity to
reframe Earth Science education in Iowa as the capstone STEM discipline.
Improving Earth Science education in the state has potential to significantly
increase the exposure of students to Earth Science at an early stage and improve
their awareness of the field as an interdisciplinary STEM discipline and
potential career path. High school students who become interested in Earth
Science must also have opportunities for engagement and professional preparation
as they matriculate to colleges and universities if they are eventually to
transition successfully into an Earth Science career and help to rebuild the
aging geoscience workforce. This project addresses reform of Earth Science
education statewide through a series of collaborative partnerships between the
University of Iowa, Kirkwood Community College, and the Iowa Geological Survey.
Targeted activities follow National Research Council recommendations for
Preparing the Next Generation of Earth Scientists and are aimed specifically at
the K-12, community college, four-year university, and professional geoscientist
levels to dramatically improve the opportunities and outcomes for student
awareness of, engagement with, and professional preparation for a potential
career in geoscience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is working to
dramatically reshape geoscience education in the State of Iowa through four
mechanisms: 1) directly funding teacher training and re-certification courses
through continuing education credits; 2) developing and disseminating K-12
course content materials for NGSS Earth Science content in the classroom; 3)
engaging undecided and early career undergraduate students at the University of
Iowa and Kirkwood Community College in the geosciences, through a series of
field trip experiences and independent research opportunities; and, 4) providing
internship opportunities as professional preparation for students who intend to
pursue a career in the Earth Sciences. This project focuses on the critical
transitions from K-12 to college, community college to four-year university, and
university to the geoscience workforce. This integrated and systemic approach to
strengthen Earth Science education has the potential to transform Earth Science
education in the State of Iowa, as well as establish a model for effective
implementation of the NGSS Earth Science components that may have utility in
other states that have adopted the NGSS. By the end of the three year project, a
total of 225 K-12 teachers will receive continuing education credits, more than
350 community college and four-year college undergraduate students will engage
in a series of geoscience field trip courses, and 45 undergraduate students will
participate in mentored research/internship opportunities.