* 1600816
* RAPID: An Integrated Study of Post-fire Wind and Water Erosion in Western Rangelands
* GEO,EAR
* 12/01/2015,11/30/2017
* Elowyn Yager, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Yuretich
* 11/30/2017
* USD 46,724.00

ABSTRACT

A non-technical description of the project, which explains the project's
significance and importance

The environmental and human costs of wildfires in the western United States are
great and they are increasing as populations grow into areas farther away from
urban centers. These fires affect the landscape in many ways, including an
increase in erosion by both wind and water. This project will take advantage of
an existing monitoring network, the Reynolds Creek Critical Zone Observatory, to
examine dust generation and erosion rates following the Soda fire in
southwestern Idaho in August, 2015. These new data can be compared to the pre-
storm measurements in order to evaluate the extent of fire effects on the land
surface that can be generalized to many other fire-prone regions.

A technical description of the project

This RAPID project will integrate the influence of post- fire wind and water
erosion following a large rangeland fire on the Idaho-Oregon border. The Soda
fire recently burned over 280,000 acres of rangelands along the Oregon Idaho
border, including ~25% of the watershed in the Reynolds Creek Critical Zone
Observatory (CZO). Smoke and dust from this fire produced dust storms and
hazardous air quality conditions for Boise and other regional communities.
Further erosion by both wind and water is expected to increase in the coming
months. The research will measure post-fire erosion of sediment and carbon in
this watershed. An extensive array of monitoring equipment at the Reynolds Creek
Experimental Watershed, plus ongoing synergistic studies with federal
collaborators, provide an opportunity to examine the dual roles of wind and
water in generating post-fire erosion from the hillslope to the regional scale.