* 1600823
* Management and Operations of the IceCube Neutrino Observatory 2016-2021
* GEO,OPP
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2021
* Francis Halzen, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Cooperative Agreement
* Vladimir Papitashvili
* 03/31/2021
* USD 35,359,711.00

This award funds the continued management and operations (M&amp;O) of the
IceCube Neutrino Observatory (ICNO) located at the South Pole Station. The core
team of researchers and engineers maintain the existing ICNO infrastructure at
the South Pole and home institution, guaranteeing an uninterrupted stream of
scientifically unique, high-quality data. The M&amp;O activities are built upon
eight highly successful years of managing the overall ICNO operations after the
start of science operations in 2008. Construction of ICNO was supported by NSF's
Major Research Equipment and Facilities Construction (MREFC) account and was
completed on schedule and within budget in 2010. Effective coordination of
efforts by the core M&amp;O personnel and efforts by personnel within the
IceCube Collaboration has yielded significant increases in the performance of
this cubic-kilometer detector over time. The scientific output from the IceCube
Collaboration during the past five years has been outstanding.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the ICNO/M&amp;O activities are
strong, involving postdoctoral, graduate, and (in some cases) undergraduate
students in the day-today operation &amp; calibration of the neutrino detector.
The extraordinary physics results recently produced by ICNO and its
extraordinary location at South Pole have a high potential to excite the
imagination of high school children and the public in general at a national and
international level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The current ICNO/M&amp;O effort
produces better energy and angular resolution information about detected
neutrino events, has more efficient data filters and more accurate detector
simulations, and enables continuous software development for systems that are
needed to acquire and analyze data. This has produced data acquisition and data
management systems with high robustness, traceability, and maintainability. The
current ICNO/M&amp;O effort includes: (1) resources for both distributed and
centrally managed activities, and (2) additional accountability mechanisms for
"in-kind" and institutional contributions. Both are necessary to ensure that the
detector maintains its capability to produce quality scientific data at the
level required to achieve the detector's scientific discovery objectives. Recent
ICNO discoveries of cosmic high-energy neutrinos (some reaching energies close
to and over 2.5 PeV) and oscillating atmospheric neutrinos in a previously
unexplored energy range from 10 to 60 GeV became possible because of the "state-
of-the-art" detector configuration, excellently supported infrastructure, and
cutting-edge science analyses. The ICNO has set limits on Dark Matter
annihilations, made precision measurements of the angular distribution of cosmic
ray muons, and characterized in detail physical properties of the Antarctic
2.5-km thick ice sheet at South Pole. The discovery of high-energy cosmic
neutrinos by IceCube with a flux at the level anticipated for those associated
with high-energy gamma- and cosmic-ray accelerators brightens the prospect for
identifying the sources of the highest energy particles.