* 1600435
* GP-EXTRA: Native Pathways/Native Science Fellows
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Bonnie Sachatello-Sawyer, Salish Kootenai College
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 08/31/2020
* USD 474,839.00

Part I: Salish Kootenai College (SKC), in collaboration with the Blackfeet
Native Science Field Center at Blackfeet Community College (BCC NSFC) and Hopa
Mountain, a Bozeman, Montana based nonprofit organization, are developing a GP -
EXTRA project entitled Native Pathways/Native Science Fellows (NPNSF) that
supports Native American and Latino undergraduate students? diverse pathways to
geosciences careers by providing fellowships with science organizations,
including nonprofits and other tribal colleges and active cohort groups to
increase their engagement in higher education and geosciences careers. By
creating three cohort groups of six Fellows linked to two tribal colleges and
universities, this initiative will be able to compare and contrast the pathways
of these Fellows at each site to determine the most effective strategies to (1)
increase the number of Indigenous (Native American and Latino) students who are
engaged in community-based geosciences research, field experiences and careers;
(2) develop work and training programs for Indigenous tribal college and
university students interested in the geosciences; (3) build a network of
community-based science professionals who are committed to the success of Native
American and Latino students and provide ongoing support for personal, academic
and professional success; and (4) prepare these students to transfer to
undergraduate or graduate school. These goals align with the GEO Education and
Diversity Strategic Framework goals of developing a diverse, competitive, and
engaged geosciences workforce. Specific objectives of the NPNSF initiative are
to match 18 promising tribal college and university students annually with
hands-on field work and professional research experiences to build skills and
pathways to academic and professional careers in the geosciences. These students
will also be mentored by geosciences professionals and a supportive cohort
network throughout the year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part II: Native
Pathways/Native Science Fellows (NPNSF) will enable Native American and Latino
undergraduate students to access tribal college and university academic tracks
that lead to graduation, fellowships with organizations that offer real world
work experiences in the geosciences, and support of local cohorts of students
that are on similar paths. These fellowships will integrate informal geosciences
education with fieldwork. This initiative will enable project partners to design
and study innovative learning opportunities as Native American and Latino
college students access fellowships with organizations that offer early career
work experiences in the geosciences. These fellowships will integrate informal
geosciences education with fieldwork and research. Fellowships with local
organizations, college visits, and professional conferences will expose college
students to future careers. Tribal college and university fellowships with
community-based science organizations will offer Native American and Latino
students? skills and networks needed for successful careers in the geosciences.
The student and professional networks that will be deepened through this program
will both promote the inclusion of Native Americans and Latinos in science-based
nonprofit organizations and professional networks while building knowledge of
effective strategies for increasing the number and diversity of geosciences
students entering the workforce.