* 1601031
* Research Initiation Award: A model plant group to study the evolution of diverse reproductive systems
* EDU,EES
* 08/15/2016,01/31/2021
* Janelle Burke, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Emanuel WAddell
* 01/31/2021
* USD 270,897.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities-Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
Research Initiation Awards (RIAs) provide support to STEM junior faculty at
HBCUs who are starting to build a research program, as well as for mid-career
faculty who may have returned to the faculty ranks after holding an
administrative post or who need to redirect and rebuild a research program.
Faculty members may pursue research at their home institution, at an NSF-funded
Center, at a research intensive institution or at a national laboratory. The RIA
projects are expected to help further the faculty member's research capability
and effectiveness, to improve research and teaching at his or her home
institution, and to involve undergraduate students in research experiences. With
support from the National Science Foundation, Howard University will conduct
research to investigate the evolution and origin of reproductive systems in
plants. The project will enhance the research capabilities of the PI as well as
teaching and learning at Howard University. Undergraduate students will benefit
from the collaborations with university and National Museum of Natural History
(NMNH) partners and the research experiences and training in plant sciences. The
project has the potential to be a model for increasing the number of African
Americans in plant sciences and support the nation's efforts in building a
robust STEM workforce by engaging students early in their career. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The aim of the proposed study is to investigate the evolution and
origin of reproductive systems in plants, using Rumex as a model. Specific
objectives are to: 1) determine the occurrence of different reproductive systems
within the genus, 2) form a phylogenetic hypothesis of the evolution of these
reproductive systems, and 3) revise infrageneric classification based on
phylogenetic data. The project will undertake a global, comprehensive study of
one large genus, Rumex. Findings from this study will include a well-sampled,
robust phylogeny for the genus Rumex. A phylogenetic basis will allow for
testing of evolutionary hypotheses and character reconstruction. In addition, a
phylogenetic framework will provide a reference to test the monophyly of
numerous subgeneric classification systems, and test the support for recognition
of segregate genera. The global approach will produce a taxonomic and
nomenclatural reference for Rumex. This project will be conducted in
collaboration with Smithsonian Institution National Museum of Natural History
(NMNH).