* 1601216
* Composites Recycling Technician Education Program
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Selvum Pillay, Skagit Valley College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 06/30/2019
* USD 194,076.00

Technician training and industry practices have not yet kept pace with
sustainability initiatives recommending reduced landfill use. This project will
advance knowledge across multiple fields and industries, and provide technicians
with the foundational knowledge, skills and abilities needed to handle composite
waste stream materials, treating them as a new resource. The project will create
a platform to develop protocols and best management processes with industry
while simultaneously creating curriculum scalable to certificate and associate
degree pathways for student learners and incumbent technicians. Community
college students, graduate students, university and community college faculty,
and industry partners will work alongside one another in an educational
environment to define the functions necessary for technicians to properly work
with composite waste stream material. The focus is on technician education in an
emerging demand field, and will enhance educational
infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Skagit Valley College (SVC) and The
University of Alabama at Birmingham (UAB) will collaborate to create curriculum
for composite technicians working with composite waste stream material. With
industry subject matter experts, the project team will develop protocols and
processes for the identification and proper handling of recaptured fiberglass
and carbon fiber composite material; develop curriculum modules to educate
technicians; and develop a template for a database learning tool to identify and
track waste stream material. Project results will be disseminated nationally and
internationally through ATE Central, the community and technical college system,
the four-year university system, open source formats and professional and
standards-based organizations. Internationally, companies are seeking the
methods and means to reduce waste and waste management costs, as highlighted by
the European Union initiative Zero Waste Communities. This project will show
linkage between composites recycling and both environmental and economic
benefits.