* 1601580
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   Mitochondrial Epistasis in Yeast
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2016,12/31/2018
* Heather Fiumera, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 12/31/2018
* USD 20,150.00

This project will investigate how interactions among mitochondrial genes
influence mitochondrial function and evolution. Mitochondria produce much of the
energy used by cells, and this production depends upon precise interactions of
multiple genes. Currently, interactions among mitochondrial genes have not been
demonstrated, mainly because these genes are normally inherited as a single unit
from the mother and such uniparental inheritance makes it difficult to study
gene interactions. To get around this challenge, the researchers will study
baker's yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae), which inherit mitochondrial DNA from
both parents. They will first generate unique combinations of mitochondrial
genes from a large yeast population to evaluate how these influence energy
production. Then they will sequence single mitochondrial genomes to identify the
specific genes involved. The project will advance our understanding of the
mechanics of mitochondrial protein interactions and how they shape evolution.
Additionally, the research will be integrated into a genetics laboratory course
and engage 128 undergraduate students in hands-on research.

Respiratory function relies on compatible interactions between nuclear and
mitochondrial genes, which leads to mitochondrial-nuclear epistasis and,
theoretically, interactions between mitochondrial genes (mt-mt epistasis).
Natural variation in mtDNAs contributes to differences in fitness, but because
mtDNAs are typically uniparentally inherited and do not recombine, it is
difficult to functionally dissect individual vs. epistatic effects of mtDNA
polymorphisms. The yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae has bi-parental inheritance
and recombination of mtDNAs. The natural distribution of mt-mt epistasis will be
assessed by mating strains with identical nuclear genotypes but divergent
mtDNAs, and the resulting strains containing mitochondrial recombinants will be
functionally screened for evidence of mt-mt epistasis. Individual mitochondrial
recombinant genomes will be sequenced and interacting loci mapped by comparing
differences in allele pair frequencies between phenotypically distinct groups.
This research will determine the role mt-mt epistasis plays in natural
populations and provide information on mitochondrial recombination in yeast at
the resolution of individual recombinant mtDNA haplotypes.