* 1601251
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   Evolution of polyploidy and storage roots in sweet potato and its wild relatives
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2018
* James Leebens-Mack, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Weeks
* 05/31/2018
* USD 19,089.00

Sweet potato, with its carbohydrate- and vitamin-rich storage roots, is a vital
source of nutrition for people in many countries. Current efforts to improve
crop yield in sweet potato are focused on a small number of breeding lines. Wild
relatives of crop species can also be an important source of genetic material
for crop improvement, but the evolutionary relationships between sweet potato
and its wild relatives are currently unknown. This project will use genomic data
to reconstruct evolutionary relationships between sweet potato and its wild
relatives, and shed light on the genetic changes that have contributed to the
evolution of the carbohydrate- and vitamin-rich storage root in cultivated sweet
potato. Root characteristics and genetic variation are poorly known for wild
relatives of sweet potato and this project will provide a greatly improved
understanding of the potential of wild relatives for sweet potato breeding
programs. The project will train one graduate student and several undergraduates
in laboratory techniques. Results from the research will be integrated within
new teaching materials for middle school, high school and undergraduate students
that emphasize the domestication process and importance of diversity in crop
breeding programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will characterize the
timing of whole genome duplication events within sweet potato (Ipomoea batatas)
and closely related species, and test whether these events are linked to the
evolution of storage roots in the group. Numerous studies have implicated
polyploidy as a major driving factor in the evolution of complex phenotypes;
however, few studies have linked whole genome duplication events with the
evolution of novel root traits. This study will apply modern phylogenomic
methods to estimate relationships within the Ipomoea batatas complex and
reconstruct the history of polyploidization and storage root development in the
group. Genetic markers developed through gene capture and Restriction site
Associated DNA Sequencing (RADSeq) technologies through this research will be
useful for germplasm stock centers characterizing and preserving diversity
within sweet potato and across the Ipomoea batatas complex. These findings will
advance sweet potato breeding efforts, including recent work to develop
productive and robust cultivars for Africa.