* 1601186
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   Mechanisms of reproductive isolation along the speciation continuum: from micro- to macro-evolutionary scales
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2018
* Sharon Strauss, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 05/31/2018
* USD 19,157.00

This project will examine the forces maintaining diversity in populations,
species, and more distantly related lineages to build a more comprehensive
picture of the speciation process in California Jewelflowers. Understanding how
new species originate from existing ones is a major goal in biology. After new
species are formed, both ecological and genetic forces may act to preserve
species boundaries, prevent hybridization, and maintain biodiversity. It is
unclear if these forces act similarly at population, species, and higher
taxonomic levels. A comprehensive understanding of how biodiversity is generated
and maintained in a single group of plants will inform basic models of the
maintenance of Earth's biodiversity. It will also guide important conservation
and management decisions for small, isolated, or fragmented populations. This
research will provide training of a graduate student and several undergraduate
research assistants. It will also provide citizens with a richer context for
understanding plant biodiversity through public outreach efforts on California's
plant biodiversity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous research at the middle and
late stages of speciation in the plant clade Streptanthus suggests that both
genetic incompatibilities and divergent ecology contribute to the maintenance of
species-level diversity. Experimental hybridizations show that genetic
incompatibility increases with species divergence times. Some recently diverged
species pairs can, however, still produce viable hybrid offspring in the
greenhouse. Field research shows that ecological differences in such species,
including microhabitat affinity, pollinator preferences and constancy, and
phenology may play a role in maintaining potential interbreeders as distinct
species in nature. It is unclear whether the same ecological and evolutionary
forces act at different stages of the speciation continuum, or if distinct
genetic and ecological forces are characteristic of each stage of speciation.
This research delves deeper into the early stages of speciation in Streptanthus,
by focusing on population divergence and early reproductive isolation at the
population level. Experimental hybridizations and Restriction site Associated
DNA sequencing will be used to examine patterns of genetic relatedness among
multiple geographically and environmentally divergent populations of S. breweri.
The same techniques will also be used to analyze the influence of genetic,
geographic, and environmental distance, on reproductive isolation at the
population level. This research complements previous work in Streptanthus,
providing new data on population-level processes, which will illuminate patterns
of reproductive isolation observed at the species level, and provide a
comprehensive view of the speciation process within a single study system.