* 1601429
* Collaborative Research: Digitization TCN: The Mid-Atlantic Megalopolis: Achieving a greater scientific understanding of our urban world
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2016,11/30/2017
* John Hall, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 11/30/2017
* USD 102,822.00

In light of the increasingly urban future of our planet, a thorough
understanding of the biological processes at work in urban areas is necessary
for the continued survival of Earth's inhabitants, including humans. The first
step in that understanding is to know what thrives, survives, or perishes in
cities, now and in the past. The Mid-Atlantic Megalopolis (MAM) Project begins
this study by looking at vascular plants, with the digitization of roughly
700,000 herbarium specimens from eleven institutions, including public and
private universities, state agencies, arboreta, museums, and botanic gardens, in
the urban corridor from New York City to Washington, D.C. As the largest,
oldest, and most populated urban corridor in the U.S., this area and its flora
present a unique opportunity for the study of urbanization, particularly given
its rich herbarium collections, containing specimens collected over the last 400
years. The data mobilized in this effort will help us achieve a better
scientific understanding of living urban systems, a critical need for urban
planners, restoration ecologists, environmental engineers, (landscape)
architects, and conservationists engaged in creating more sustainable and better
designed cities, including the constructed and restored natural environments of
our urban areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Digitization of each specimen in the MAM
Project will result in a high resolution image, a databased record of collection
metadata, and a georeferenced point, all of which will be made publicly
available online. Building on already successful regional programs, the MAM
Project will partner with schools, universities, botanical clubs, and the
general public to crowd source databasing efforts and to recruit citizen
scientists to help build urban floras online, enabling not only increased
digitization efficiency, but educational and research opportunities as well. The
MAM Project also includes new developments for data cleaning and standardization
in Symbiota, which will expedite the use of digitized specimen data for
research, and new reporting features which will advance digitization workflow
and project management. This award is made as part of the National Resource for
Digitization of Biological Collections through the Advancing Digitization of
Biological Collections program, and all data resulting from this award will be
available through the national resource (iDigBio.org).