* 1601470
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Estimating the genetic and demographic response of an amphibian metapopulation to global climate change
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2018
* David Weisrock, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 06/30/2018
* USD 18,946.00

This project will contrast the utility of population size estimates and
migration estimates in predicting population declines and increases. It is known
that populations that are too small can experience high levels of inbreeding and
may lose much of their genetic diversity over time. In turn they may face higher
extinction probabilities and for this reason population size could be a critical
variable in many conservation plans. Population size, however, may be a poor
predictor of a population's viability when additional forces are at play.
Migration between locations as well as climate induced fluctuations in a
population from year to year may be just as important as the average population
size in predicting long term trends in a population's likelihood of survival.
The researchers will examine the relative effectiveness of average population
size, migration between populations and population variability in predicting the
viability of populations of two salamander species. The project will develop
more informative genetic monitoring techniques as well as the training of a
doctoral student.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will determine the effective
population size (Ne), and gene flow patterns of two salamander species that have
been monitored in the same wetland for 37 years. One of the species, Ambystoma
opacum, is increasing in number while the other, Ambystoma talpoideum, is
decreasing in number over the last fifteen years. This study will answer two
questions: First, is the reliability of Ne as a predictor of population
viability dependent on metapopulation structure? Second, how do gene flow and
annual fluctuations in reproductive rate influence the long-term viability of
populations? The question of how gene flow impacts viability estimates based on
Ne will be addressed by collecting Single Nucleotide Polymorphism data from
individuals from five connected subpopulations using next generation sequencing.
Maximum likelihood estimates of Ne for the subpopulations, and Bayesian
estimates of gene flow rates between the subpopulations will be calculated for
both species. The importance of metapopulation structure in refining conclusions
based on Ne will be determined for both declining and growing populations from
that data. Individual based census data from previous years will be used to
ground truth estimates obtained from genetic samples. Projection models will
then be developed to predict whether the metapopulation of each species is at
risk for extinction or if only individual subpopulations are expected be lost
and recolonized over time.