* 1601370
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Reinforcement of isolation between parasite host races
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2018
* Kelsey Yule, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 06/30/2018
* USD 19,955.00

A long-standing debate in evolutionary biology is how reproductive barriers
among species can arise in the absence of geographic obstacles. New parasite
species can often form following infection of a novel host species if barriers
to successful reproduction between parasites on the two species exist. This
project combines observational, experimental, and genomic studies of a native
parasitic plant, desert mistletoe, to address this question. While showing the
same epidemiological patterns as many other parasites, parasitic plants allow
for direct tests of hypotheses concerning the evolution of barriers to mating in
diverging parasite lineages that would be infeasible in other systems. This
research will help elucidate the poorly understood ecological mechanisms that
promote parasite speciation and adaptation to novel hosts. The potential for
studying parallel evolution of parasites undergoing ongoing diversification
provides a unique opportunity to study the genomics of species interactions.
Additionally, the researchers will disseminate the results to a broad audience
through collaborations with local outreach groups interested in native plants
and will contribute to the training of graduate and undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will test established theory about the
relative roles of pre-zygotic and post-zygotic isolation mechanisms in sympatry
and allopatry using two host races of a native aerial hemiparasite of plants,
Phoradendron californicum (Viscaceae), across their overlapping ranges.
Populations of the host races infecting catclaw acacia (Senegalia greggii ) and
velvet mesquite (Prosopis velutina) in sympatry (locally interspersed) and
allopatry (&gt; 3 km from nearest infected host of other species) will be
studied at multiple sites across Arizona. The researchers will conduct selection
gradient analyses for flowering time across these populations to test if
selection for divergent flowering times (a pre-zygotic isolation mechanism)
between the host races is stronger in sympatry than in allopatry. Additionally,
the researchers will perform hand-pollination experiments to quantify the cost
of mating between host races and the strength of late-acting barriers to gene
flow. Finally, population genomic analyses of mistletoes from these host races
using RAD sequencing will reveal whether host races are the result of a single
host-switching event or repeated, parallel divergence and reinforcement across
the range. The researchers will further use the sequence data to investigate the
genomic signature of host race formation and adaptation to host species in this
parasitic plant.