* 1601271
* Dissertation Research:   Linking climate dynamics and historical demographic in South American forest lizards
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2016,08/31/2017
* Ana Carnaval, CUNY Graduate School University Center
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 08/31/2017
* USD 12,590.00

Tens of thousands of years ago the levels of rainfall in northeastern South
America were much higher than today. As a result, the Amazon and the Atlantic
rainforests were much more extensive, occupying regions that are today covered
by deserts and savannahs. When the climate became drier, those forests retracted
and became fragmented. This change likely had dramatic effects on the animals
and plants that live in tropical rainforests. This project asks how tropical
forest organisms were affected by the climatic changes experienced over the past
250,000 years. The genomes of three species of lizards that occur in the
Brazilian forests will be studied, and by comparing the DNA sequences of
multiple individuals per species over their geographic range, the project will
uncover the extent that their populations have expanded or declined in the past.
This research shed light on how these organisms have responded to environmental
change, in addition to the processes that led to their current distribution
patterns. This project will provide training in molecular systematic methods and
mentorship for undergraduate and Masters students at The City College of New
York. It also will foster new USA-Brazil scientific collaborations through joint
field trips to northern Brazil.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to test
how populations of forest-associated lizards have been affected by a recently
proposed dynamics of moisture transport in South America during the Quaternary.
It will generate Single Nucleotide Polymorphism (SNP) data of three arboreal
lizard species that occur in both Amazon and the Atlantic rainforests (Anolis
punctatus, A. ortonii and Polychrus marmoratus) using a restriction-site
associated DNA sequencing protocol. Phylogenetic relationships will be inferred
using coalescent-based methods. Analyses of genetic structure will be performed
to infer the number of effective populations within the different species.
Scenarios of population expansion, contraction, or persistence will be evaluated
based on coalescent simulations and both likelihood-based methods and
Approximate Bayesian Computation. Estimates of demographic parameters such as
effective population sizes, divergence times between populations, and migration
rates will be estimated using best-fit models. Together these data will provide
new insights on the population structure for taxa in the Brazilian Atlantic and
Amazonian rainforests, and how they have responded to recent climate
perturbations.