* 1601418
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Carbon allocation strategies in understory native and invasive woody plants
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Jason Fridley, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 08/31/2018
* USD 12,105.00

One of the largest management concerns in natural forests of the Eastern U.S. is
the invasion of ornamental shrubs from Europe and Asia. These plants outcompete
native species for resources, reducing plant species diversity and altering the
cycling of forest nutrients. This project will explore differences in energy use
between native and invasive shrub species to advance our understanding of when
and why exotic plants will exclude native plants. Research findings will help
forest managers make decisions that will best protect U.S. forests in the face
of environmental change. The project will support the research and training of a
doctoral student, expanding the student's experimental and analytical skills.
Undergraduate students from underrepresented groups will participate in hands-on
research; through this engagement, the research will foster a new generation of
critically thinking young scientists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
characterizes carbon allocation patterns in native and invasive woody plants
growing in deciduous forest understories. It will evaluate the relationship
between growth rates and carbon storage allocation, and how allocation to
defense mediates this relationship. Researchers will test the general hypothesis
that invasive plants allocate more carbon toward growth at the expense of
storage allocation in order to outcompete native plants for resources. Storage
compounds, in the form of starches and simple sugars, are critical for recovery
from tissue damage and protection from frost events. Preliminary data show that
invasive species have higher growth rates and produce more leaves in response to
leaf removal, but it is unknown whether this comes at a loss of storage
compounds that promote survival. An insect feeding experiment on a range of
native and invasive species' leaves will be carried out to assess allocation to
physical and chemical defenses, and a freezing experiment will elucidate the
relationship between stem starch and sugar concentrations in different species
and their ability to tolerate cold temperatures. These activities will test the
hypothesis that invasive species possess lower carbon storage and defense
allocation than native species, and that this difference leads to lower survival
in response to leaf removal and freezing events, and lower resistance to
herbivore feeding.