* 1601014
* Broadening the Impact of STEM Education: The Community College Leadership Role II, 2017-2019
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2016,12/31/2020
* Ellen Hause, American Association of Community Colleges
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 12/31/2020
* USD 3,989,601.00

The activities conducted through this project will help community college
leaders to make the important connections and partnerships necessary to build
and sustain their STEM programs, as well as to mentor and nurture new
collaborations. The proposed activities will help to strengthen and expand the
role of the nation's community colleges as they continue to meet the increasing
demand for a trained technical workforce; play a critical role in addressing the
national student completion agenda in STEM fields; and face the challenges of
maintaining U.S. global competitiveness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
broadens the impact of community college leadership in STEM technician
education; encourages greater numbers of community colleges to develop and
strengthen ATE-related programs; creates and supports venues for developing and
nurturing STEM professional and leadership development opportunities; and
disseminates the value, resources, and accomplishments of the ATE program. The
following proposed activities build upon AACC's previous efforts supported by
the National Science Foundation: 1) Three National ATE Principal Investigators
Conferences in 2017, 2018, and 2019; 2) Continuation of AACC's successful
MentorLinks program to help an additional 10 community colleges establish new
programs or strengthen existing ones in STEM fields; 3) An online publication
documenting Strategies for Successful STEM Mentoring, based on the MentorLinks
mentor training model and mentoring guidelines; 4) A national Thought Leaders'
Summit and proceedings report focused on implementing evidence-based teaching
strategies for supporting student success in STEM among underrepresented
students; 5) Dissemination of ATE program resources, information, and impact
through presentations, feature stories, website, conference proceedings, and
social media technologies; and 6) Evaluation, including a longitudinal study of
the 44 colleges (and 17 representative mentors) that participated in the
MentorLinks program from 2002-2016.