* 1601038
* Building an Academic Pathway for the Aerial Sensing Data Analyst
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Andrew Shepherd, Sinclair Community College
* Standard Grant
* Heather Watson
* 06/30/2019
* USD 583,698.00

Sinclair Community College (Dayton, Ohio) and partners will fill a workforce
need for data analysts working with data collected from remote sensors flown on
unmanned aircraft. These individuals will be increasingly employed in the
Unmanned Aerial Systems (UAS)/Geospatial Intelligence Systems (GIS) sectors.
Fueling the demand for Aerial Sensing Data Analysts are technological advances
and the affordability and higher resolution of UAS compared to manned-aircraft
and satellites. This project will develop a competency-based, hybrid post-
secondary certificate for a new Aerial Data Sensing Analyst program to increase
preparedness for entry-level employment in UAS/GIS, provide post-secondary
professional development related to recruiting and retaining underrepresented
populations, and conduct outreach and orientation activities for high school
teachers and students regarding UAS/GIS educational pathways.

Due to an increasing number of civil and commercial applications for UAS/GIS
methods, there is a growing demand for analysts who have the competencies needed
to correct, calibrate, process, store, and analyze the numerous terabytes of
data collected from UAS flight. This project will provide community college
students an opportunity to master competencies in the growing field of UAS/GIS
through the development of a new competency-based, online post-secondary
certificate program, Aerial Sensing Data Analyst. The program also seeks to
expand awareness of UAS/GIS careers and educational pathways among high school
students and teachers, and increase the number of underserved students enrolled
in targeted undergraduate programs, including military veterans who may have
applicable prior experience for this growing commercial industry. In addition,
the project will help advance understanding of how such competency-based
certificate programs promote access to post-secondary opportunities, with
attention to their influence on increasing recruitment and retention of students
from underrepresented groups.