* 1601522
* Advanced Design and Fabrication of Prosthetic and Medical Devices
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* sidi berri, CUNY New York City College of Technology
* Standard Grant
* John Jackman
* 08/31/2021
* USD 811,064.00

The United States is the world leader in the design and fabrication of medical
devices, holding one-third of global market share. Aging populations and global
military conflicts alone create a rapidly growing need for the state-of-the-art
production of medical devices. There is a significant gap between the market for
prosthetic devices and the nation's capacity to meet production needs in the
future unless engineering technology and engineering programs educate future
technologists to work in this field. In partnership with leading producers and
medical professionals in this field, the Department of Mechanical Engineering
and Industrial Design Technology at New York City College of Technology (City
Tech) has designed an associate degree program that is well aligned with the
Medical Device Harmonization Initiative created by the current Administration
and the US Department of Labor, to help the medical industry address its
workforce supply deficiencies. Considering that City Tech is the second most
diverse institution of higher education among regional universities in the
northeast producing a high number of associate degree recipients, it is
anticipated that this project will also have a significant impact on the
production of a diverse cohort of technologists with expertise in this critical
field. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;City Tech will provide students with unique
classroom experiences that combine curriculum enhancement with intensive hands
on experience using state of the art design and manufacturing technologies and
offering advanced certificates in key technical areas. Students will gain real
world experience with the field through association by working on real-world
projects with the prestigious Hospital for Special Surgery in Manhattan, SUNY-
Downstate Medical Center in Brooklyn, and other not-for-profit organizations, to
design and fabricate prosthetic and medical devices. Students will be expanding
their knowledge and multidisciplinary expertise in dental prostheses, business
management, mechatronics, ethical issues in medical devices, and product
lifecycle management through interaction with top experts in these fields. The
project will also be introduced to grades 7-12 students and teachers in order to
provide them with early exposure to this field.