* 1601450
* The Nanotechnology Applications and Career Knowledge (NACK) Support Center
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2016,12/31/2022
* Michael Lesiecki, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 12/31/2022
* USD 2,347,347.00

Nanotechnology is constantly impacting society through the field of
nanoelectronics and large numbers of nanotechnology-based products in other
fields, such as health care, automotive and transportation, safety and security,
and home and leisure. The existing Nanotechnology Applications and Career
Knowledge (NACK) Network will transition to the NACK Support Center with the
objective of continuing to support U.S. nanotechnology workforce education. The
NACK Support Center will employ its community and technical college
(CC)-industry-research university (RU) partnerships to carry out: 1) resource
sharing among CCs as well as among CCs and RUs; 2) dissemination of learning
materials that deliver a core set of industry-recommended nanotechnology skills;
3) live-streaming of professional development webinars; and 4) creation of more
effective approaches for disseminating resources and expanding dissemination
methodologies through a NACK website with added services and enhanced
functionality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NACK will carry out its work by: continuing
to support and develop new nodes in the Remotely Accessible Instruments for
Nanotechnology (RAIN) Network; adding new online-accessible characterization and
processing tools; developing ways to increase awareness and usage of RAIN
resources; and collecting data and statistics to evaluate RAIN's impact on
nanotechnology education. Through a partnership with the industry standards
organization ASTM International, NACK educational materials from its six core-
skills courses will be institutionalized into industry standards. This
partnership will allow students and working technicians to earn up to 6
stackable ASTM certificates with worldwide industry recognition via ASTM-
administered tests based on these core courses. By continually updating core-
skills course material and adapting it to online delivery via videoed lectures
and labs, and by growing on-line course and equipment accessibility, educational
opportunities will become increasingly available to highly diverse secondary and
post-secondary level populations. The NACK Support Center's planned outreach to
veterans and underrepresented student groups will address a key need to recruit
these groups for advanced STEM education, and broaden nanotechnology awareness
in general. Business outreach and the stackable certificate program will promote
technician careers and visibility among a broad range of industries.