* 1601362
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:Understanding effects on climate change on parasitism in small mammals
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2018
* Armand Kuris, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 05/31/2018
* USD 19,550.00

A surprising large percentage of human mortality is caused by infectious
disease. Understanding patters of parasite diversity and the dynamics of disease
transmission is critical. Little is currently known about how climate alters
basic patterns of parasite distribution and diversity. This project will use
changes from low to high elevations on a mountain to mimic climate change. The
research will describe the distribution of parasites and examine the factors
affecting parasite diversity along this gradient. Results will link climate
change, parasite diversity, and disease. The project will advance public health
and policy efforts to reduce risks that disease will increase with climate
change. The National Geographic Society and the Smithsonian Institution will
host publicly available databases that will facilitate future studies in a
region of high species diversity. The research will strengthen collaborations
with Kenyan researchers and will engage American students in field work. The
investigators will also collaborate with the California Alliance for Minority
Participation to mentor students from economically disadvantaged and otherwise
under-represented groups in data analysis and disease ecology.

This project will explore how climate driven changes in host diet, diversity,
and density affect parasitism. Results will contribute to the predictive
framework needed to understand how climate change will affect wildlife and their
parasites. The investigators will use previously-collected samples from 30
species of small mammals to quantify each host's diet and gastrointestinal
parasite community. Samples were collected along an elevational gradient on
Mount Kenya that approximates changes in abiotic conditions expected with
climate change. Parasites will be counted and identified and a subset will be
barcoded to identify cryptic and novel species. Host diet and trophic level will
be determined using ä15N stable isotope chemistry and validated with compound
specific stable isotope analyses and visual inspection of host gut contents.
Controlling for host abundance and diversity, these data will then be used to
test if long-recognized patterns in free-living species richness apply to
parasite richness along elevational gradients. The mechanisms responsible for
patterns in parasite diversity will be explored by examining how host diet,
diversity, and density affect parasite richness. Climatic gradients are expected
to alter both parasite diversity and the number of parasites per host
(intensity). The relative importance of biotic elevation effects (host density,
diversity and diet) on parasite intensity will be examined for parasites that
occur in hosts abundant at multiple elevations. This analysis will be repeated
across multiple parasites to test the generality of parasite responses to
changing host and climatic conditions.