* 1601127
* Research Intiation Award: Long Time Behavior for Systems of Coupled Partial Differential Equations
* EDU,EES
* 05/15/2016,04/30/2021
* Yongjin Lu, Virginia State University
* Standard Grant
* Emanuel WAddell
* 04/30/2021
* USD 299,628.00

Research Initiation Awards provide support for junior and mid-career faculty at
Historically Black Colleges and Universities who are building new research
programs or redirecting and rebuilding existing research programs. It is
expected that the award helps to further the faculty member's research
capability and effectiveness, improves research and teaching at his home
institution, and involves undergraduate students in research experiences. The
award to Virginia State University has potential broader impact in a number of
areas. The goal of the project is to study the existence and uniqueness of
solutions of systems of strongly coupled partial differential equations given an
appropriate initial configuration and to study the long time behavior of the
solutions. The models have wide applications in areas such as aerospace
engineering, civil engineering, and environmental sciences. Undergraduate
students will gain research experiences and courses in ordinary and partial
differential equations will be enhanced.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the
project is to study the control, optimization and stability analysis centered on
physically significant systems composed of dynamical "interactive" inhomogeneous
structures, whose behavior is governed by nonlinear systems of coupled partial
differential equations (PDEs). The two PDE-components act on separate and
adjacent media. Two specific models under consideration are: (1) Fluid-structure
interaction (FSI), where the model consists of the Navier Stokes equation
coupled on the interface with dynamic elasticity; and (2) Structure acoustic
interaction (SAI), in an acoustic chamber with an elastic or thermoelastic shell
as a flexible wall. The SAI model consists of hybrid coupling between an
acoustic wave equation and a shell equation which is possibly nonlinear. Control
theoretic issues to be studied are: (a) stabilization, particularly
stabilization of unstable equilibria in FSI and stabilization of SAI subject to
weak dissipation; and (b) well-posedness, particularly seeking suitable feedback
control such that the solution to FSI with moving interface is well-posed. Both
models could be generalized to other structures where the developed mathematical
technology could be applied to other coupled systems.