* 1601473
* Precision Agriculture Curriculum Enhancement
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2016,12/31/2020
* Jenni Fridgen, Parkland College
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 12/31/2020
* USD 197,505.00

Technicians and specialists are needed in order to fulfill the demand of the
precision agriculture industry as precision agriculture technicians, crop
specialists, nutrient management specialists, precision agronomists, service
technicians, and research scientists. They work with soil testing companies,
crop consulting firms, and fertilizer and chemical retailers, but the shortage
of precision agriculture educational opportunities limits the ability of
businesses to hire qualified employees and forces them to use their limited
resources on incumbent worker training. In addition, the gap between industry
need and existing training leads to graduates having to retrain or take
additional courses even though they have already earned a general agriculture
degree. By offering an enhanced curriculum to high school and college students,
this project at Parkland College in Illinois will educate a wide variety of
agriculture workers in line with industry needs as it provides a robust
education and training program to support the vital agricultural industry of
Illinois and the United States. A focus of the project is on increasing the
number of women in precision agriculture, which will strengthen and diversify an
emerging American industry. The deliverables and best practices developed
through the project will be disseminated through coordination with the ATE
National Geospatial Technology Center of Excellence, Clark State Community
College in Springfield, OH, and agricultural education
conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Jobs in precision agriculture require a unique
combination of technical and agricultural expertise that is not widely available
for high school and college students. Due to the highly technical nature of
precision agriculture jobs, the curriculum in the field is often outdated and
does not fully prepare students for available positions. Enhancing precision
agriculture curriculum for two-year colleges and connecting this curriculum with
high schools and four-year colleges will dramatically improve the preparedness
of technicians in a number of agricultural sectors. It will utilize the existing
precision agriculture curriculum as the foundation for an enhanced program
including a more comprehensive associate degree, updated articulation
agreements, and the development of dual-enrollment content for area high
schools. These components will create a 2+2+2 structure that will be replicable
in other regions and sustainable. The project will utilize emerging technologies
in conjunction with agronomy to enhance precision agriculture education and will
be developed in close partnership with local and regional employers. A formative
and summative evaluation process will be employed to continuously enhance the
project activities and provide opportunities for researching and evaluating the
success of the project and deliverables.