* 1601815
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   Morphological, genetic, and evolutionary bases for structurally blue scales of Buckeye butterflies
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2019
* Nipam Patel, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 06/30/2019
* USD 19,819.00

A major goal in biology is to understand the biological basis of traits that
mediate an organism's interactions with its environment. Color mediates
organismal success in diverse ways, including camouflage and signaling to other
organisms. While pigments such as melanin are one familiar source of coloration,
many organisms also employ structural coloration. Structural color is caused by
interference of light as it interacts with nanometer-sized physical structures
near the surface of an organism. Organisms use structural mechanisms to display
colors for which they lack pigments (frequently blue) or to create optical
effects like iridescence. Structural coloration is a pervasive and adaptive
phenomenon, and is highly relevant for the bio-inspired synthesis of optical
materials and devices. This project investigates the biological basis of
structural color (e.g. how genes and developmental processes sculpt the
underlying nanostructures, as well as how the shapes of nanostructures evolve).
The researchers are also involved in outreach to K-12 teachers in rural Nevada.

This study will focus on a single species, the Buckeye butterfly, to explore the
biological basis of blue structural color. Although wild buckeyes are
predominantly brown, a population that was artificially selected to be a
pronounced blue, through structural mechanisms, is recently available. In this
study, blue and brown buckeyes will be interbred to generate variably colored
offspring. These progeny will be statistically analyzed to correlate extent of
blueness with the genetic information carried by each individual, thus
identifying genetic loci that regulate structural color. This study will also
analyze the nanostructures of six related species to track the evolution of
structural color within a phylogenetic context.