* 1601508
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   The Effect of Plant Dispersal on Ecosystem Function
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2018
* Jason Fridley, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 04/30/2018
* USD 16,361.00

Plant communities are the main source of energy for the rest of life. Habitat
loss and fragmentation -- the conversion of large areas into isolated smaller
areas -- threaten the diversity of plant communities and ecosystem functions
(essential services provided by plants). Thus, it important that we understand
how to maintain plant communities and how they help ecosystems function. This
project explores how seed dispersal in fragmented habitats helps sustain plant
diversity and promote ecosystem functions such as nutrient cycles and
decomposition rates. Investigators will examine whether habitat fragmentation
has an unusually large impact on the abundance of plant species that are poor
seed dispersers and, if so, how loss of these species may result in loss of
ecosystem function. Scientists working on this project will engage with the
public through talks, a workshop, and internship opportunities. Results will
help inform the U.S. Army Corp of Engineers and their mission of conservation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Investigators will study impacts of habitat fragmentation
on plant communities and ecosystem functions, using a set of islands in Lake
Strom Thurmond, South Carolina. Plant communities, plant chemical and physical
attributes, and soil properties will be measured on 20 islands of different
levels of spatial isolation (near shore versus far from shore) and historic
disturbance. Specifically, investigators will quantify the abundance and
diversity of plant species, leaf properties of those species, soil nitrogen
availability, and microbial decomposition rates. These data will be used to test
the hypothesis that spatial isolation and disturbance affect ecosystem function
by altering plant species composition. Statistical models will test 1) whether
ecosystem carbon and nutrient fluxes are a function of spatial isolation,
disturbance history, and leaf properties; and 2) whether dispersal limitation
caused by island spatial isolation can drive functional composition.