* 1601830
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Testing macroevolutionary predictions of diversity and disparity in the ray-finned fishes
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Michael Alfaro, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Ingram
* 06/30/2019
* USD 20,020.00

Understanding why some groups of organisms have more species than other groups
of organisms is a long-standing goal in evolutionary biology. One proposed
explanation for the process that creates this uneven diversity is evolvability,
the idea that some lineages that have the intrinsic ability to evolve novel
morphologies also have an increased ability to generate new species. Ray-finned
fishes, representing half of all vertebrate diversity with 30,000 species, have
an astonishingly disparate array of body forms. Fishes are also intensively
harvested for human consumption, potentially leading to major impacts on their
diversity and their ability to serve both as ecological role players and as a
human food source. This project will aim to test the evolvability hypothesis by
collecting data on fish body shape using museum collections and crowdsourcing.
The researchers will digitize a vast store of biodiversity in museum collections
to be made available online, for use by the public and interested researchers.

This project will (1) build the largest phylogeny of vertebrates, with over
12,000 species represented, (2) digitize ichthyology collections at three
museums, (3) collect the largest geometric morphometric dataset, consisting of
shape data for over 9,000 species of fishes, and (4) reconstruct the disparity
among different fish lineages, and how their rates of body shape evolution have
changed over time. Several key macroevolutionary predictions can be made based
on differential evolvability across clades. More evolvable lineages should have
higher richness and diversification rates, and enjoy more phenotypic disparity
and rates of phenotypic evolution. Additionally, lineages that enjoy fast
phenotypic evolution should also diversify into a larger variety of ecological
niches.