* 1601333
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Genetic Mechanisms of Spatial Eco-Evolutionary Dynamics in Range Expansions
* BIO,DEB
* 04/15/2016,03/31/2017
* Brett Melbourne, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 03/31/2017
* USD 19,926.00

The proposed research will analyze genomic patterns to test evolutionary
contributions to experimental range expansion using a model laboratory system.
Recent decades have seen large scale changes of species' geographic ranges, as
introductions of invasive species and shifting climate patterns displace
organisms from ancestral areas and expand into new regions. Many previous models
of range movement rely only on ecological processes while ignoring evolution;
recent research, however, suggests that evolution at the expanding range edge
might play a key role. Range shifts have important conservation and economic
implications that will be informed by these studies. The researchers also
conduct a workshop course for K-12 teachers and provide curriculum materials to
examine range shifts as a teaching tool.

Several hypotheses will be tested by quantifying patterns in allele frequencies
through space and time using flour beetles stored from an already completed
laboratory range expansion experiment. The hypotheses to be tested are that (1)
core and edge locations of a species range should grow increasingly genetically
distinct through time, (2) they should accumulate different genetic variants,
with edges containing variants associated with high colonization ability, and
(3) the speed of range expansion should correlate with these evolved genetic
patterns. Whole genome sequencing will be used to quantify allele frequencies
among beetles sampled at different times and locations during the range
expansion. The results will not only provide insights into the role of spatial
structure in evolution, but they will also have significance for management of
invasive species and species shifting ranges due to climate change.