* 1601775
* California WaterWorks:  Building the People Pipeline
* EHR,DUE
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2020
* Sally Cox, Grossmont Cuyamaca Community College District
* Standard Grant
* Pushpa Ramakrishna
* 09/30/2020
* USD 898,662.00

The California WaterWorks: Building the People Pipeline is a project at Cuyamaca
College to identify and train the next generation of water industry
professionals who will operate and maintain the critical infrastructure that
keeps our water safe and reliable. The project will develop a new "Institute for
Water Studies" that embeds contextualized STEM learning opportunities in
technical courses at the college. It will also work with local 7-12 math and
science teachers to provide contextualized teaching modules and demonstrations
of water and wastewater equipment for 7-12 students. Students at the college
will assemble an above-ground water distribution system that allows them to hone
their mechanical skills and gain relevant job experience in the classroom.
Through these activities, the project will develop career pathways that recruit
women, underrepresented students, and veterans into careers in water and
wastewater management.

As part of their effort to educate the next generation of water technicians and
replace an aging workforce, the California WaterWorks project will develop new
stackable certifications in water treatment, water distribution, wastewater
treatment, and wastewater collection. These certificates will offer multiple
entrance, multiple exit pathways aligned with industry standards and
credentials. The project will also implement the ACT WorkKeys and National
Career Readiness Certification materials to improve students' job readiness and
soft skills. To support recruitment efforts, the project will work with ATETV to
produce a series of recruitment video that target women and transitioning
military personnel with STEM skills, and inform them of career opportunities in
the water and wastewater management industries. The curricula, videos, and other
teaching materials will be shared with other community colleges through the ATE
network.