* 1601088
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   Do accelerated microbial - organic matter interactions feed back to promote shrub growth in arctic tundra?
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2016,09/30/2018
* Nina Wurzburger, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* John Schade
* 09/30/2018
* USD 17,264.00

The arctic holds the largest pool of soil carbon across land ecosystems. As the
climate warms, changes to this carbon pool become increasingly important to
understand. Carbon release from soils would increase concentrations of carbon
dioxide in the atmosphere, while increases in soil carbon pools would remove
carbon dioxide from the atmosphere. Higher temperatures have already trigged
widespread expansion of large, woody shrubs across arctic tundra, and appear to
stimulate the loss of soil carbon. This research examines whether shrubs change
the composition of microbial communities in a way that positively impacts the
shrub growth. This information is critical to understanding how shrubs affect
carbon pools of plants and soils in the arctic. Using arctic soils from Alaska,
the investigators will establish a plant growth experiment to determine how
shrubs respond to different treatments of soil microbes and nutrients. By
investigating plants, soils, and microbes in one experiment, this work will
improve the accuracy of models of arctic carbon dynamics. In addition, this work
will train undergraduates in both field and laboratory research skills and
provide hands-on scientific experience. The results of this research will also
be integrated into lesson plans for elementary, middle, and high school students
through a collaboration between the researchers and local Georgia teachers.

Previous research by these investigators demonstrates that shrubs promote a more
active and less nutrient limited microbial community, which may lead to carbon
loss from shrub soils. These findings suggest that shrubs stimulate soil
microbial activity as a mechanism to improve nutrient availability, but it is
unclear if shrub-induced changes to microbial communities benefit shrub growth.
Using arctic soils, the researchers will establish a plant growth experiment
using a fully factorial design crossing soil microbial source (shrub vs non-
shrub) by nitrogen (+/-) and phosphorus (+/-) with a sterile control for three
species of shrubs (Alnus fruticosa, Betula nana, and Salix pulchra). Collected
data will include plant biomass, quantification of root symbioses, and soil
microbial biomass. These data will be used to understand the magnitude and
direction of shrub-microbial relationships and if carbon loss induced by
microbial activity can be counterbalance by shrub carbon gain.