* 1601762
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Network heterogeneity and metapopulation persistence in Pseudomonas syringae
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2018
* Ellen Simms, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 04/30/2018
* USD 20,396.00

Society is increasingly defined by networks - groups of individuals separated by
small or large distances. Movement across space to connect groups determines the
strength of a network, the rates at which information spreads (social networks)
or individuals interact (population networks), and the extent to which events in
one group affect events in another group. This project will use a new tool to
determine how, when, and why connections among populations determine whether a
population persists or goes extinct. Results of the project will improve
conservation and management plans for populations that are increasingly isolated
by changes in land use. Improved conservation plans will be particularly
important for endangered species that persist within weak networks. The project
will advance the training and education of a doctoral student, who has developed
and will improve a new experimental tool. Investigators will make the design and
use of this tool publicly accessible, contributing to a democratic scientific
process in which researchers co-design and share equipment. Use of this research
approach will be extended to undergraduate and middle school students through
programs that provide supervised independent research.

This project will use a newly-developed experimental chamber to test directly
both assumptions and predictions of existing metapopulation models;
metapopulations are groups of linked populations. Bacterial populations cultured
in chambers will be connected by corridors in a homogeneous lattice or a
strongly heterogeneous arrangement. Both colonization and extinction rates will
be controlled by manipulating corridor configurations and by disturbing
populations with tetracycline, causing extinction. These manipulations will
compare patch occupancy and metapopulation persistence in homogenous and
heterogeneous networks across a gradient of extinction-to-colonization ratios.
The researchers will next design network treatments that conform to lattice,
random, exponential, and power-law distributions to identify the threshold
extinction-to-colonization ratio at which bacterial populations can no longer
persist. A final manipulation will create 'lonely' populations that are
connected to a single neighbor and compare population persistence to that of
counterpart populations connected to diverse nodes in a network. These
experiments will improve understanding of the effects of spatial heterogeneity
on ecological and evolutionary processes and identify appropriate conservation
strategies for metapopulations comprising strong versus weak networks.