* 1601804
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  The role of the gut microbiome in individual specialization and population-level niche partitioning
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2017
* Brett Jesmer, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 04/30/2017
* USD 18,698.00

Wildlife affect society in positive and negative ways. For example, moose have
economic and cultural value for hunters and for tourists, but overabundant
populations of moose can destroy crops and endanger motorists. This project will
examine how food availability affects moose population growth and decline and
advance general understanding of the number of animals an area can support.
Results will guide decisions about managing endangered, overabundant, and alien
species. The researchers will work with state and local agencies in Wyoming to
develop programs to monitor wildlife habitat and nutritional conditions. Results
will be communicated to the public in partnership with the Wildlife Migration
Initiative. The project will both advance training of an early career researcher
and produce new tools to estimate food limitation for wildlife populations.
These tools will be available to state management agencies throughout Wyoming,
Montana, Colorado, Idaho, Utah, and Washington.

This project will characterize diet and the digestive physiology of moose across
eight populations experiencing different levels of plant abundance.
Investigators will measure abundance of forage plants along with levels of body
fat and reproduction, which indicate how much forage is available. Fecal samples
from each population will be used to quantify diet. DNA analyses of feces will
identify individual moose and their gender. Measures of plant availability, body
fat, reproduction and diet will demonstrate if moose adjust their diets when
particular plants becomes scarce. Moose and other large herbivores are
ruminants, relying on highly specialized guts that cultivate microbes to digest
plant fibers and toxins that other animals cannot. The ability of moose to shift
their diets when food becomes scarce may depend on the ability of their gut
microbes to accommodate new diets. The alternate hypothesis that will be tested
is that moose diets and their gut microbes are inherited and are resistant to
changes in food availability. To answer these questions, microbial DNA found in
feces will be used to quantify the relationship between gut microbes, the
genetic relatedness of individual moose, and moose diets. Results of this
project will advance understanding of how food supply drives population increase
or decline.