* 1601533
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Phylogenomics and biogeography of Vochysia, unraveling its tempo and mode of evolution
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2018
* Robert Jansen, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 05/31/2018
* USD 20,069.00

One of the most intriguing questions in modern biogeography relates to
Neotropical plant diversity. The high number of species in this region was once
thought to be due to the antiquity of rainforest habitats; however, recent
studies suggest that many Neotropical flowering plant groups have been
diversifying in the last 10-20 my. Recent episodes of plant diversification in
the neotropics raise questions such as why have there been so many recent
speciation events and what were the contributing biotic and abiotic factors.
This study aims to investigate the biogeography and origin of Vochysia, a
strictly Neotropical group that is hyper-diverse, widely distributed and
relatively young. By contributing to a better understanding about the drivers of
recent diversification in a group of plants, it will lead to an improvement in
general conservation strategies since it will improve knowledge about species
distribution and diversification. This research will be valuable for the
academic progress of a graduate student and an undergraduate student that is
gaining experience in bioinformatics, data analysis, laboratory, and herbarium
protocols. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to improve the knowledge of
the historical biogeography of plants of the neotropics by investigating the
tempo and mode of Vochysia diversification. A phylogenetic reconstruction of the
group will be done using next generation sequencing and computational analytical
tools to provide a phylogenetic tree for investigating the evolutionary history
of Vochysia. The analysis of the mode of evolution will be done using software
for phylogenetic tree dating calibration, biogeographical reconstruction, and
niche modeling. Results from these analyses will allow inferences to be made
about the relative importance of vicariance versus dispersal and niche
conservatism versus divergence with an emphasis on endemic and rare species of
Vochysia. The tempo of Vochysia diversification will involve comparing the net
diversification rates within the genus and between sub-clades from different
biomes using a modern Bayesian-based software that models the complex dynamics
of species diversification.