* 1601454
* Learning Program for Cobots in Advanced Manufacturing Systems
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2021
* Joseph Petrosky, Oakland Community College
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 08/31/2021
* USD 309,206.00

U.S. manufacturing competiveness relies on workers trained in advanced
manufacturing technologies. This project focuses on the use of cobots in
advanced manufacturing systems, and aims to develop critical industry-driven,
hands-on learning content for cobot technicians, engineering technologists, and
robotic automation teachers and faculty. Cobots, or collaborative robots, are
safe and flexible enough to operate in the vicinity of and harmoniously with
human operators. With a predicted 150,000 cobots to be installed worldwide in
the next three years, cobots will become standard practice in advanced
manufacturing systems and will cause manufacturers to re-evaluate traditional
barriers between human, semi-automated, and automated tasks.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Oakland Community College Department of Engineering,
Manufacturing, and Industrial Technology (OCC-EMIT) and the Wayne State
University Division of Engineering Technology and Industrial and Systems
Engineering Department (WSU-DET) will: (1) develop a cobot course and create an
industry-based cobot laboratory at OCC-EMIT to educate community college
students and develop their cobot skills and competencies; (2) develop a two-day
cobot short course at WSU-DET to teach community college instructors advanced
cobot topics; (3) develop and deliver seminars for community college faculty,
secondary STEM teachers, and industry professionals to broaden cobot awareness;
and (4) establish articulation agreements to create a pathway for OCC-EMIT
students to continue cobot education at WSU-DET. Evaluation and assessment
activities will be used to measure the effectiveness of the cobot learning
program. The deliverables of this project include comprehensive educational
material for STEM secondary teachers, community college and university faculty
to educate manufacturing workers in cobot technology. Cobot learning modules,
materials, seminars, short-course, and labs will be disseminated through OCC-
EMIT and WSU-DET websites and will be available for distance learning and
industry-based training.