* 1601999
* PFI:AIR - TT:  RestEaze: Accessible Measures of Leg Movements during Rest and Sleep
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2016,10/31/2017
* Richard Allen, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 10/31/2017
* USD 199,988.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating a fully
functional prototype for RestEaZe, a leg-worn device comprising capacitive and
inertial sensors to distinguish between general leg movements (GLM) and periodic
leg movements (PLM) during sleep. These leg movements can be associated with a
variety of medical conditions including restless leg syndrome (RLS), attention
deficit hyperactive disorder (ADHD) and insomnia, which collectively affect
millions of adults and children. RestEaZe is an in-home sleep monitoring product
that will give the user an immediate, scientifically accurate view of quiet vs.
restless sleep, and changes in sleep, over several nights along with
professionally developed interactive guides for improving sleep based on the
RestEaZe results. The doctor will get advanced movement and sleep analyses with
interactive graphic and numeric summaries of the patient's sleep over several
days. There is currently no easily used at-home way to measure PLM, GLM and
sleep/leg position. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Leg movements in sleep divide into two
phenotypes: General Leg movements during Sleep (GLM) are defined by actual leg
movements and periodic leg movements of Sleep (PLM) are defined by periodic
dorsiflexion of the foot at the ankle. GLM patterns reveal texture and severity
for sleep-behavioral intervention and in this project GLM characteristics are
related to arousal risk (GLMA); PLM reveal possible medical conditions such as
restless legs syndrome (RLS), cardiac morbidity and REM (rapid eye movement)
behavior disorder. PLM, GLM and GLMA along with sleep position will be used to
develop metrics for PLM/hr, sleep time, wake during sleep and quiet vs. restless
(fragmented) sleep to support evaluations and treatments. To address this
technology gap, this project is developing and commercializing a novel system,
RestEaZe that identifies GLM (leg movements), PLMS (foot flexions), and leg
position using a single point measurement system in a home setting.
Specifically, this project combines a flexible proprietary ankle band developed
at the University of Maryland, Baltimore County, with proprietary PLM analytics
developed at Johns Hopkins University. RestEaZe will be an enabling technology
for identifying sleep status, evaluating treatments, e.g. oral iron, behavior
therapy, RLS medications, and identifying possible medical conditions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The graduate students involved in the project will be
exposed to a start up like environment where milestones have to be met within
strict time limits. They will also participate in presentations and
demonstrations that the faculty researchers will have during events such as the
Technology Breakfast (an event where entrepreneurs demonstrate their prototypes
in Baltimore), exposing them to the world of entrepreneurship and
commercialization.