* 1601576
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   Proximate Mechanisms of Aggression in Role Reversed Species
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2016,12/31/2017
* Elizabeth Derryberry, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 12/31/2017
* USD 18,779.00

Hybridization, the breeding of two separate and distinct species, has the
potential to merge two species into one when hybrids are fairly healthy, or keep
the species separate when hybrids fare poorly. In western Panama, where the
species ranges of the tropical shorebirds known as Northern Jacanas and Wattled
Jacanas meet, they form a hybrid zone. Jacanas exhibit mating role reversal
where females control access to mates by competing for territories encompassing
a harem of males, and males provide all parental care. The unusual circumstance
of hybridization between species with such a unique mating system offers a
window into examining why and how species-specific boundaries to mating fail,
from a female perspective. Genetic and experimental evidence suggests that
differences in aggressive behavior between the species may explain patterns of
hybridization. Females of the more aggressive species produce the majority of
hybrid offspring. The proposed research employs techniques to assess the
expression of genes to examine variation in aggressive behavior between the
hybridizing species. This research addresses a fundamental question in ecology,
evolution, and behavior what is the genetic basis of behavioral differences?
This can 1) improve our understanding of the behavioral mechanisms important in
species formation, and 2) provide insight into the genetic mechanisms underlying
behavioral differences between males and females. Understanding of science and
research will be communicated through workshops with local school aged children
and ecotourists at the Panamanian field site.

Between recently diverged species, mating behavior can either impede or promote
reproductive isolation. Theoretical and empirical evidence demonstrates this for
female mate choice and male competition, but little is known about the relative
roles of each. Female aggression has only recently been recognized as an
adaptive behavior, and how its underlying mechanisms compare to those of males
is not well understood. A key step towards understanding the evolutionary
significance of the competitive phenotype in females is determining its
underlying genomic mechanisms. The goal of the proposed research is to elucidate
the molecular basis of the female competitive phenotype by identifying clusters
of candidate genes whose differential expression is responsible for consistent
variation in aggressive behavior. This study combines aggression assays with a
transcriptomic approach to address this question in role reversed, hybridizing
Northern Jacanas (Jacana spinosa)and Wattled Jacanas (J. jacana) in Central
America. This project is novel with respect to understanding the mechanisms by
which phenotypes change as role reversed species diverge, which could advance
our understanding of how organisms respond and adapt to changing environmental
selection. By identifying how the genes underlying aggression are differentially
expressed between role reversed females and males, the proposed research will
expand upon general principles in sexual selection theory that have been
developed in well-known male-dominant systems. Furthermore, this project
investigates the genetic underpinnings of complex behavioral traits in wild,
free-living, non-model organisms, which is vital for understanding the evolution
of ecologically relevant phenotypes under natural conditions.