* 1601564
* CT-EnTICE:  Chemical Technology - Enrolling Technicians and Improving Community Engagement
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/2016,04/30/2020
* Tracy Holbrook, Cape Fear Community College
* Standard Grant
* Pushpa Ramakrishna
* 04/30/2020
* USD 402,048.00

Cape Fear Community College (CFCC) will develop the "Chemical Technology-
Enrolling Technicians and Improving Community Engagement" program (CT-EnTICE).
Project activities will build a pathway from regional high schools to the CFCC
chemical technology program, and will improve technician education at CFCC.
Project activities include a high school science project competition supported
by an instrumentation loan program. This activity builds on past NSF ATE-funded
work at CFCC (Project W.A.T.E.R.S., Award# 1003564), and will be coordinated
with local industrial partners. It will bring a technology and research-rich
educational experience in the context of industry needs to high school students
in their classrooms. CT-EnTICE will support a part-time chemical technology
liaison to reach out to local business and industry to build new partnerships
with industry in CFCC's service area.

CT-EnTICE will leverage what was learned during Project W.A.T.E.R.S. regarding
positive community engagement and will incorporate industrial partners as active
participants in its outreach activities. There is enthusiastic industry support
for CT-EnTICE and the community science projects, and what is learned will
improve technician education at CFCC. Anticipated outcomes of this project are
stronger partnerships between the CFCC chemical technology program (which
results in an Associates of Applied Science) and the community at multiple
levels: students from high school, citizens from the community, and
representatives from local industry. Ultimately, this project will increase the
enrollment of the CFCC chemical technology program, expand the number of its
community partners, and strengthen its relationships with industry. Many of the
high schools targeted have a significant number of economically disadvantaged
students, so heightened awareness of the CFCC chemical technology program
through CT-EnTICE could lead these students to a pathway to economic prosperity.
Project evaluation will measure participants' changes in opinions and
perceptions of careers in chemical technology and their awareness of the
program. The results will be disseminated through the ATE community.