* 1601867
* PFI:AIR: - TT:  Forming Metals Like Plastics: Thermoplastic Blowmolding of Metallic Glasses
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2016,01/31/2018
* Jan Schroers, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 01/31/2018
* USD 206,000.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating the ability
to thermoplastically form metallic glasses like plastics to fill the need of
net-shaping metals. Net-shaping, a process that shapes a material in one
processing step into its final shape, is well established for thermoplastics,
but thermoplastics are too weak for most structural applications. In structural
applications that are critical, such as aerospace, automotive, and hard-tissue
replacements, metals are typically used. Forming of metals, however, has been
limited. This project will combine metal-like properties and plastic-like
processing. Particularly, thermoplastic based blow-molding and stretch blow-
molding, will be translated during this project from a scientific discovery into
a technological process, which can meet the need for a metal net-shape process.
These blow-molding processes have potentially vast commercial ramification as
they could replace many of the currently used metal processing methods, and
hence replace many of the applications currently occupied by metals and
plastics. In order to reach such a translation, this project will determine
processing parameters that are required for a commercial fabrication process. In
addition, a commercial viability study will be carried out considering capital
investment, processing time, and materials costs. As a product, a commercial
apparatus and processing procedure will be determined in consultation with
equipment manufacturers. Specifically, cycle time will be minimized, and
processing conditions optimized for speed, energy efficiency, and robustness.
Considering the redundancy of machining, joining, and other finishing
procedures, and taking into account the processing speed and accuracy, blow-
molding of metallic glasses is envisioned to replace currently used materials
and processes used for electronic casings.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project
addresses the following technology gap(s) as it translates from research
discovery toward commercial application. The effect of high strain rate on the
deformation behavior is not well understood. Particularly, if the metallic glass
forming liquid remains to behave like a Newtonian liquid as strain rates
exceeding 0.1/sec. Accurate understanding of the deformation behavior, the
metallic glasses' response to temperature and pressure is crucial for future
modeling of mold filling during blow-molding and stretch blow-molding. How the
high strain rates effects the mechanical properties of the metallic glass also
will be investigated. Bending experiments will be conducted and the strain to
failure will be used as a quantitative measure for bending ductility.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Involved personnel include graduate students, post-docs,
undergraduate students, and visiting undergraduate students. They will be
exposed to the whole range of technological development; from fundamental
science of determining the deformation behavior, to engineering aspects of
developing appropriate processes and machinery, to commercial and business
aspects of viability and comparison studies. Students will be exposed to the
state of the art metallurgy processes and characterization methods and will also
develop a deeper understanding of the connection between science, innovation,
and entrepreneurial skills.