* 1601916
* PFI:AIR - TT:  AGV-3D: A Low-Cost, Infrastructure-free Localization Solution for FlexibleWarehouse Automation
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2016,12/31/2017
* Mooi-Choo Chuah, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 12/31/2017
* USD 200,000.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating technology
to fill the need for an infrastructure free localization system to accurately
estimate the position and orientation of an automated guided vehicle (AGV) in
large-scale warehouse environments. The system is called AGV-3D, and it is
important because it enhances current AGV technology, which in turn improves the
efficiency of U.S. manufacturing by providing a reliable and safe means of
meeting material movement demands. The project will result in an AGV-3D
prototype being integrated into an actual AGV system, and demonstrated in a
representative warehouse environment. AGV-3D has the following unique features:
it integrates the latest in 3D imaging technologies to enable robust and
accurate localization of an AGV vehicle in a large-scale warehouse facility
without the integration of wires, magnets, or reflectors in the environment.
These features provide the following advantages: lower per-vehicle cost, lower
facility installation cost, and increased facility flexibility when compared to
the leading competing 2D laser guidance technology in this market space.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the following technology gap(s) as
it translates from research discovery toward commercial application. The first
significant challenge is that the required positioning accuracy of AGVs is on
the order of 1 cm. The second is that the localization system must be extremely
robust as AGV warehouse installations require very high levels of availability.
Unfortunately, correctly associating landmark features will be far more
difficult as unlike current 2D laser guidance technologies, artificial
retroreflector targets will not be installed in the environment. Thus, there are
significant challenges in both data association and reconstruction. To meet
these challenges, AGV-3D leverages 3D data for both mapping the environment and
landmark feature segmentation. First, a 3D reconstruction of the facility is
created to extract salient natural features as landmarks. Next, a map-based
localization approach leverages 3D LIDAR to enable 3D feature-to-landmark
matching which minimizes the potential for data association errors. By employing
the latest in 3D sensor systems, AGV vehicles will be able to track these 3D
features in real-time. In conjunction with the map-based localization approach,
centimeter level accuracy is expected. In addition, graduate students involved
in this project will receive innovation and technology translation experiences
through system development, and through direct interactions with companies in
the robotics, AGV, and 3D sensing spaces.