* 1601353
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   Scaling within host interactions to epidemic patterns
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2016,02/28/2019
* Patrick Clay, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 02/28/2019
* USD 20,102.00

Parasites regulate the dynamics of almost all populations, and the vast majority
of hosts (including humans) are infected by multiple parasite species at the
same time. Do infections by multiple parasite species increase the risk of
epidemics in host populations? This research will establish a general framework
that predicts how co-infections affect epidemics in host populations. Results
will help predict the consequences of concurrent emerging parasites and will
inform strategies to help curb epidemics that threaten wildlife, animal stocks,
agricultural crops, and human populations. The project will extend the research
and training of a doctoral student by supporting two new experiments that will
improve existing mathematical models. The researchers will engage a diverse
range of students in the Houston Public Schools through lectures on infectious
disease and participation in the design of experiments and analysis of resulting
data.

When multiple parasites infect hosts, the order of infection likely plays an
important role because it can determine transmission rates and host mortality.
The effects of arrival order - or priority effects - are well documented within
single hosts but rarely incorporated in classical models to predict and
understand multi-parasite epidemics. The goal of this project is to determine
(1) how the relative timing of infections alters epidemics in multi-parasite
systems and whether multiple infections increase variation in outcome of
epidemics, and (2) test whether this variation can be predicted with mechanistic
models that incorporate the consequences of co-infection from single-host data.
These goals will be accomplished using a combination of experiments and models.
The first experiment will examine multi-parasite epidemics with multiple arrival
orders of parasites and doubly infected and singly infected populations. This
will determine how priority effects alter epidemic patterns at the host
population level. A series of single host infection experiments will be
conducted to parameterize a predictive epidemic model that accounts for the
infection history of hosts and how this history influences interactions among
co-infecting parasites and hosts. Comparing model predictions to empirical
epidemics will test whether variation in epidemics patterns in natural
populations can be predicted from individual host data when accounting for the
infection history of hosts. The predictive power of this model will be compared
to traditional models that do not include priority effects.