* 1601003
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Evolution of Gene Expression in Floral Diversification of Neotropical Gesneriaceae.
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2017
* Eric Roalson, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 05/31/2017
* USD 19,323.00

Flowers are among the most common ways that people connect to nature and have
enormous potential to engage broad audiences in science and evolution. In
addition, an intriguing and complex question in biology is how genetic and
ecological processes promoted the rapid evolution and diversification of
flowers. This project focuses on a genus in the African violet family, which is
comprised of many species with highly colorful and diverse flowers. Thus the
researchers can use comparative genomic approaches to investigate how patterns
of gene expression vary across multiple species and relate to flower traits
important for speciation and pollination. Results of this work will aid
researchers and government agencies interested in biodiversity and conservation
by providing additional evidence for the complex genetic and ecological
interactions between plants and pollinators that have promoted flower
diversification.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;High throughput sequencing of expressed
genes from flowers in two developmental stages of 10 species of Achimenes will
provide a powerful dataset for investigating evolutionary processes at the
genome level. Specifically, the study will further our understanding of the role
of gene expression and protein evolution in speciation. The researchers will use
transcriptome-wide levels of gene expression across multiple species to
associate variation in expression with evolutionary transitions between flower
color, shape, and pollination syndrome. They will also determine if target genes
expressed during flower development have signatures of positive selection. The
genomic data generated will be used to (1) compare patterns of gene expression
within and among species, (2) resolve phylogenetic relationships, and (3)
identify shared and divergent changes to protein sequences that correlate to
transitions in floral form and pollination.