* 1601335
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Using Covariance to Test Hypotheses about the Function and Underlying Genetic Control of Multi-component Signals
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2019
* Kaila Colyott, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 04/30/2019
* USD 19,469.00

The ability to communicate effectively with other individuals is important for
survival and reproduction; however, little is known about the genetics of
producing communication signals. The proposed project focuses on sound
(auditory) signals used in courtship in a species of fruit fly. The multiple
auditory signals produced by this species are complex but their relationships to
each other and genetic control of their production have not been determined. The
proposed research incorporates methods from animal behavior, evolution, and
genetics to better understand how conveying and receiving messages occurs in
animals. This can provide insights into what messages are passed from males to
females and how these messages are genetically controlled. Given the abundance
of genetic knowledge in fruit flies, and how many genes are shared between flies
and humans, broader connections can be made from this species to other study
systems. In addition, part of the project will extend public understanding of
the genetics and information content of signals through mentorship of two
undergraduate students, outreach at a local high school, attendance at national
scientific conferences, and development of teaching materials for high school
classrooms.

Signals transmitted between individuals are often complex and contain multiple
components. These components may convey the same information, in which case they
are expected to evolve in concert, or they may have separate messages, which
implies independent evolution. Understanding how signal components co-vary and
are genetically controlled may provide insight into the messages conveyed. To
address this problem, the acoustic signals of Drosophila sturtevanti will be
examined using a novel approach. This species has complex mating signals,
generated by male wing vibration, that stimulate females to mate. Two signal
components, pulse song and beep song, will be examined for phenotypic
covariance. The absence of phenotypic co-variation between the song components
will support the hypothesis that the respective components contain multiple
messages. In contrast, significant positive co-variation will support the
hypothesis that the respective components contain the same message.
Alternatively, significant negative co-variation will support the hypothesis
that respective components constrain each other. In addition to phenotypic
covariance, the genetic architecture of the two signal components will be
assessed through quantitative trait loci (QTL) mapping using a next generation
sequencing approach. The amount of co-localization of the QTLs for the signal
components will determine the commonality of genetic control. Significant co-
localization will imply shared genetic control and the direction of association
(positive or negative) will indicate how selection pressures act on the
genetically linked systems. Understanding the genetic control of associated
signals is essential for elucidating mechanisms by which adaptive behavioral
traits evolve and for modeling the evolution of multi-component signals.