* 1601281
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   A genomic and experimental characterization of local adaptation
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2018
* Katherine Silliman, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 05/31/2018
* USD 18,529.00

Nature provides a mosaic of variability in both abiotic and biotic factors. This
often results in populations of a species evolving traits in response to local
conditions that give an advantage to individuals in that native habitat but not
in other habitats. Understanding the processes that drive such local adaptation
is crucial to predicting the fate of species in the face of rapid environmental
change. Many species are shifting their ranges to move poleward or to higher
altitude sites as temperatures increase, but marine species are also at risk
from ocean acidification - the ongoing decrease in ocean pH due to the uptake of
carbon dioxide from the atmosphere. This is especially true for marine bivalves,
who require specific carbonate chemistry to form their shells. The west coast of
North America has natural long-standing variation in ocean pH and temperature;
therefore, it is possible that some populations of wide-spread species could
contain adaptations that have evolved in areas with low pH and higher
temperatures. This may provide insight to scientists on what portions of the
genome may be under selection in species during rapid climate warming events or
highlight areas of the genome that have adapted to those conditions. The
research provides training to a graduate student and additional outreach to
commercial, government, non-governmental organizations, and public stakeholders.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will test whether
adaptation to environmental variability has occurred in the Olympia oyster
(Ostrea lurida). This ecologically and commercially important bivalve is
patchily distributed from southern California up to the central coast of Canada.
Using population genomic analyses and common garden experiments, the proposed
research will test for adaptive differences among distinct and separate
populations from San Francisco Bay, CA, Coos Bay, OR, Puget Sound, WA, and
Vancouver Island, British Columbia. Offspring of wild oysters will be raised
under common conditions and studied for differences in growth rate, survival,
and response to induced stress from temperature and pH. Transcriptomics will be
used to characterize cryptic variation in gene expression and identify genes
involved in adaptation to theses stressors.