* 1601870
* 8th African Materials Research Society Conference
* MPS,DMR
* 12/15/2015,11/30/2017
* Eric Garfunkel, Materials Research Society
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 11/30/2017
* USD 45,000.00

Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;With the support from both the Division of
Materials Research and the Office of International Science and Engineering, this
program will support the participation of graduate students, as well as senior
scientists and engineers at the Eighth African Materials Research Society
(A-MRS) Conference to be held in Accra, Ghana. Organized by the African-MRS with
strong support of the Materials Research Society (MRS), the heart of the
Conference is to build knowledge, foster relationships and promote action to
further the knowledge and understanding in the broad fields associated with
materials science and technology. Central aspects of the conference include
increasing the scope, involvement and capabilities of Africa's materials
research community, and to link it more closely with it's US and other non-
African counterparts. Although Africa is rich in materials resources, it has not
taken appropriate advantage of its resources to develop its regional economies
to their fullest potential. The growth of science, technology and education are
recognized as essential components of the economic and social development of
Africa. With an eye toward increasing understanding and awareness of how
materials impact development, a key goal of the Conference is to bring together
leading scientists from around the world to interact with leading African
researchers. Another key goal is capacity building, part of which involves
helping educate the next generation of African scholars and technologists. The
conference will also inform US and other non-African participants about the
current state of materials science and education in Africa, including research
needs and opportunities for development and collaboration. Bringing African
students, African academic and industrial leaders, and internationally acclaimed
scientists together with students from the United States, Europe, Asia and South
America offers a unique opportunity to promote information and resource sharing.
Participation by governmental and non-governmental organizations will ensure
that the materials topics discussed will be addressed by wider audiences
following the Conference. The conference will include a special session on women
in science and engineering, led by the US-based COACh group.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The African-MRS Conference
will play a vital role to help unify the rapidly growing materials research
community in Africa, and help couple it to the broader materials research world
outside of Africa. Themes of the Conference reflect both needs of the global
research community such as energy and health, as well as needs specific to
Africa such as appropriate construction materials and sustainable biomaterials.
The primary themes of the Conference are Energy and Sustainability, Health and
the Environment, Basic Nanoscience, Computational Materials Science,
Manufacturing and Innovation, Infrastructure, Education, Petrochemistry, Mining,
and Agricultural Materials and Chemistry. The Conference adds unique value by
bringing together leading international scientists and engineers to present and
discuss recent advances in several broad areas of materials research and to help
define future research priorities. The African-MRS, and the Conference in
particular, is deeply committed to education and capacity building, and provides
a unique platform for students to directly interact with each other as well as
with national and international leaders.