* 1601052
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Consequences of resource heterogeneity for immune defense, connectivity, and rabies dynamics in vampire bats
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Sonia Altizer, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 08/31/2018
* USD 19,499.00

Wildlife are fed by humans intentionally or accidentally all over the world.
This common activity can change wildlife physiology and behavior, intensify
human-wildlife interactions, and influence human health through the transmission
of infectious disease. This research will examine how feeding wildlife
influences the spread of infectious disease, focusing on vampire bats and rabies
virus. It will develop models that can a) forecast the future spread of rabies
when livestock rearing expands into undisturbed habitats and b) predict human
and animal rabies risk in areas undergoing rapid land conversion. Results could
alter societal views on activities ranging from bird feeders to ecotourism and
will directly improve predictions of the spread of a lethal disease. The project
will support education and training of a doctoral student in modern molecular
biology techniques and will develop new tools for evaluating disease in bats.

The research will integrate observed relationships between livestock abundance,
antiviral immunity, and bat dispersal between colonies into mathematical models
of rabies transmission. Earlier research showed that livestock rearing is
associated with higher chronic stress, lower antibody levels, and larger vampire
bat colonies, suggesting that livestock rearing produces source populations of
immune-impaired vampire bats. The first research goal will use novel
immunological tools on field-collected samples to characterize expression of
antiviral cytokines of vampire bats across a livestock density site gradient in
two regions. These data will be used to test if bats in livestock-dense habitat
invest more or less in responses that promote resistance to rabies virus. The
project's second goal will use molecular genetics approaches to characterize the
connectivity of bat populations at fine spatial scales through field-collected
tissue samples. Results will determine whether or not bat movement varies with
livestock distribution. Finally, the researchers will develop a spatially
explicit mathematical model of rabies transmission that incorporates results
from the first two goals to provide a mechanistic framework for understanding
how resource heterogeneity affects viral spread.