* 1601375
* Independent Learner Energy Education Design project
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Roger Ebbage, Lane Community College
* Standard Grant
* John Jackman
* 06/30/2020
* USD 618,881.00

The Lane Community College (LCC) Energy Management Program (EMP) has a long and
rich history of preparing students for jobs in the commercial building energy
efficiency workforce. While LCC EMP has produced many graduates who are employed
throughout the energy efficiency industry, the projected demand for energy
efficiency education continuous to grow. Further, while online degrees are
fairly commonplace in many sectors of higher education, career-technical
education lags behind in part due to the hands-on fieldwork requirements of such
programs. Motivated by the demand for an energy management workforce, this
project brings together the LCC EMP education with online education. The result
being the Independent Learner Energy Education Design (ILEED) effort, which
provides a scalable solution of changing the current LCC EMP traditional
classroom model into an online hybrid option that expands energy efficiency
educational opportunities to traditional and nontraditional students, but also a
broader and more diverse population across the Pacific Northwest. This project
also serves to develop, manage, and support a network of utility mentor partners
that will provide the essential energy-related fieldwork at multiple remote
locations. Northwest utilities and utility professional associations have agreed
to provide employee-mentors for this innovative education
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To increase participation of a wider sector of
potential students, and to cover a broader geographic range, ILEED updates the
existing online coursework and couples it with fieldwork experiences through
local, public utilities and industry connections (similar to that of an
internship or cooperative education). With this model of higher education and
industry partnerships, energy management education will be available to students
who are currently outside the local area. ILEED faculty will still teach and
assess, but also coordinate with industry mentors so ILEED students can complete
their field-work component of instruction, regardless of their geographic
location. Students who participate will be able to earn a full, two-year
Associate of Applied Science degree through the online offerings, or an
incumbent worker could choose to take a few classes to augment their current
profession (e.g., architects, engineers).