* 1601402
* Dissertation Research: Detecting introgression in the presence of incomplete lineage sorting: phylogenomics and hybridization in Chylismia (Onagraceae)
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2018
* Bruce Baldwin, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 06/30/2018
* USD 20,410.00

A major goal of evolutionary biology has been to use DNA sequences to
reconstruct the evolutionary history of relationships among organisms - to
reconstruct the tree of life. However, biologists are increasingly aware that
many species hybridize, resulting in a 'network' of life. This research
introduces a new mathematical model to infer hybridization over the tree of
life, and tests the model with DNA data from a group of highly hybridizing
evening primrose plants that grow in the harsh habitats of the Sonoran, Mojave
and Great Basin deserts. This project also will provide bioinformatics and
training and research experience to undergraduates, and produce computer
software to detect hybridization events that will be disseminated freely via the
Internet.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hybridization is an important evolutionary
process in a substantial portion of the tree of life that may act as an
evolutionary catalyst by increasing the adaptive variation within lineages.
However, inferring hybridization in a phylogenetic context is difficult due to
the lack of methods that model evolutionary scenarios involving both incomplete
lineage sorting and introgression. This research incorporates both empirical and
theoretical work to address the challenges of inferring hybridization and
examining its evolutionary significance. The researchers will use next-
generation sequencing and genomic datasets to study the evolutionary
consequences of introgression and historical biogeography across a homoploid
hybrid complex in the plant genus Chylismia (Onagraceae). They also will apply
both empirical datasets and simulated datasets to develop and test a novel
Bayesian approach for detecting introgression that combines aspects of both
phylogenetic and coalescent theory. Finally, they will quantify the genomic
structural changes that accompany reticulate evolution and their functional
significance in Chylismia using whole chloroplast genomes and markers from
across the nuclear genome.