* 1601075
* Rural Internship Program
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Doug Kirby, Klamath Community College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 06/30/2020
* USD 199,986.00

Today employers in business and industry seek to hire workers who have both
technical expertise as demonstrated by college courses and degrees and technical
experience in the workplace; but college science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) programs are often challenged as to how to provide this
required workplace experience for students. Internships and coop experiences
have long been one solution to bridging this gap; however, rural colleges with
widely dispersed and economically disadvantaged student bodies with low
educational attainment rates have found that many students are unable to
participate in traditional internship programs. To address the shortage of
internship opportunities, Klamath Community College (KCC) in rural south central
Oregon is enhancing the job readiness of students in the Computer Engineering
Technology and Digital Media and Design associate degree programs through
virtual and peer-to-peer internships in addition to traditional, one-on-one
internships. Faculty members will collaborate with businesses and industry to
create and evaluate three different models to provide options for students to
participate in work-based educational experiences. As a result, graduates will
be better-prepared and ready to enter the technician workforce. The program
encompasses a potential to benefit society by providing a model for other rural
colleges with similar economic and labor market conditions. Nationwide, of the
860 publically controlled community college districts, 553 (64%) are rural
community colleges with a total annual student enrollment of 3.4 million.
Students and businesses served by these colleges will benefit from a flexible
approach to internship development. The advanced technological education
programs at the college will gain exposure through active relationships with
businesses in the community. Increased awareness about college programs and the
availability of a highly-qualified applicant pool will attract new businesses
and spur economic development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project approach will
provide flexibility to students and businesses. Virtual internships will connect
students in remote locations, where many courses are delivered via synchronous
classrooms, with local businesses and industry employers. The long-standing lack
of access to opportunities due to geographic distances will be resolved. Use of
the Internet is the primary means of communications, which saves students from
traveling long distances of up to 180 miles round trip per day. Peer-to-peer
internships provide a creative, cost-saving solution for smaller businesses that
can offer valuable work-site experience but are unable to dedicate staff time to
constantly train new interns. Businesses will utilize graduates from the college
who have worked as interns prior to becoming an employee to subsequently train
the next student interns. Participation in traditional, one-on-one internships
will be available to students living in close proximity to the college and the
worksite. Through this program, the number of employers directly undertaking the
training and supervision of the interns in an actual work-site environment will
be increased. All three internship models will bridge classroom education and
application of technical skills through on-the-job training. Students will build
their resume by listing recent work history and job references in occupational
fields related to their academic degrees. Businesses will be able to vet
potential job applicants. A positive experience will lead to paid employment
with participating businesses and improve student employability. College faculty
will be exposed to the workforce needs and technology requirements of local
businesses. Curriculum development will be shaped to ensure that the college is
teaching the most relevant job skills and that students are well-prepared to
obtain employment. A comprehensive summative evaluation is planned to determine
the success (and factors of success) of each of the internship models for
students, the college, and employers as well as a formative evaluation to make
recommendations for modifications as the project progresses.