* 1601072
* Dissertation Research:  Integrative species delimitation, cryptic coloration, and climatic niche breadth in songbirds
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2018
* Irby Lovette, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 06/30/2018
* USD 20,001.00

All species exhibit some level of phenotypic variation, such that individuals
and populations differ in their appearance. The amount of phenotypic diversity
and the number of species, however, vary dramatically among different types of
organisms and regions of the world. Understanding the evolutionary and
ecological processes that cause differences in the number of species among
different groups of organisms and geographic regions is a longstanding goal in
evolutionary biology. This research first seeks to improve our estimation of the
number of species of horned locks, which would help in better understanding how
biodiversity evolves and is maintained. This project will then measure
geographic variation in camouflage by quantifying how feather coloration on the
backs of larks matches the color and composition of the ground among different
populations. Species that possess distinct forms of camouflage, or background
matching, have provided some of society's most celebrated examples of natural
selection; yet we lack an understanding of the evolutionary and ecological
dynamics behind such complex, subtle, and continuous patterns of color variation
related to camouflage. This research will advance our understanding of how
animals adapt to environmental conditions that vary over space and time. The
researchers will actively recruit and train undergraduate research assistants
from underrepresented demographic groups in science to complete this work. This
project will also generate online educational resources and popular science
articles to educate the public about natural selection and camouflage in
nature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This research proposes an integrative study of
phenotypic and genetic differentiation within a recent, widespread, and highly
polytypic lineage of larks in the bird genus Eremophila. The project will
leverage traditionally data sources, including multiple forms of remote sensing
data, digital photography, and ancient DNA from museum toepads via Sequence
Capture using PCR-generated Probes (SCPP), to delimit species and undertake
comparative analyses of cryptic coloration. Using SCPP, the researchers will
generate a panel of 60 loci, including the mitochondrial genome, sex-linked
markers, and autosomal introns and exons, for phylogeographic analyses and
integrative species delimitation alongside phenotypic variation in song,
plumage, and morphology. Upon delimiting species and resolving relationships
within the genus, the project will use the revised taxonomy and corresponding
species tree to quantify the prevalence of geographic variation in cryptic
coloration--or the degree of background matching between dorsal plumage and
corresponding substrates--among populations and species. Finally, the project
will test whether the amount of variation in cryptic coloration is correlated
with abiotic niche breadth among species in Eremophila, which would suggest that
evolvability of cryptic coloration plays an important role facilitating range
expansions into different habitats.