* 1601657
* RoadMAPPs to Careers:  A New Approach to Mobile Apps Education featuring a Mapp for Deaf and Hard-of-Hearing Students
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2021
* Brian Trager, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 05/31/2021
* USD 820,504.00

RoadMAPPS to CAREERS will help solve a significant projected skills gap in the
US economy. As smart phones, smart things, tablets and wearable devices continue
to change the way we communicate, do business and access information, the demand
for mobile applications has grown exponentially. This explosive increase in
demand translates into a large skills gap - there are simply more mobile
application (app) development job openings than there are skilled application
developers to fill them. The Bureau of Labor Statistics predicts that there will
be approximately 82,000 mobile app developer jobs for candidates with associate
degrees by 2020. The RoadMAPPS to Careers project will prepare associate degree
students for mobile app developer positions that pay well above the national
average, maintain a high rate of employment, and offer a range of advancement
opportunities. The 5-semester curriculum is being developed and initially
offered at the National Technical Institute for the Deaf (NTID), one of the nine
colleges of the Rochester Institute of Technology (RIT). The program content and
educational strategies of the curriculum are appropriate for all students,
whether hearing or deaf, and can be tailored for programs requiring less than
five semesters. However, specific teaching techniques tailored to the needs of
deaf and hard-of-hearing students will be employed at NTID. The project will
also create a pathway to the program for middle and high school students through
career awareness materials, summer camp activities and dual credit courses.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broad scope of the curriculum will integrate technical
courses with business courses, general education courses, and work experiences
in order to cultivate the technical, social, and work skills needed for success
in today's global economy. Students will learn through instruction, hands-on
exercises, labs, and learning support community activities. They will also
fulfill a required cooperative work experience and complete a capstone project
where they will design and develop a publishable mobile app. Although other
colleges are offering programs in mobile app development, RoadMAPPS to Careers
will introduce an innovative cross-platform approach that is especially
appropriate for an associate degree program. Students will learn the programming
concepts and acquire the skills needed to create mobile apps that run on
multiple platforms (iOS, Android and Windows) without being overwhelmed by
learning a different programming language for each platform. A leading developer
of cross-platform technology (Xamarin) is partnering with RIT on the project.
Students will also have the opportunity to achieve C# and Xamarin certification,
which are standards in the field.