* 1601840
* New England Water Treatment Training (NEWTT) Program
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2022
* Kirk Laflin, Bristol Community College
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 06/30/2022
* USD 602,883.00

The New England Water Treatment Training Program (NEWTT) will recruit and
educate community college students for careers in water treatment and wastewater
treatment. With input from academic, industrial and government partners, NEWTT
will produce a model curriculum and certificate program that can be delivered in
both onsite and online formats, giving students the flexibility to balance
career development with their lives. NEWTT will disseminate its model to
neighboring institutions through equipment loans and consulting, leading the New
England region in modernizing and growing its technical workforce. With much of
the existing water treatment and wastewater treatment workforce preparing to
retire by the year 2020, NEWTT will help ensure this region of the country is
prepared to deal with emerging issues surrounding access to clean water.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this project are to recruit and prepare
students for careers in water and wastewater treatment. With input from its
partners and an industrial advisory board, NEWTT will conduct a Developing a
Curriculum (DACUM) workshop to ensure its program is aligned with industry and
community needs, and the program prepares students with the proper knowledge and
skills to enter the regional workforce. The use of hybrid instructional methods
will ensure NEWTT reaches students in urban, suburban, and rural areas. NEWTT
will use a prior learning assessment tool to link students' non-credit
experiences and certifications to germane academic credit. Project evaluation
will focus on the progress of developing the program and student performance
indicators such as enrollment, success, and retention. The participation of
community colleges from throughout the New England region will assure the
program deliverables have broad application and impact, and will serve as a
model as other institutions adopt NEWTT's program.