* 1601865
* Commutative Algebra: Set-Theoretic Complete Intersections, Local Cohomology, Free Resolutions, and Rees Rings
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2020
* Claudia Polini, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Sandra Spiroff
* 08/31/2020
* USD 262,000.00

This research project concerns commutative algebra with a view towards algebraic
geometry. Often, the most effective method to solve a problem is to create a
mathematical model. Frequently, such models involve unknown parameters related
by several equations that are often impossible to solve exactly. Commutative
algebra is the qualitative study of such systems of polynomial equations. Its
applications are far-reaching and include diverse fields such as computer
science, cryptography, coding theory, robotics, pattern recognition, and
theoretical physics. One can study the sets of solutions of these systems either
geometrically or algebraically. This project deals with the algebraic approach.
One of the goals of the project is to understand the smallest number of
equations needed to describe a geometric object like a curve or surface. Another
is to construct the system of equations defining a given geometric object. A
third goal is the study of the relations among a given set of polynomial
equations, the relations among the relations, and so on. The project involves
undergraduate students, graduate students, and postdoctoral fellows in the
research.

This research project has three main themes. The first is to develop criteria
for a variety in projective space to be a set-theoretic complete intersection. A
fundamental tool to solve this problem is the theory of local cohomology
modules. Local cohomology modules encode the algebraic and topological structure
of an algebraic variety. As modules over the ring, local cohomology modules are
huge (neither finitely generated nor Artinian), hence intractable. However, as
modules over the Weil algebra they can be filtered by simple objects and become
manageable. Hence an important task is to understand the D-module structure of
local cohomology modules. The second theme is the study of local rings using the
notion of distance. This notion was introduced in recent work of the
investigator and collaborators to understand the integral closure of ideals. The
idea is to use distance as a substitute for shifts in homogeneous resolutions
and for the Castelnuovo-Mumford regularity of graded modules. The main goal is
to prove general results that are inspired by statements in the graded case. The
last theme is to study the implicit equations defining the graph and the image
of rational maps between projective spaces. This is a classical problem in
elimination theory, commutative algebra, and algebraic geometry with
applications, for instance, in geometric modeling.