* 1601135
* Dissertation Research:   Assembly, maintenance, and function of the plant-endophyte symbiosis
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2018
* Natalie Christian, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 05/31/2018
* USD 19,551.00

Living within the leaves of every plant species on our planet are diverse
communities of microscopic fungi, known as fungal endophytes. Unlike pathogens
that cause plant disease, fungal endophytes can be beneficial for their plant
hosts. Due to their variety of health benefits for plants, there is currently
great interest in using endophytes in sustainable agriculture and biological
control. Although recent research has begun characterizing endophyte communities
and their functions in agricultural crops and other plants, we lack basic
knowledge of how endophytes benefit the plants in which they live. Just as we
understand the mechanisms by which drugs promote human health, understanding the
mechanisms by which endophytes interact with plant physiology and the immune
system is imperative for using these fungi in restoration ecology and
sustainable agriculture. This research will work to uncover these mechanisms,
improving knowledge of how and why plants and fungal endophytes form and
maintain their beneficial relationships. Additionally, this research will train
undergraduate students, as well as high school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will use Theobroma cacao, the cacao
tree, as a host species for studying assembly, maintenance, and function of the
plant-endophyte interaction. First, the researchers will use total RNA
sequencing to understand how changes in plant and fungal gene expression
underlie increased plant pathogen resistance following application of leaf
litter to conspecific seedlings. The researchers expect that exposure to leaf
litter, a source of endophytic inoculum, will not only alter baseline gene
expression in plants, but will also change how plants respond genetically to
pathogen infection. Second, this project will use stable-isotope techniques to
track the nutrient exchange between plants and endophytes, and determine if
plants "pay" endophytes to mount an immune response against their enemies. The
researchers hypothesize that plants can direct nutrients toward more beneficial
endophytic fungi.