* 1601184
* Research in Ring Theory and Noncommutative Algebraic Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2023
* Kenneth Goodearl, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2023
* USD 223,650.00

The central aim of this research project is the study of various classes of
quantum algebras (particularly quantized algebras of functions), with strong
focus on both algebraic structure and geometric aspects. These algebras were
discovered in the 1980s in the process of solving problems in theoretical
quantum physics. They are mathematical systems that model rings of functions on
geometric structures as in algebraic geometry (the study of geometric spaces
defined by polynomial equations) except that the multiplication is
noncommutative. The internal structure of quantum algebras will be intensively
investigated, particularly those substructures that correspond to points and
geometric subspaces in the classical analogs, together with relations between
quantum and classical algebras that are connected via a semiclassical limit (a
process in which the noncommutativity tends to zero). These commutative
semiclassical limit algebras carry a remnant of the noncommutativity of the
associated quantum algebras, recorded in a bilinear form called a Poisson
bracket. The work will also pursue the closely related questions about Poisson
algebras, as well as the classical-quantum interplay between Poisson
semiclassical limits and their quantum counterparts. The research aims both to
advance, and to tighten the links among, several highly active mathematical
areas -- quantum groups, Poisson algebra, noncommutative algebraic geometry, and
cluster theory. In particular, the work will furnish tools to pass insights from
one area to the others. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific projects include the
exploitation of cluster algebra structures on large classes of quantum and
Poisson algebras towards the ideal theory of these algebras. A related effort
will go into the construction of more viable bridges over which to shift
information back and forth between quantum algebras and their semiclassical
limits. Along this line, the investigator conjectures that the prime and
primitive spectra of a quantum algebra are homeomorphic to the Poisson-prime and
Poisson-primitive spectra of a semiclassical limit, and he will devote major
effort towards a confirmation. Other projects target the classical-quantum
interplay. The goal is to develop noncommutative versions of properties enjoyed
by commutative coordinate rings, prominent among them being catenarity of their
prime spectra. The work will explore the conjecture that all quantized
coordinate rings enjoy catenarity. These efforts are related to the goal of
elucidating the global topological structures of the prime and primitive spectra
of quantum algebras. This is aimed at gluing the (already secured) classical
pieces of these spectra via auxiliary spaces and maps that are not required in
the classical setting. Establishing a specific, detailed format for this gluing
and auxiliary data, together with similar, matching formats for the spectra of
quantum algebras and semiclassical limits, would yield explicit homeomorphisms
between these spectra, and thus establish the conjectured quantum-Poisson
interplay.