* 1601239
* Southeastern Number Theory Meetings
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2018
* Michael Filaseta, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 07/31/2018
* USD 14,695.00

In mid-September of 2016, the first of three Southeastern Number Theory Meetings
planned for the 2016-2017 academic year will be held at either the University of
North Carolina at Greensboro in Greensboro, NC, or at Wofford College in
Spartanburg, SC. The University of South Carolina in Columbia, SC will host the
second meeting on the first weekend of December 2016. The third meeting will be
held in April 2017 at either the University of North Florida in Jacksonville,
FL, or at Washington and Lee University in Lewisburg, VA. Further information on
these meetings including the locations, dates, lists of speakers, lists of
participants, and registration information will be linked to the conference home
pages (below) as it becomes available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conferences
slated for 2016 will be the 26th and 27th meetings of the Palmetto Number Theory
Series http://www.math.sc.edu/~boylan/seminars/pantshome.html , which is a
series of meetings started in 2006 and managed jointly by the University of
South Carolina and Clemson University, the two flagship research institutions in
South Carolina, the Palmetto State. The Spring 2017 meeting will be the 30th
meeting of the Southeast Regional Meeting on Numbers
http://www.math.clemson.edu/~kevja/SERMON/, which is a larger regional meeting
started in 1988. Recent meetings have averaged 40 - 60 participants. The
meetings consist of participant talks on current research in all areas of number
theory, including analytic number theory, arithmetic geometry, and automorphic
and modular forms. These topics reflect the research interests of number
theorists working in the Southeast. Each meeting features plenary talks by
nationally and internationally recognized leaders in the field, invited talks by
graduate students and postdoctoral researchers, and a larger number of
contributed talks by mathematicians at all levels including undergraduate and
graduate students, and junior and senior faculty. Number theorists from outside
the Southeast will give the invited and plenary talks, while regional
researchers will give most of the contributed talks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
primary goal of the Southeastern Number Theory Meetings is to provide members of
the number theory community in the Southeast with an opportunity to learn about
new and significant research in number theory and to disseminate their own
research. Students and junior researchers in the community particularly benefit
from the meetings. The meetings strengthen their knowledge base, expose their
work to a wider audience, and give them insightful input and feedback from other
participants. Funding from the NSF allows the organizers to achieve their goals
at a low cost to individual participants. These meetings integrate regional
mathematicians into the community who may have little or no funds for
professional travel such as graduate students and faculty at institutions that
do not award Ph.Ds. The organizers will continue efforts to attract a
demographically diverse participant base including women and racial and ethnic
minorities.