* 1601121
* NM Green: Advancing Sustainable Construction Technology Education
* EHR,DUE
* 05/15/2016,04/30/2021
* Susan Bogus, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 04/30/2021
* USD 884,573.00

There is a growing need for more technicians in the area of green construction
technology as well as sustainable design and sustainable construction
techniques. With growth in green construction jobs, the challenge is on
educating the local workforce with the knowledge and skills necessary to obtain
and succeed in these jobs. The University of New Mexico and Central New Mexico
Community College will collaborate on this project resulting in the development
of (1) a certificate program in green construction technologies to provide
students with the necessary skills that lead to workforce development, (2) a
pathway for students to participate in an internship program and dual credit
courses (high school and college credit), and (3) outreach and mentoring efforts
to expose underrepresented students to STEM fields, specifically construction
technology and engineering.

With a strong evaluation plan, the project will generate new knowledge about the
skillset needed and the challenges faced in educating green construction
technicians. The collaborative team of University of New Mexico and Central New
Mexico Community College faculty will work to implement academic experiences
relevant to green construction and sustainability. Over 400 students will be
impacted. One of the key deliverables will be developing a model for
internships, outreach, recruitment, and mentoring for underrepresented students.
The knowledge gained will be shared with other institutions that have a focus on
green construction technology and sustainability.