* 1601130
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The evolutionary recruitment of effector genes into a novel sensory system
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2018
* Artyom Kopp, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 05/31/2018
* USD 19,965.00

The fruit fly Drosophila prolongata exhibits a unique set of sensory organs on
the front legs. This study examines the genomics of their cells to learn how a
group of genes is recruited to form a new specialized cell type. Distinct types
of tissues and cells are differentiated by which genes are expressed. Cells
produce their varied functions by turning the genes necessary for these roles
on, while keeping other genes off. Errors in the expression of genes is one
cause of developmental disorders and other diseases, yet the mechanisms of
expression control are still not well understood. Observing the patterns of the
recruitment process will illustrate how a new cell type evolves, how gene
expression is controlled in different types of cells and tissue, and why
expression control breaks down. This research will expand the training of a
graduate student, who also leads public outreach activities at his university
and provides research experiences for high school students and undergraduates.

To study the gene recruitment process, the evolutionary history of genes
expressed in the novel sensory organs of Drosophila prolongata will be inferred.
The mRNA from forelegs of this and several closely related species will be
sequenced. The gene sequences present in the mRNA reflect which genes are
expressed. These will be filtered based on similarity to sequences of known
sensory genes; those present only in D. prolongata samples represent genes that
have acquired new tissue specificity. These genes will be compared to related
genes in other fly species, including the well-studied D. melanogaster, to
determine what characteristics make genes more malleable to expression shifts.
The evolutionary patterns reflect naturally occurring variation and suggest
mechanisms of creating expression control, factors relevant to gene regulation
in other organisms.