* 1601837
* Modern Approaches for Classical Diophantine Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2019
* Shabnam Akhtari, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 07/31/2019
* USD 142,000.00

This research project concerns Diophantine approximation and the geometry of
numbers. Diophantine approximation deals with approximation of real numbers by
rational numbers and with questions of classification of given numbers as
irrational, algebraic, or transcendental. Diophantine equations are algebraic
equations with integer coefficients, for which integer solutions are sought. The
geometry of numbers deals with the use of geometric notions to solve problems in
number theory, usually via the solutions of equations in integers. One of the
basic problems of mathematics is to find the solutions of a given polynomial
equation. The level of difficulty of such problems depends on the shape of the
polynomial and more so on what kind of solutions one is looking for. Finding
complex numbers that are solutions to a polynomial equation is a relatively easy
task. However, finding integer solutions to polynomial equations is a problem of
much greater subtlety and depth, and is the focus of number theory. This project
aims to broaden and deepen knowledge in this fundamental
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this research project is to study the
general problem of counting integral solutions of Diophantine equations and its
applications. The PI will develop methodological advances by combining
techniques from classical analysis with modern applications of analytic number
theory and arithmetic geometry to address some important and long standing
Diophantine problems effectively and explicitly. The research is also concerned
with studying the distribution of integral solutions to Diophantine equations.
Results of the project are anticipated to lead to substantially better
understanding of the geometric and analytic properties of certain arithmetic
objects, such as elliptic curves.