* 1601397
* Strengthening Farms and the Rural Economy through Agricultural Mechanics
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2022
* Matthew Goble, Snow College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 07/31/2022
* USD 198,671.00

The project at Snow College in Utah will advance knowledge in the field of
agricultural mechanics by integrating education and training in the mechanics of
modern, computer-driven technologies with traditional farm equipment mechanics
training. Maintenance and repair of precision irrigation equipment, an important
innovation that conserves water while enabling profitable farming in drought-
ridden areas, requires advanced skills that students will develop as they work
with state-of-the-art equipment. The use of drones and GPS makes it possible to
identify and monitor problems that directly impact agricultural productivity,
and drones also require very specialized maintenance and repair skills. The
precision irrigation component of the project will support more efficient use of
scarce water resources. Business owners and farmers will provide input into
program and curriculum design by serving on the Ag Mechanics Advisory Committee.
A formative and summative evaluation process will be employed to continuously
enhance the project activities and provide opportunities for researching and
evaluating the success of the project and
deliverables.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is designed to develop a new
Agricultural Mechanics (Ag Mechanics) program that will meet the growing need
for education and training in installing, maintaining,
diagnosing/troubleshooting, using, and repairing complex and integrated
agricultural equipment. A multidisciplinary curriculum will focus on both
traditional gasoline- and diesel-powered equipment and on new computer-driven
technologies, including precision irrigation equipment, as well as drones and
GPS for crop monitoring and mapping. The new program will consist of existing
courses that are relevant to Ag Mechanics, existing courses that are modified to
integrate new content, and newly created courses. A rich curriculum will serve
students who plan to work in agriculture, both those working on family and
commercial farms, and students preparing to become skilled technicians in
service industries that repair, sell, and service farm equipment. Ag Mechanics
will offer two certificates and an A.A.S. degree. Students who are interested in
more advanced studies will be able to transfer to a four-year degree program in
Agricultural Systems Technology at Utah State University. An important component
of the project will be the development of a pathway program that connects high
school students in agricultural courses to the Ag Mechanics program. College
faculty will work with high school instructors to promote the pathway and
develop a concurrent enrollment course in Ag Mechanics. Area high schools that
participate in the pathway program will be able to provide their students with a
broader educational experience. Because their high school classes are the
beginning of a pathway that can lead to a certificate, a two-year degree, and a
four-year baccalaureate degree, participating students will be motivated to
complete high school and seek college-level education. The program will provide
a model for other technical colleges as the focus on both traditional and modern
equipment is an approach that can be replicated at colleges throughout the
nation. The multidisciplinary design, which combines existing courses with new
and modified courses, is an excellent template for other small schools that lack
the financial and human resources to create completely new curricula.