* 1601220
* CT Pathways to Innovation in Advanced Manufacturing Technologies and Entrepreneurship
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2020
* Karen Wosczyna-Birch, Education Connection
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 06/30/2020
* USD 899,707.00

A new industrial revolution driven by design, innovation, and digital technology
is currently underway in the U.S. The manufacturing industry now requires
sophisticated computing and thinking skills that are challenging the U.S.
workforce, and as a result educators face a major responsibility to prepare
students with the 21st century skills needed to innovate and thrive in this new
manufacturing environment. The CT Pathways to Innovation Advanced Manufacturing
Technologies &amp; Entrepreneurship (CPI-AMTE) project uses a research validated
challenge-based learning model to transform instruction in Connecticut High
School Manufacturing Technology programs to strengthen college and career
readiness. The CPI-AMTE instructional approach inspires and prepares students to
become innovators and entrepreneurs who are ready to thrive in 21st century
advanced manufacturing careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CPI-AMTE is a novel
instructional model designed to engage predominantly underrepresented students
from both technical and comprehensive high schools in challenge-based Advanced
Manufacturing Technologies (AMT) projects that align with an advanced
manufacturing initiative underway in the CT State Colleges and University
system. The curricula engages students in innovative project design, research,
refinement, and launching, to advance 21st century AMT core competencies,
workforce readiness, and entrepreneurial skills. This multifaceted project
responds to four ATE activity categories, including: 1) program development and
improvement, 2) curriculum and educational materials development, 3)
professional development for educators, and 4) business and entrepreneurial
skills development for students. The project advances replicable instructional
models that develop students' entrepreneurship, 21st century skills, and STEM
technical education and career interests. Research results and tested curricula
will be made publically available under an Open Educational Resources license.