* 1601814
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The Genetics of Adaptation and Diversification in the avian genus Zosterops
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2018
* Rauri Bowie, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 05/31/2018
* USD 20,375.00

Understanding the processes generating the multitude of species on earth is a
fundamental challenge that has preoccupied biologists since Darwin's time to the
present. By utilizing massive-parallel DNA sequencing methodologies this project
will address questions concerning the rapid diversification of a group birds
(White-eyes or Zosterops) found on the island of Sulawesi in the Indonesian
archipelago. This study will make use of whole genome sequencing to compare
levels of divergence among a suite of closely related Zosterops species. This
approach will permit the detection of regions of the genome that are potentially
responsible for the rapid divergence in plumage that we see among this
remarkable radiation of passerine birds. Further, Indonesia is home to many
birds that are on the brink of extinction, and with the advent of new genetic
techniques, research such as this study will likely uncover cryptic diversity
and hence many more potentially endangered species requiring conservation
efforts. Through the description of new populations and/or species, the research
findings will be shared with the Indonesian government in hopes of informing
conservation policy and helping to preserve their unique and diverse biota.

This study takes an integrated approach to elucidate phylogeographic, and
evolutionary processes that underlie the unique diversity of Wallacea. Genomic
data from this project will provide an unparalleled perspective on the
underlying processes that are driving high levels of endemism and species
richness in the region of Wallacea. Furthermore, it will provide a detailed view
into the processes underlying the diversification of one of the most speciose
groups of birds on the planet (Zosterops). Only one other study has ever been
performed in this context (Darwin's Finches), between islands and along
environmental gradients within a rapidly speciating lineage. Furthermore the
entire region of Wallacea and the Australasian tropics remains vastly
understudied. Understanding the genomic changes among members of the Sulawesi
Zosterops species complex will reveal evolutionarily and ecologically important
loci underlying the processes that have allowed this group to radiate across the
Old World and thus provide insight into the drivers of global avian
diversification.