* 1601208
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Phylogenomics and Biogeography of Early-diverging Laniatores (Opiliones) using Ultraconserved Elements
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2017
* Marshal Hedin, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* ashley dowling
* 05/31/2017
* USD 19,500.00

The spider group known as Opiliones, or harvestmen, is understudied,
particularly the suborder Laniatores where the evolutionary relationships among
major lineages are uncertain. To date, research on the relationships among major
lineages of Laniatores has produced conflicting results in regards to the proper
classification. The current research project will use newly developed DNA
sequencing technologies combined with fieldwork targeting key harvestmen groups
distributed across the world, including a collaboration between researchers in
the U.S. and New Zealand. The goals of this research are to reconstruct the
evolutionary relationships among these lineages, producing a stable taxonomy,
and to infer the biogeographic history of this group in the southern hemisphere,
testing specific biogeographic scenarios. By using newly developed methods, this
research will establish the UCE approach as a valid and useful method for other
harvestmen and arachnid researchers, which may have a potentially transformative
effect on harvestmen systematics, and increase the visibility of harvestmen in
the broader field of systematics.

The field of molecular systematics is transitioning from traditional studies
using single- or multi-gene datasets to phylogenomic studies with 100s - 1000s
of genes. This increase in the amount of data helps resolve relationships and
settle taxonomic issues, particularly in understudied groups like arachnids.
This research will attempt to address unresolved systematic and taxonomic issues
through a phylogenomic approach using ultraconserved elements. The inclusion of
these key taxa whose placement is uncertain coupled with phylogenomics will lead
to a stable taxonomy. Additionally, the general biological characteristics of
these harvestmen (low dispersal ability and restricted distributions) make them
ideal candidates for hypothesis-based biogeographic analyses. The disjunct
worldwide distribution and recently estimated divergence times suggest that
these lineages are ancient, likely predating the breakup of Pangea.