* 1601440
* Developing a 21st Century Training Program in the Florida Keys for Renewable Alternative Energy Technology: Wind, Solar and Tidal Power
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2022
* Patrick Rice, Florida Keys Community College
* Standard Grant
* Jill Nelson
* 07/31/2022
* USD 894,321.00

The need for sustainable, clean, renewable alternative energy is well grounded,
as well as the need to establish renewable alternative energy production
technologies (e.g. wind and solar power) and increase exploration of new
technologies like tidal power. With increasing demands for "solar and wind"
jobs, the training needed to create the workforce necessary to sustain the rapid
expansion and transition to these new energy production technologies is also
needed. Florida Keys Community College (FKCC) is ideally located in one of the
sunniest, windiest and tidal energy rich cities in the US. This project at FKCC
will lead to the development of an Associate in Science degree for Engineering
Technology that will focus on training Alternative Energy Technicians and
conducting research to foster wind, solar and tidal energy technologies locally,
regionally, nationally and internationally. As FKCC trains the 21st Century
workforce for green energy, conducts research to harness the surrounding
renewable energy resources and develops a global network devoted to fostering
the renewable energy industry, the Engineering Technology Alternative Energy
Technicians (ET-AET) program will be at the epicenter. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed two year training and research program will join a network of other
regional engineering technology programs that will maximize transferability
while using unique research opportunities as a training tool for wind, solar and
tidal energy. The College has extraordinary infrastructure that makes it
perfectly suited for renewable energy training, including a 17,000 square meter
lagoon that will be used as a tidal energy simulation laboratory (TESLA). The
TESLA facility will allow FKCC to participate in ground breaking tidal energy
research by testing prototype tidal energy devices in a controlled yet natural
marine environment. The program will include multiple industry certifications
and be highlighted by a capstone industry internship that will provide valuable
"real world" skills combined with paid professional experience and job placement
opportunities. The program partners include a host of national and international
renewable alternative energy experts and promises to provide state-of-the-art
technology and opportunities for developing global networks, all while fostering
the transition from fossil fuels to green energy.