* 1601986
* Coupling Tribocharging and Hydrodynamics in Fliuidized Beds
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Sankaran Sundaresan, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 06/30/2020
* USD 393,037.00

CBET - 1601986&lt;br/&gt;PI: Sundaresan,
Sankaran&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tribocharging refers to the exchange of electric
charge between two materials that make mechanical contact with each other. It is
observed in many situations involving flows of particles suspended in a gas. One
industrially important example is tribocharging in a fluidized bed chemical
reactor. In this kind of reactor, gas flows through a bed of particles at such
high rates that the particles become "fluidized," and the particles and gas
behave as a fluid mixture. This project seeks to understand how tribocharging
affects the fluid dynamics of gas-particle suspensions. Models will be developed
to explain and predict how the dynamics of tribocharging and hydrodynamics of
gas-particle suspensions are affected by material characteristics, humidity, and
particle size. The research will be the first study that focuses specifically on
the coupling between tribocharging and fluidization hydrodynamics. The results
will be useful in a wide range of industrial processes involving gas-solid
suspensions, because tribocharging can create significant hazards and reduce
process efficiencies. The project will provide opportunities for students at
various academic levels to participate in research, including high-school
students who participate in Princeton's summer Laboratory Learning
Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of the project are to develop and
validate a computational model that accounts for tribocharging and electrostatic
forces in fluid-particle flow systems, to understand how electrostatics affect
hydrodynamics, and to understand the transient rate of charging in these
systems. The model will use an effective work function for triboelectric
charging that captures charge transfer owing to differences in material of
contacting particles, differences in overall charge of contacting particles,
differences in sizes of the contacting particles and humidity. The effective
work function will be incorporated into a model that combines a discrete element
method for resolving particle contacts with computational fluid dynamics for
resolving larger scales of the flow. Model parameters will be calibrated using
vibrated bed experiments. Then, the model's predictions of fluidized bed
dynamics will be tested against experiments in which particle material, size,
humidity and the wall material of the fluidized bed are systematically varied.
Results of the study will provide useful information for industrial
practitioners to improve processes involving granular materials.