* 1601386
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Hormonal Regulation of Feather Color Development and Variation across Populations
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2016,03/31/2018
* Ellen Ketterson, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Elekonich
* 03/31/2018
* USD 14,280.00

Bird feathers are one of the most striking examples of diversity on the planet.
The color and shape of feathers are of fundamental importance in bird courtship
rituals, camouflage, and other social and ecological interactions. Feathers can
evolve rapidly - populations of the same species often show striking differences
in feather color and patterns. The mechanisms that are responsible for these
differences, however, are poorly understood. Abolins-Abols investigates how and
why feather color differs between individuals and populations. In this
dissertation improvement project Abolins-Abols will investigate the hormonal
mechanisms that regulate the development of two rapidly evolving feather traits
- head and tail color - across multiple populations of the Dark-eyed Junco, a
small songbird that is a common visitor to feeders across the United States.
This research will increase our understanding of the evolution of bird color
diversity, because head and tail feathers are hotspots for variation across
songbirds. This project will also train undergraduate students and facilitate
outreach to the general public using the newly founded bird banding station
where Abolins-Abols will characterize color variation across a variety of
migratory bird species. The affordability and simplicity of this study system
make it a prime candidate for future research programs in development and
evolution, especially at smaller institutions such as liberal arts
colleges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Some feather ornaments are used as honest
signals, suggesting that their development is integrated with other phenotypic
traits such as behavior. A candidate mechanism for this integration is hormones,
which regulate both neural and peripheral processes. While hormones have been
shown to mediate sex differences coloration, we do not yet understand the role
of hormones in mediating individual differences and population divergence in
feather color. Abolins-Abols proposes to investigate the genetic and hormonal
mechanisms that mediate the development of two rapidly evolving social plumage
ornaments - head and tail color in Dark-eyed Juncos - across populations of
varying coloration. These honest feather ornaments have been shown to be related
to individual differences in testosterone physiology, suggesting a causal link
between hormones and feather color. To gain an explicit understanding of whether
and how hormones regulate this variation, Abolins-Abols will analyze hormone
receptor gene and protein expression in developing feathers in combination with
experimental manipulations of testosterone and luteinizing hormone. By
understanding the hormonal regulation of these ornaments we will gain insight
into how these ornaments are linked to behavior as well as a better
understanding of how hormones mediate the divergence of social feather
ornaments.