* 1601100
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Selection and Signal Evolution: Diversification of Peacock Spiders (genus: Maratus)
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2018
* Erica Rosenblum, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 05/31/2018
* USD 20,372.00

This project examines color vision in peacock spiders, which are some of the
most conspicuously colored animals described. Males of this group exhibit
complex color patterns on abdominal fans and data suggest that these colored
patches are used by females to make mating decisions. Peacock spiders, and
jumping spiders in general, have some of the most unique visual systems
described. However, a long-standing question that has yet to be answered for
these spiders, as well as many other animals, is how do females evaluate color.
The overall goal of the project will be to test the hypotheses that differences
in visual system features between species are related to the diversity of colors
and courtship displays seen across this group. An in-depth look at the visual
properties of these animals will enhance our interpretation of behavioral and
ecological data already collected in this system, inform our understanding about
sensory system limitations as well as provide the necessary groundwork for
future research on the sensory ecology of this charismatic spider group as well
as other animals. All of the results and findings will be widely available to a
variety of audiences through publication in peer-reviewed journals,
participation in professional conferences, and online databases. In addition,
the researchers have a strong commitment to outreach and education among
students of all ages.

Salticids have one of the most unique visual systems in the animal kingdom, and
are easily distinguished from their relatives by their distinctive eye
arrangement. In particular, their anterior median eyes (AME) are enlarged, and
contain tiered retinae. The leading hypothesis about the function of tiered
retinae is that each layer expresses a different photoreceptor with distinct
absorption spectra, however, this has only been tested for a single species.
This means that previous research on salticid visual displays has only been able
to make assumptions about what females are able to perceive when evaluating
potential mates. Salticids of the Maratus genus are exceptionally sexually
dimorphic, not only in their appearance, but also, male behavior wildly deviates
from that of females in a signaling context. Thus, the proposed research is
designed test if color vision exists for Maratus, based on the presence of
different opsin genes, and/or optical and retinal characteristics. Furthermore,
we will investigate whether variation in these properties has driven signal
evolution and/or species diversity. Specifically, we will identify Maratus opsin
genes and any pre-retinal filtering in the eye, as well as measure peak
sensitivities and relative abundance of photoreceptors in the retina. These
objectives will be accomplished through the use of bioinformatics and
microspectrophotometry (MSP) methods. We expect that a successful evaluation of
visual system evolution will present a major breakthrough for enabling future
work on sensory evolution in jumping spiders, an exceptional yet understudied
micro-fauna, as well as other animal groups.