* 1601614
* Geospatial Technician Education-Unmanned Aircraft Systems (GeoTEd-UAS)
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2022
* Chris Carter, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 07/31/2022
* USD 1,079,321.00

Unmanned Aircraft Systems (UAS) workforce studies recently completed by various
organizations show that the utilization of UAS technology in the workplace is
exploding in the domestic and international markets. UAS technology has the
potential to impact nearly every sector of the economy and is revolutionizing
manufacturing, emergency management, intelligence, agriculture, civil
engineering, utility systems monitoring and package delivery. Because they have
the ability to complete traditionally hazardous jobs more safely and difficult
jobs more easily, UAS and related technologies are changing the way these tasks
are performed. UAS have a cross-cutting impact on nearly every sector of the
economy and every educational discipline. To take advantage of the opportunities
provided by this emerging sector, the "Geospatial Technician Education-Unmanned
Aircraft Systems (GeoTEd-UAS)" project, a three-year effort that focuses on
geospatial technologies, will develop and implement academic courses and
pathways to prepare Unmanned Aircraft Systems Operations Technicians (UASOT) to
succeed in the emerging fields of geospatial data acquisition, analysis and
exploitation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will also provide faculty
professional development and mentoring, curriculum development, and precollege
activities to increase the UAS workforce pipeline. GeoTEd-UAS will build college
and faculty capacity at two partnering community colleges and support these
faculty to develop pathways for UASOT training. Activities include workforce
needs and skills analysis, compilation of the duties and responsibilities of a
UASOT, convening of leadership and faculty development workshops, faculty
mentoring, curriculum development and student recruitment. The partnering
community colleges represent rural and urban locations allowing the project to
broaden the participation of many underrepresented groups. Project materials and
resources will be shared nationally through the GeoTech Center and the GeoTEd
website (http://geoted.org). GeoTEd-UAS project partners include Thomas Nelson
Community College, Mountain Empire Community College, the Virginia Community
College System, Virginia Tech, and the Virginia Space Grant Consortium (VSGC).
The project will be led and administered by the VSGC. The innovative UASOT
courses and pathways being developed through the GeoTEd-UAS project will advance
the field significantly and serve as national models.