* 1601404
* Collaborative Research: Enhancing Hands-on Interactive Learning in Process Technology Programs with New Low-Cost Miniature Industrial Equipment
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/2016,10/31/2018
* Bernard Van Wie, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 10/31/2018
* USD 164,688.00

Based on projected growth of the petroleum industry in Alaska and worldwide, the
pace of process technician education will need to increase to meet employer
demand for highly-qualified process technology technicians. The project's long-
term goal is to build a sustainable program to enhance community college process
technology education by introducing new hands-on opportunities through use of
light-weight extremely low-cost miniature industrial equipment (LCMIE) with a
small footprint that fits on a standard desktop or which can be taken home for
use in homework assignments. The LCMIE technological approach is being developed
in an ongoing NSF IUSE grant (DUE-1023121) and will be applied and expanded for
technician education. The focus is on easing incorporation of this new
technology and assessing its impact in community colleges with Process
Technology programs with an end goal of educating a more flexible and
knowledgeable technician for industries that use mechanical, physical, and
chemical processes.

The objectives are to: (1) develop and pilot the means to easily incorporate
existing, lower-cost, hands-on equipment into the classroom by developing
student and instructor materials, (2) develop a new injector LCMIE suited for
process technician training programs, (3) model and assess LCMIE implementation
within an existing 2-year process technician program at Kenai Peninsula College
(KPC), and (4) disseminate activities regionally and nationwide. LCMIE
implementation strategies are expected to impact 2-year AAS Process Technology
technician programs and trainees, vital to oil and gas production, chemical
manufacturing, petroleum refining, utility and power generation, water treatment
and food processing industries. Results will be disseminated through the Alaska
Process Industry Careers Consortium, an advisory board to state process
technology programs, and nationally through workshops at the North American
Process Technology Association Instructor Skills, and American Society for
Engineering Education Annual Conferences.