* 1601299
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   Assessing Homology of Hoofed Mammal Cranial Appendages with 3D Morphometrics and Next-Generation Transcriptomics
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2016,09/30/2017
* John Flynn, American Museum Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 09/30/2017
* USD 19,348.00

The horns, antlers, and other bony structures (cranial appendages) growing from
the skulls of even-toed, hoofed mammals like deer, antelopes, and giraffes (the
group of hoofed mammals called Pecora) are an evolutionary mystery. Cranial
appendages are often used to determine how species are related to the different
families of Pecora, because each family is distinguished by the presence of a
specific type of appendage. When fossil species lack cranial appendages, it is
difficult to assign them reliably to any particular family. These appendage-less
fossil species could provide necessary information about the ancestral origins
of cranial appendages in each family, but the inability to confidently place
them in the context of pecoran evolutionary relationships precludes their use in
studies of cranial appendage evolution. Prior studies have shown that variation
in the way structures change as an animal grows can result in the origination of
totally new structures. A better understanding of cranial appendage development
will therefore provide much-needed context for hoofed mammal cranial appendage
evolution and help resolve the question of their origins. It will also
contribute to research on how skin and connective tissues contribute to bone
growth and have implications for understanding pathways and patterns of skull
development, with methods and results that are broadly applicable to skull and
bone growth research in all vertebrates, including humans. This research will
form the basis of a curriculum on genomic analyses and genetics for middle
school students in the American Museum of Natural History's Lang Science
Program, piloted with diverse groups of New York schoolchildren and available to
teachers and schools across the country. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
test two competing hypotheses: 1) the broad range of distinctive cranial
appendages observed in fossil and extant pecoran artiodactyls do not share a
common evolutionary origin, 2) portions of cranial appendages, such as the
permanent bone pedicles of antlers and the bone cores of horns, may be
homologous across some or all of the appendage types in this clade. Samples will
be collected from the cranial appendage forming tissues of at least three
individuals each from the four extant cranial-appendage-bearing families of
Pecora (Bovidae, Cervidae, Giraffidae, and Antilocapridae) and an appendage-less
outgroup taxon from Tragulidae, at 3 developmental stages: birth, one month, and
two months old. RNA will be isolated from these tissues and sequenced using
next-generation sequencing technologies. Gene expression profiles sequenced from
tissues at a second location on the body of each individual will provide a
somatic control to estimate gene expression specifically related to cranial
appendage growth (the cranial appendage transcriptome). These transcriptomes
will be optimized onto a phylogeny to test for homology of the genes responsible
for cranial appendage growth across and within age groups.