* 1601588
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Does genetic similarity of trees explain beta diversity of soil microbes and the strength of negative plant-soil feedbacks in a tropical tree population?
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2018
* James Marden, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 04/30/2018
* USD 19,960.00

Adult trees in tropical forests prevent their offspring from sprouting nearby.
This parent-offspring interaction can explain high species diversity in tropical
forests. The genetic foundation for this negative interaction will be
investigated. The genetic diversity of mature trees, seedlings, and bacteria and
fungi in the soil will be assessed. The mechanisms by which pathogen-resistant
genes influence reproduction and maintain diversity will be examined. Efforts in
conservation and in tropical reforestation will be aided by this information.
The project will strengthen the scientific workforce by training a graduate
student in genetic techniques.

This study will be among the first to incorporate a genetic mechanism into the
classical Janzen-Connell hypothesis of seedling survival and diversity
maintenance in tropical forests. New evidence has shown that negative plant-soil
feedbacks between tropical trees and their pathogens are genotype-specific
(i.e., trees within a population respond differently to the same soil
microbiome). Whether plant-soil feedbacks in tropical tree communities are
genetically controlled will be determined for tree-seedling genetic similarity,
for tree-tree genetic similarity, and for microbial community - tree community
genetic similarity. Analyses of the genetics will complement experiments on the
conditions in which pathogen-resistant genes affect population dynamics. The
degree of similarities will elucidate the biological and spatial scales at which
the interactions are effective. Training in genetic and metagenomics techniques
and bioinformatics will provide research experience for the student.