* 1601583
* PFI:AIR - TT:  Cost-Effective Membrane-Based Green Electrolytic Process for Solar and Semiconductor Grade Silicon Production
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2016,03/31/2020
* Uday Pal, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 03/31/2020
* USD 251,999.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating technology
that will change the state-of-the-art silicon production process from an energy-
intensive and environmentally detrimental one into a cost-effective green
process. The new process is an order of magnitude better in energy cost than
current practices, and also emits well below half the carbon dioxide (CO2) of
the most efficient existing metallurgical processes. The goal of the project is
to generate the necessary process data to evaluate scalability and cost-
effectiveness of this solid-oxide-membrane-based green electrolytic process for
semiconductor and solar grade silicon production. Upon successful
implementation, this process will demonstrate several advantages over current
processes. They include: very low energy usage relative to free energy required
for silicon dioxide (SiO2) reduction; use of inexpensive raw materials that
require little to no pre-treatment; no carbothermic reduction, which emits 10 kg
of CO2 per kg silicon (Si) product and whose contaminants typically reduce
purity of silicon from 99.6% in natural quartzite to 97-98% in metallurgical
grade (MG) Si; possibility of inherent boron removal by borium triflouride (BF3)
volatilization; absence of any carbon or chlorine in the process; and there are
no anode effects resulting in perfluro and/or perchloro carbon emissions.

Current methods for Si production include, fluidized bed reduction processes,
carbothermic reduction of high-purity silica, slag/crystal refining, liquid Si
electrorefining, and electrolysis of chlorides and fluorides. Some of the major
limitations of these processes include extensive raw materials pre-processing,
low yields, detrimental environmental impact and substantial energy
requirements. In the proposed process, a one-end-closed oxygen-ion-conducting
stabilized zirconia (SOM) tube will be used to separate pure silica (SiO2)
dissolved in molten flux from an inert anode placed inside the SOM tube. To
ensure product purity, a pre-reduction step using a secondary cathode at lower
applied potentials will be employed to remove impurities that are more
electronegative than Si. The impurity-laden secondary cathode will be removed,
and then employing a liquid tin cathode the applied potential will be increased
to reduce silica. The Si reduced will go into solution in the liquid tin
cathode. Less electronegative impurity ions compared to Si will remain in the
flux. Thus impurity oxides of both more and less electronegative impurities are
not reduced along with silica. Si is over 95 atom% soluble in liquid tin at high
temperatures but at lower temperatures pure Si and Sn are immiscible. This will
allow directional solidification to be employed after electrolysis to produce
high-purity Si ingots and demonstrate this as a cost-effective carbon-free
method for mass production of Si from commercially available sources of silica.
This project will provide research opportunities for graduate and undergraduate
students to work with our industrial partners and move the technology closer
towards commercialization. It will also provide a rich set of case-study
materials for introduction into both undergraduate and graduate classroom
teaching.

Infinium, a clean metals company, and SunEdison Semiconductors, consumer of
semiconductor grade silicon will be engaged in the research program to assess
quality, scalability and cost-effectiveness of the green technology for mass
production of silicon starting from commercially available sources of silica.