* 1601140
* Next Level Networking Project
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2019
* William Sanderson, Renton Technical College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 07/31/2019
* USD 199,893.00

Across the nation, community and technical colleges offer many programs and
degrees in computer networking (CN) to serve business and industry, but
companies are increasingly requiring a baccalaureate degree for advanced
positions. To address this need, this project at Renton Technical College (RTC)
is designed to create a transferable Associate of Applied Science (AAS) degree
option in the Computer Network Technology (CNT) program that will facilitate the
transition of students into an industry-driven Bachelor of Applied Science (BAS)
degree in Computer Network Architecture to provide the education required for
these advanced positions. Through enhanced partnerships with industry, it will
address the annual shortage of educated professionals in the high-demand, high-
paying field of CN in the service area of the college, the majority of which
require a baccalaureate degree. The college will also develop articulation
agreements with area high schools to help high school students transition
seamlessly into the associate degree program. The project will also recruit and
retain a more diverse student as it engages with local and national groups to
get advice on increasing diversity in CN programs to increase the enrollment of
underserved populations, women, and veterans in these programs.

By adopting the Business and Industry Leadership Team (BILT) best practice
process and curricular resources created and refined by the ATE-funded National
Convergence Technology Center (CTC) (DUE 1205077), the college will ensure that
its AAS and BAS degrees provide students with the latest skills and knowledge
they need to gain employment in the high-demand computer network field. The
project will engage local employers, students, colleges, and high schools to
develop a clear and achievable plan to upgrade the AAS, create a BAS, and
develop articulated pathways from high school into CN programs that build on the
experiences of other ATE-funded colleges. Activities will include curriculum and
course development for two degrees, in-depth consultations with industry,
extensive outreach to high school and college students and instructors,
professional development for 20 area high school teachers, navigation of the
approval processes, and creation of the infrastructure for the BAS program. The
project will deeply engage employers to improve learning outcomes at the AAS
level and build a BAS degree that will directly meet their need for
baccalaureate level education in CN occupations. The college will collaborate
with other institutions, including the Green River College ATE-funded project
Expanding Career and Educational Learning in Information Technology (DUE
1400688) and other peer colleges in the National CTC's Convergence College
Network (CCN) to benefit from their experiences and speed up the adoption of
processes and relevant curriculum. The leadership team will share materials and
findings with others in the Washington community and technical college system
and with the CCN members through presentations, publications and listservs to
help others in building similar programs around the country. It will also reach
out to other programs at RTC to share the BILT process and help increase
partnerships with industry. Evaluation of the project will include both
formative and summative elements to help ensure the project team's work with the
BILT and student experiences are positive and productive.