* 1601329
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Selenium hyperaccumulation in a rapid radiation of legumes
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2019
* Michael Sanderson, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Ingram
* 04/30/2019
* USD 19,811.00

Milkvetch (Neo-Astragalus) species from the legume plant family known as
selenium hyperaccumulators are restricted to soils rich in the element selenium,
where they accumulate the element in their tissues at levels that are toxic to
other organisms. This research will determine the number of origins of selenium
hyperaccumulation in milkvetch species by reconstructing the group's
evolutionary history using DNA sequence data. The project will also sequence
genes thought to be involved in selenium hyperaccumulation to determine if they
have been subject to natural selection. This research will provide one graduate
student and undergraduates with training in molecular, chemical, and
bioinformatics techniques and will also supply molecular resources for
population genetic studies of poorly known North American Astragalus
species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Twenty-five Neo-Astragalus species from two
traditional taxonomic groups have been identified as selenium hyperaccumulators;
however, it is not known if these groups are monophyletic. The researchers will
sample these selenium hyperaccumulators and other species from across the clade
and reconstruct a phylogeny using a target-enrichment approach for sequencing
low-copy nuclear loci in order to infer the number of times selenium
hyperaccumulation has evolved. Analytical chemistry methods will be used to
survey selenium accumulation in relevant species, and phylogenetic ancestral
state reconstruction will be used to characterize the number of origins of
selenium hyperaccumulation from the resulting phylogeny. This approach can
quantify the relative contribution of ecologically driven speciation and
allopatric speciation in light of the number of origins of the cryptic trait,
their phylogenetic position, and geographic ranges of the different species.