* 1601084
* SCH: EXP: Smart Adaptive Adherence-Enhancing Intervention Strategies for Breast Cancer Prevention
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2020
* Turgay Ayer, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 12/31/2020
* USD 289,569.00

Each year about 200,000 women are diagnosed with and more than 40,000 die from
breast cancer, the most common female cancer in the US. Late detection
significantly reduces survival; while 5-year survival is about 97 percent for
early stage breast cancers, it is only about 20 percent for advanced stage
cancers. Numerous clinical trials and community setting analyses have shown that
repeat mammography use can significantly reduce breast cancer mortality. The
reduction in breast cancer mortality due to screening however, is contingent
upon adhering to screening recommendations and having consecutive on-schedule
mammograms. Therefore, women who do not adhere to receiving repeat mammograms
are at risk for developing advanced stage or incurable breast cancers. Indeed,
adherence to cancer screening has been identified as a national top priority to
reduce cancer mortality. In line with this initiative, the research objective of
this project is to optimize the design and allocation of adaptive adherence-
enhancing intervention (AEI) strategies to improve overall adherence to
mammography screening, while reducing unnecessary costs. From a societal
perspective, this research has the potential to significantly improve the
efficiency of adherence-enhancing intervention strategies for more effective
breast cancer prevention. Results from this research can inform breast cancer
prevention policies at the level of the individual health plan, a state's
comprehensive cancer control plan, and also at the national level in terms of
guideline development. This project will also have an immediate impact on
integration of research and learning, and enhancing diversity. Under this
project, a PhD student will be trained to apply systems modeling methodologies
to healthcare area. In addition, the investigators will engage several minority
students into these research activities, and aim to attract them to engineering
with a focus on healthcare. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will apply
machine learning and adaptive stochastic dynamic control methodologies to learn
patients' responses to adherence-enhancing interventions and optimize the use of
intervention strategies accordingly. If successful, this project will make
several intellectual contributions. First, this will be the first study to
optimize the design and allocation of adaptive AEI strategies for sustained
mammography use. The team will develop flexible adaptive stochastic control
models that capture key disease and intervention dynamics, conduct in depth
structural analysis of analytical models, and develop tailored solution
algorithms. In parameterizing such models, the team will use large national
datasets to inform the models. Further, the team will test policies derived by
the analytical models against some actual policies through a detailed simulation
model to evaluate possible solutions and estimate the impact. The project's
approaches are general and could be applied to other chronic diseases with
historically low adherence rates to screening.