* 1601248
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   Do interactions between ultraviolet radiation and dissolved organic carbon modulate disease in aquatic systems?
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2019
* Clara Shaw, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 05/31/2019
* USD 20,150.00

Environmental change alters ecosystems by changing the physical characteristics
of a habitat, affecting which organisms can thrive in a given environment. In
this graduate student project, research will address the impacts of darkening
water in Midwestern lakes on the prevalence of disease in a common miniature
crustacean. Lake darkening occurs due to increases in input of plant debris
washing into lakes as a result of increased precipitation and storm severity.
Lake nutrient levels and the penetration of various wavelengths of light into
the water are both affected by the darkening process. The common miniature
crustacean known as Daphnia can be parasitized by certain fungi and/or bacteria.
This project will examine the mechanisms by which lake darkening can affect
these parasitic interactions. It will provide insight into how altering
environmental factors can influence disease in lake communities, and will also
involve local students in research and fieldwork in south-central
Indiana.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to quantify how lake darkening affects
disease dynamics in lakes, for this Doctoral Dissertation Improvement grant, the
graduate student will manipulate the darkness of lake enclosures through two
treatments: shading and addition of dissolved organic matter. The student will
then seed enclosures with local community members (Daphnia hosts, other
plankton, and invertebrate predators) and parasite-infected hosts. Abiotic
habitat variables (e.g. temperature, pH, oxygen levels), community structure,
and disease levels will be measured throughout the course of the ten-week
experiment and compared to control enclosures without shading or added dissolved
organic matter. Since lake darkening is expected to affect all lake community
members either directly or indirectly, it is important to observe and quantify
effects of these environmental factors on hosts, disease agents, predators,
producers, decomposers, and physical habitat structure. By measuring differences
in communities in the different treatments, we will be able to tease apart the
mechanisms by which lake darkening affects disease.