* 1601504
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Systematics, host-specificity, and genome evolution of holoparasitic plants: A case study in Orobanche (Orobanchaceae)
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2018
* Bruce Baldwin, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 06/30/2018
* USD 20,344.00

Parasitism is a unique life history strategy that has evolved independently
dozens of times in plants, animals, and other organisms. Due to its high
biodiversity and a good understanding of its mode of parasitism, the non-
photosynthetic parasitic plant genus Orobanche provides a remarkable opportunity
for understanding the unique macro- and microevolutionary consequences of
parasitism in a phylogenetic framework. Recent work has identified both
evolutionary and genetic consequences, including numerous host specific lineages
as well as host-to-parasite horizontal gene transfer. This research will use
genomic-scale sequencing of new-world Orobanche and field studies across North
America to develop the following: (1) a fine-scale understanding of tempo and
mode of genome evolution in parasitic plants, (2) a better understanding of
host-breadth, and (3) abiotic and biotic habitat characteristics, with a
taxonomic revision to follow. In addition to advancing the fields of
evolutionary biology and ecology, an improved understanding of host specificity
and parasite genomics may be of use in combating several species of Orobanche
that cause severe agricultural damage to tomato, sunflower, and other crops in
Europe, Asia, and the Americas. One graduate and several undergraduate students
will receive training in laboratory and museum research techniques, and will
have the opportunity to present the results at regional and national
meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, we will use a genome skimming
approach, coupled with field studies across North America to study (1) fine-
scale tempo and mode of plastid and mitochondrial evolution in new-world
Orobanche, (2) host-breadth of numerous lineages, (3) abiotic and biotic habitat
characteristics to better understand distributions, and (4) diagnosable features
of lineages, leading directly to taxonomic revision. Out of several genome
reduction techniques available, genome-skimming (whole-genome shotgun
sequencing) will provide the most cost-effective way to&amp;#8232;capture the
high-copy fraction of genomic DNA, including the&amp;#8232;nuclear ribosomal
cistron, plastome, and mitogenome, even from degraded material such as that
found on herbarium sheets.