* 1601355
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Linking functional evolution of odorant receptors to behavioral adaptations and the emergence of herbivory in drosophilids
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2018
* Benjamin Goldman, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 04/30/2018
* USD 19,849.00

This research investigates the role of sensory adaptation of smell in closely
related species of flies in transitions from feeding on microbes to feeding on
plants. Plant-feeding are the most diverse group of animals, including a quarter
of all named species. Yet little is known about how insects evolve to feed on
plants from other types of diets, or how insects evolve to target specific kinds
of plants. This project will study how the smell receptors and underlying
genetics of these flies have changed over evolutionary time as their diet
switches from yeast to plants. It will determine the changes in smell receptors
that allow the switch to new diets and how the underlying genetics shifts to
target new host plants. This increased understanding of the evolution of the
sense of smell will inform our general understanding of changes in ecological
interactions. This research may furthermore provide insights that allow
manipulation of insect food choice. It therefore has the potential to broadly
impact society through applications to agriculture, where insects are major crop
pests, and human health since insects frequently spread
disease.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will investigate the evolution of
olfaction (sense of smell) after a niche change by comparing the olfactory
systems of Scaptomyza flava and Scaptomyza pallida. These two fly species are
closely related but differ in diet. S. flava is a true herbivore feeding on
mustard plants, while S. pallida retains the more ancestral diet of microbes.
Gas chromatography (GC) -electroantennographic detection (EAD) will be used to
differentiate which volatile compounds (smells) produced by leaves of host
species the flies can detect. This technique divides a stream of leaf volatiles
into two identical streams. One stream is sent into a GC detector for
identification by essentially artificially smelling the compound. The other
stream is aimed at a fly where EAD will determine if the compound is detectable
naturally by determining if the compound triggers a response in single nerve
cell. Leaf volatiles that are detected by herbivorous flies will thereby be
identified and compared to those detected by flies that feed on microbes. The
volatiles identified by GC-EAD as differentiating the two species will then be
used as baits in olfactory assays where four calibrated airstreams containing
different volatiles are fed into the corners of a square arena. The attraction
to each plant volatile will then measured to determine if the species behavior
matches their detection profile. Finally, genes that appear to be important in
differentiating these two species will be engineered into a model organism
Drosophila melanogaster to test if the genes effect on food choice is fully
understood.