* 1601806
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: A PHYLOGENOMIC APPROACH FOR UNDERSTANDING THE SYSTEMATICS AND PHENOTYPIC DIVERSIFICATION OF AUSTRALASIAN GECKO LIZARDS
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2018
* Jimmy McGuire, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* ashley dowling
* 05/31/2018
* USD 20,410.00

The evolutionary processes that have produced current patterns of species
diversity are poorly understood. The best groups to better understand these
processes are those that have radiated quickly both in terms of species number
and morphological form. This study will use a group of gecko lizards restricted
to Australia, New Zealand, New Guinea and associated islands in the Pacific
Ocean (Australasia) that exhibit a diversity of body-forms, ranging from fully
limbed species that are very adept climbers to terrestrial forms completely
lacking limbs. Researchers will reconstruct evolutionary relationships within
the group and then investigate how changes in geographical distribution within
the area have affected the rate of species formation and the rate of change in
morphological form. One graduate student and several undergraduate students will
be trained in laboratory techniques. Findings from the research will be
incorporated into a K-12 classroom activity and will also be broadly
disseminated to the public. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to improve
understanding of the phylogenetic relationships among Australasian geckos by
using an ultraconserved elements (UCEs) phylogenomics approach. All of the
estimated 200 species in the clade will be sampled for 5,000 published UCE loci
to produce a well-supported phylogeny for the group. Pipelines developed in the
Museum of Vertebrate Zoology will be used for DeNovo assembly. Concatenated and
coalescent species trees (ASTRAL, ASTRID, SNAPP, and MP-est) will be used. A
large ecomorphology dataset for this group of geckos (150 species, 1,100
specimens) has been assembled using photographs and 24 linear measurements to
test questions regarding phenotypic evolution. The resulting species-level
phylogeny will then be used to infer heterogeneity in net diversification rate
across the tree and heterogeneity in the diversification of certain ecologically
relevant characters using phylogenetic comparative methods. These same
ecomorphological characters will also be used to test the prevalence of
convergent evolution in unrelated geckos in this clade.