* 1601687
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Global patterns of fish functional diversity and trait convergence along species richness and environmental gradients
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2018
* Kirk Winemiller, Texas A&M AgriLife Research
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 05/31/2018
* USD 15,192.00

Community assembly processes (CAP), such as environmental filtering, limiting
similarity, and neutral processes, explain species coexistence and community
composition. Environmental filtering posits that environmental conditions allow
species with certain traits to establish and persist, causing species traits to
cluster. Alternatively, limiting similarity is the idea that species with
similar traits will competitively exclude each other, producing an assemblage
with an overdispersion of traits. Trait dispersion patterns are used to
determine the importance of these scale-dependent, niche-based (i.e.,
biological, chemical, and physical factors in the environment) processes in
structuring assemblages relative to neutral processes. The search for general
patterns of these processes has been hindered by several factors including: lack
of large-scale studies, inconsistent and erroneous methodologies, and changes in
CAP along environmental gradients and species richness. Convergent evolution of
functional groups within independent zoogeographic regions would provide
additional evidence for ecological mechanisms influencing assemblage structure.
A major challenge for ecology is to understand how assemblages are functionally
structured and how CAP, at varying spatial scales, influence biodiversity
patterns.

This dissertation research project has three aims that address these issues: (1)
examine knowledge gaps regarding functional diversity and convergence patterns
of fish assemblages at a global scale; (2) determine relative contribution of
limiting similarity and environmental filtering to neutral processes at three
scales using recently proposed analytical methods; and (3) assess changes in
functional diversity and community assemblage processes across environment and
species richness gradients. Understanding the relative role of niche-based and
stochastic processes at various scales is a central goal in community ecology
and crucial for not only conservation and management of assemblages but for
understanding the effect of the ever-changing environment on communities as a
whole. To effectively address these aims, fish assemblages will be sampled in
forty wadable streams in five different zoogeographic regions of varying species
richness. Traits with well-known relationships to trophic ecology, habitat use,
and life history will be measured for each assemblage. The relative contribution
of community assembly processes will be tested at three spatial scales using new
methods for analysis of functional trait dispersion. Functional diversity
indices will be compared across gradients of stream size and species richness.
Lastly, patterns of convergence of functional structure and community assembly
processes in different zoogeographic systems will be analyzed using multivariate
statistical methods. Field research will involve collaborations with scientists
and students from several countries.