* 1601545
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Empirical, theoretical, and comparative tests of major hypotheses for the recurrent evolution of self-fertilization
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2018
* Nathan Layman, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 05/31/2018
* USD 10,097.00

The goal of this project is to evaluate the underlying mechanisms that drive the
evolution of the ability for flowering plants to self-fertilize. This goal will
be accomplished by measuring the rate at which lineages transition from
outcrossing to self-fertilizing in the mustard family, a diverse and
agriculturally important group. Flowering plants display an incredible breadth
of variation in flower size, shape, and color that is generally attributed to
the co-evolution of flowering plants and pollinators. Considering the
potentially important role of cross-pollination in evolution, it is surprising
that the shift to self-fertilization is one of the most common evolutionary
transitions in flowering plants. Despite decades of work on this subject, it is
still not clear what drives the initial spread of selfing and tests of the
leading hypotheses explaining this pattern are rare. One reason for this is that
a series of rapid changes in other floral traits occur in response to selfing,
which then act to obscure traditional methods of comparative inference.
Additionally, the project will result in the training of graduate and
undergraduate students.

In flowering plants, shifts from outcrossing to selfing and from diploidy to
polyploidy are common and are thought to occur in concert An association between
selfing and polyploidy can occur through three non-mutually exclusive pathways.
First, polyploidization could act as a filter, limiting the founding of new
populations to those that originate from a self-compatible progenitor. Second,
polyploidization could provide strong reproductive assurance resulting in the
joint transition of mating system and ploidy. Finally, polyploidization could
create a favorable environment for the spread of selfing after the population is
established. This research estimates the transition rates of these three
pathways in the Brassicaceae by assembling a database of mating system and
ploidy data and extending a multi-state comparative model. These estimates will
be used to evaluate the relative importance of reproductive assurance in the
spread of selfing in neopolyploids. The model will show why simultaneous
transitions to selfing and polyploidy are relatively rare in Brassicaceae and
other families with sporophytic self-incompatibility (SI). The theoretical
framework will be extended to explain why such SI systems can survive extreme
population bottlenecks associated with polyploidy and island colonization.