* 1601738
* Workshop: Assessing and Documenting the Vitality of Native American Languages
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2016,05/31/2019
* Tyler Peterson, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 05/31/2019
* USD 59,936.00

The Native American Languages Act, passed by the U.S. Congress in 1990, enacted
into policy the recognition of the unique status and importance of Native
American languages. All Native American languages are endangered, although they
vary considerably in terms of 'vitality,' that is, who, how and where the
languages are in use. Currently, there is no systematic assessment of the Native
American languages of the United States and their vitality. Through a workshop
followed by a summer course, this project will review existing assessment tools
and survey methodologies with the goal of enabling participants to create new
and innovative assessment tools that address this need. Participants will Native
Americans who are currently engaged in language work, as citizen scientists,
educators, and staff and students at tribal colleges and universities. This
project has the potential to inform policy decisions and implementations in
national and international contexts. In addition, it will create a cohort of
indigenous citizen scientists well-versed in scientific activities that include
research protocols, assessment design and use, data analysis and more.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The American Indian Language Development Institute (AILDI)
at the University of Arizona is in its fourth decade serving as a training
institute for Native Americans in descriptive linguistics, language
documentation, and assessment and more. Through this pilot project, Documenting
Native Language Vitality, AILDI researchers and workshop participants will begin
the long term goal to create a model for grass-roots assessment for tribal
communities. In the summer course, participants will learn best practices in
data collection, management and archiving, as well as how to deploy assessment
data. Participants will come from eight Arizona tribal language and four tribal
colleges and universities, the latter of whose involvement will test the
viability of the national network of tribal colleges for future assessments. The
NSF Tribal Colleges and Universities (TCUP) program in EHR is providing support
for tribal college participation in this project. Assessing language vitality
and the collection and analysis of data in language surveys are the empirical
cornerstones for language documentation and revitalization projects in Native
American communities. Importantly, this innovative approach has implications and
potential utility for endangered language scientists and communities worldwide.
Results will be published online and in print to promote an ongoing discussion
with a wide audience.