* 1601076
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Identifying the genetic basis of adaptation to a freshwater environment using admixture in natural populations
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2018
* Andrew Whitehead, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 05/31/2018
* USD 18,040.00

This research will determine the genetic changes that have permitted the
Atlantic killifish, Fundulus heteroclitus, to move from saltwater to freshwater.
Adaptation to different environments is important for generating biological
diversity, and for fish, environmental salinity is a major factor limiting where
they can live. Adaptation to different salinities is therefore thought to have
been critical in the generation of the amazing biodiversity of fishes. However
little is known about the genetic and physiological changes that enable species
to adapt to different salinities. The Atlantic killifish mainly occupies marine
habitats, but some populations have recently moved into fresh water. The
freshwater populations provide an ideal study system for discovering the genetic
changes that have enabled life in a fresh water environment. This research is
important because it will shed light on the types of evolutionary changes that
have permitted this species, and perhaps many species, to colonize new
environments resulting in the biodiversity of the fishes. The project will have
broader societal impacts through the training of undergraduates in the
techniques and research methodology of the project. In addition, the research
will provide material in college preparatory mentorship of disadvantaged youth
through the AggieMentors program at UC Davis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main
goal of this research is to identify the genetic loci that are associated with
tolerance of low salinity. Admixture mapping is a method that takes advantage of
natural hybridization between genetically and phenotypically distinct
populations in order to determine the loci that influence a particular
phenotypic trait. Admixture mapping will be applied to two replicate hybrid
zones: one within the Chesapeake Bay consisting of a freshwater native and a
brackish water native population, and the other along the east coast where a
northern and southern population are both marine. Sampling in these zones will
provide genetically similar populations that experience vastly different
selective pressures. It is therefore possible to disentangle the effects of
genetic ancestry versus the effects of selection on the fitness of fish adapted
to low salinity environments. Parental populations and their hybrids will be
tested for low salinity tolerance and genotyped using restriction site
associated genetic markers. Admixture mapping will identify loci contributing to
the specific phenotypes. Genome-wide analysis will identify loci that are under
selection only in the freshwater environment. This combination will not only
allow for the identification of phenotypes involved in general salinity
tolerance, but also will reveal those loci driving recent adaptation to fresh
water.