* 1601242
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Transposable element dynamics across reproductive modes and ploidy levels in natural populations
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Kyle McElroy, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 06/30/2020
* USD 19,825.00

This project investigates how an important kind of mutation (transposable
elements) is impacted by reproductive mode and the number of chromosome sets in
a cell. Transposable elements (often called "jumping genes") are sequences of
DNA that self-replicate across genomes. They can contribute to genome expansion
and are a source for rapid adaptive evolution. In addition, transposable
elements are found in all organisms and likely play central roles in evolution,
but how chromosome number (or other factors) influences the accumulation and
evolution of transposable elements is unclear. This project addresses these
fundamental questions and is relevant to all scientists interested in genome
structure. Researchers are also involved in Project Lead the Way to develop
genomic and molecular evolution lessons for high school students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A pool-sequencing approach will be applied to a New
Zealand freshwater snail, Potamopygus anitopodarum, to test the effects of
reproductive mode and ploidy level on transposable elements' evolutionary
dynamics. This snail species is ideally suited for the project because otherwise
similar coexisting snails vary in reproductive mode and ploidy. Whole-genome
sequencing of pools of individuals is a cost-effective means for addressing
population genomic questions and enables this novel test of genome-wide effects
of reproductive mode and ploidy on the evolutionary dynamics of transposable
elements.