* 1601509
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   Gastropod shells: A window into the developmental origins of diversity
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2018
* Neil Shubin, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 05/31/2018
* USD 11,897.00

This project investigates how different types of shell shapes are encoded in
snail embryos. Animal form is marvelously varied. This study addresses the
question: what are the developmental mechanisms that produce such diversity?
Snails have long been a model system for studying biological form. They have
diverse shapes but are easy to measure due to their mathematically regular
coiling and have been a major study group since Charles Darwin's famous voyage
around the world. Darwin's approach to the study of animal form included
investigations of patterns of change in the snail-rich fossil record
(paleontology). Modern developmental biology uses molecular tools to understand
how genes determine snail form. This project will determine the genetic and
environmental interactions that may underlie a conspicuous pattern in
paleontology, the repeated evolution of non-coiled shells from coiled ancestors.
The researchers will combine computer imaging technology, genetic manipulation
and paleontology to provide unparalleled precision in determining how both genes
and their environment shape an organism through time. Broader societal impacts
will result from this work due in part to the design and implementation of a
workshop on visual literacy. This workshop will improve the ability of the
researchers and the scientific community to understand and convey complex visual
information to the public. The workshop materials will be posted online for
increased access. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates the
developmental basis of snail shell morphology and the transition from coiled to
non-coiled shells in the emerging model system, the Common Slipper Shell
(Crepidula fornicata). Specifically, it evaluates the hypothesis that simple
modification in signaling patterns in a protein named decapentaplegic could be
the basis for a pattern of non-coiled shell evolution. Other shell developmental
genes also will be evaluated for the ability to affect shell patterning more
generally. Genetic pathways influenced by changes in shell coiling will be
manipulated in developing animals to isolate their individual effects on
morphology. Detailed morphological data is required for this work. Scanning
electron microscopy will be used to visualize the process of torsion and to
assess morphological changes across the entire embryo in response to genetic
perturbations. Computed tomography (CT scanning) will enable the use of
3-dimensional shape analysis of embryo and shell form with enhanced precision.
The use of these computer-assisted technologies combined with molecular
techniques will allow new insight into how paleontological patterns are formed.