* 1601372
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   Metatranscriptomics links phenology with community dynamics and ecosystem function in wood decay fungi
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2018
* Amy Milo, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 05/31/2018
* USD 19,811.00

Forests contain half of the world's terrestrial carbon, much of which is stored
over long time periods in forest trees. This carbon is typically released after
tree death through the actions of fungi and other microorganisms that consume
woody debris, breaking it down and releasing carbon into the soil and atmosphere
(as carbon dioxide). Most of what is known about wood decay fungi comes from
observations of reproductive fruiting bodies, such as mushrooms, but this is
only one stage of the life cycle of these fungi. In this project, fungal
activities will be studied over the course of the forest growing season and over
the developmental life cycle of fungi to measure the amount of wood decay
activity, and to determine the factors that control the process. These results
will significantly improve our understanding of the role wood decay fungi play
in releasing stored carbon now and under changing global conditions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide needed insight into the
functioning of wood decay fungal communities by examining the phenology of
extracellular enzyme production throughout the year. The researchers will use
recent advances in sequencing methods to determine when fungi are actively
expressing decay genes, and how decay activity is affected by community
diversity, substrate quality, and environmental conditions. High throughput
sequencing will be used to compare decay gene expression through time by
capturing populations of messenger RNAs, and to identify shifts in the active
fungal community using ribosomal RNA. Sequencing data will be complemented with
extracellular enzyme assays and measurements of respiration, to quantify the
activity levels of enzymes targeting specific wood components and rate of carbon
dioxide released to the atmosphere, respectively. The drivers of decay activity
and fungal community changes will be compared with those affecting fruiting body
production.