* 1601269
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Abundance, trophic transfer, and cross-ecosystem movement of multiple cyanotoxins in arctic lakes
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2018
* Jessica Trout-Haney, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 05/31/2018
* USD 18,891.00

Freshwater lakes provide critical value human populations, from water supply for
households, industry, and agriculture to opportunities for active and passive
recreation. However, lake-dwelling cyanobacteria and their toxins, cyanotoxins,
are of increasing concern, threatening the health of aquatic food webs and the
safe uses of freshwaters. Most studies of cyanotoxins have focused on temperate
and tropical systems with conspicuous surface blooms of planktonic
cyanobacteria. However, not all toxin-producing cyanobacteria form surface
blooms, both bottom-dwelling cyanobacteria and very small single cells in the
water column, can produce toxins, and the abundance, impacts on organisms that
consume the cyanobacteria, and the potential for toxins to move from lakes to
the lands surrounding them is poorly understood, especially in polar regions. To
date, very few studies have examined whether polar freshwater cyanobacteria
produce cyanotoxins and the extent to which cyanotoxins move through polar
aquatic food webs or into terrestrial ecosystems remains largely unknown. This
project will expand our understanding of the types of ecosystems that support
toxic cyanobacteria and contribute to the evaluation of which systems are
currently at risk or may become at risk in the future. Studies of the
cyanotoxins produced by both bottom-dwelling cyanobacteria and very small single
cells in the water column will take place in lakes and ponds in Greenland. To
complement ongoing studies of the most common class of cyanotoxin, the
researchers will evaluate the production of four additional toxins and their
transfer through aquatic food webs and into terrestrial ecosystems. As such,
this project will expand the knowledge on the geographic and taxonomic range and
ecological distribution of cyanotoxins relevant in both the scientific and
public health communities.

The research funded by this grant will use samples previously collected from 19
lakes and ponds in southwestern Greenland to (1) quantify the abundance of four
additional classes of cyanotoxins (anatoxin-a, saxitoxins, cylindrospermosins,
and BMAA) within the aquatic ecosystem and (2) estimate cyanotoxin transfer to
terrestrial ecosystems in order to obtain a more complete picture of within- and
across-ecosystem movement of biotoxins in Arctic lakes and nearby terrestrial
habitats. Preliminary data suggest that hepatoxic microcystins are produced and
released by benthic colonial cyanobacteria of the genus Nostoc and are also
found in pelagic non-blooming phytoplankton. Moreover, microcystins are being
transferred into zooplankton and invertebrate larvae. This research will extend
these microcystin analyses into the terrestrial environment and investigate the
presence of four additional cyanotoxins within the food web. The researchers
will investigate toxin production, the transfer of cyanotoxins to other
organisms in the lake, and several mechanisms (i.e., emerging insects, aerosols)
that may influence the movement of toxins from the aquatic to terrestrial
ecosystem. The already-documented presence and movement of cyanotoxins in these
lakes demonstrate that high-latitude lakes can support toxigenic cyanobacteria,
and that we may be underestimating the potential for these systems to develop
high levels of toxicity in the future.