* 1601126
* Research Initiation Award: Establishment of an Integrated Analysis, Control Design and Implementation Framework for Hybrid Dynamical Systems with Constraints
* EHR,HRD
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2022
* Chang Duan, Prairie View A & M University
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 05/31/2022
* USD 299,999.00

Research Initiation Awards provide support for junior and mid-career faculty at
Historically Black Colleges and Universities who are building new research
programs or redirecting and rebuilding existing research programs. It is
expected that the award helps to further the faculty member's research
capability and effectiveness, improves research and teaching at his home
institution, and involves undergraduate students in research experiences. The
award to Prairie View A&amp;M University has potential broader impact in a
number of areas. The goal of the project is to establish an integrated analysis,
control design and implementation framework for hybrid dynamical systems with
constraints. Such systems contain rich dynamics that can be used to model a
large class of physical systems such as robotic systems, advanced manufacturing
systems and drug effects to gene networks. Undergraduate students will gain
research experiences and the research will be integrated in a number of
mechanical engineering courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the research is
to investigate the theory, engineering, and application of hybrid dynamical
systems subjected to various constraints such as actuator nonlinearities,
robustness against parameter uncertainties and limitations on hardware when
implementing digital controls. Hybrid dynamical systems are characterized by the
interaction of continuous system dynamics and discrete event dynamics.
Conservatism is often introduced for such complex systems in order to, for
example, render convex control synthesis conditions or reduce computational
complexity. To avoid introducing such conservatism, efficient analysis and
control synthesis algorithms will be created and integrated through exploiting
and inventing various modeling and controller structures. A novel underactuated
platform will be built to experimentally validate and verify the analysis and
control method for a subclass of hybrid dynamical systems. Through this
experiment platform, practical issues such as actuator nonlinearities, friction,
measurement noise and quantization will also be investigated to enhance and
expand the theoretical framework.