* 1601579
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Pulsed and Pressed: the Interactive Effects of Disturbance Intensity and Complex Chemical Exposure on the Productivity of Urban Stream Ecosystems
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2016,03/31/2018
* Joanna Blaszczak, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* John Schade
* 03/31/2018
* USD 20,660.00

Streams in urban landscapes can be negatively impacted by increased flooding due
to runoff from impervious surfaces and elevated exposures to both nutrients and
pollutants that wash off of those surfaces and can be delivered from inadequate
waste water treatment systems. Understanding the individual contributions of
these different factors in limiting the productivity and health of urban streams
is important for an understanding of the impacts of land use changes, but
difficult to identify, because they can occur simultaneously. This project will
make use of controlled experimental stream channels to separate how physical
disturbances associated with high flows and increased contaminant exposure
affect the productivity of stream ecosystems. In small streams, almost all of
the productivity is associated with organisms living on the stream bed. Stream
beds vary in their stability, or susceptibility to disturbance, largely due to
the mixture of streambed materials including the sizes of sediments and rocks.
The researchers will compare the rates of recovery and compositions of streambed
communities in experimental channels following exposure to storm flows. The
experimental treatments will involve different doses of common urban
contaminants added to the stream water and adjusting the size of sediments
within the streambed. The researchers will train a high school student from a
rural community in New York in research, develop a lesson plan for high school
environmental science students, and engage the public through a research website
and professional meetings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to
experimentally measure the independent and interactive effects of physical
(pulse) and chemical (press) disturbance on aquatic ecosystem productivity. The
researchers will test the alternative hypotheses that: 1) more severe
disturbances may exacerbate the effects of chemical stress by increasing the
susceptibility of biofilms to contaminant exposure; or 2) less severe
disturbance may exacerbate the effects of chemical stress by increasing the
accumulation of contaminants in biofilms. Water chemistry, biofilm composition,
and whole-stream metabolism will be measured throughout the recovery period
following a physical disturbance in experimental stream channels with cobble
beds and sand beds.