* 1601078
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: QTL Mapping Floral Trait Divergence and Reproductive Isolation between a Jaltomata (Solanaceae) Species Pair
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2016,03/31/2018
* Jamie Kostyun, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 03/31/2018
* USD 20,246.00

This study aims to identify genes controlling floral trait differences between
two species of Jaltomata, a florally diverse genus that is closely related to
the economically important genus Solanum (which includes tomato and potato), and
to examine whether these genes may also contribute to reproductive barriers
between these species. Differences in floral traits are well known to reduce
reproduction between species when they attract different pollinators; this study
also addresses how such differences may affect success of other reproductive
stages, including the survival of hybrids. The flowering plants (Angiosperms)
form the foundation of agriculture as well as many of the Earth's ecosystems.
This study will advance our understanding of how differences in floral traits
may first arise, and how those differences may reduce or prevent reproduction
between distinct species. This project will also provide research experiences
for undergraduates, including those from groups underrepresented in STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This work will employ Quantitative Trait Locus
(QTL) Mapping to identify genomic regions associated with floral trait
differences and multiple reproductive barriers between two species by genotyping
an existing hybrid population that has already been phenotyped for these traits.
These genomic regions will help determine the genetic basis and evolutionary
history shaping floral traits and reproductive barriers in this system. In
combination with existing gene expression data from relevant floral and
reproductive tissues, the study will also identify candidate genes controlling
these processes. These are key steps in understanding the mapping between
genotype and phenotype, which is of fundamental importance in both basic and
applied biology. Ultimately, this work potentially will provide unique insights
into the genetics and evolution of floral diversity, and the mechanistic role of
this diversity in promoting speciation.