* 1601096
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   Developing a toolbox for evolutionary inferences in polyploids: new methods of analysis applied to the plant genus Penstemon (Plantaginaceae)
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2018
* Andrea Wolfe, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Weeks
* 05/31/2018
* USD 20,020.00

Whole genome duplication, or polyploidy, is a common phenomenon in many plants
wherein all chromosomes are doubled. A major challenge for working with species
with duplicated genomes is that the extra gene copies make it extremely
difficult to reconstruct their evolutionary relationships. The goal of this
project is to develop and apply new statistical tools that take advantage of
modern DNA sequencing technologies to enable the study of polyploid organisms.
These tools will then be used to study patterns of hybridization and whole
genome duplication in a complex group of polyploids in beardtongues, plants from
the genus Penstemon. In addition to providing opportunities for graduate student
training in laboratory and bioinformatics techniques, this project will produce
and freely distribute software code for use by evolutionary biologists.

Although polyploidy has played an important role in the history of many
eukaryotic lineages, there are few tools for studying and understanding their
genetic history at contemporary timescales. Two of the main reasons for this are
(1) ambiguous genotypes due to uncertainty in allele copy number and (2) complex
patterns of allelic inheritance that can vary at different loci across the
genome. The proposed work addresses these issues by developing a statistical
framework to infer inheritance patterns from high throughput sequencing data
while simultaneously accounting for genotype uncertainty. It will develop a
model that will then be used to test hypotheses regarding the origins of the
allohexaploid Penstemon attenuatus species complex, which contains four regional
varieties each with different putative parental species. Double digest
restriction site associated DNA sequencing will be employed to gather genome-
wide Single Nucleotide Polymorphism (SNP) data for the model, and hypotheses of
allopolyploid origin will be evaluated using tests for introgression. The
statistical model will facilitate the study of polyploidy in other non-model
organisms.