* 1601456
* Preventing "Digital Dust": Supporting the Creation and Dissemination of High-Quality Videos for Advanced Technological Education
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Anthony Manupelli, Pellet Productions, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 08/31/2020
* USD 828,232.00

At ATETV (http://www.atetv.org), Pellet Productions has produced and hosted over
250 high-quality videos highlighting educational and career opportunities in
Advanced Technological Education (ATE). Many ATE grantees and other educators
are not only using ATETV's digital assets for teaching, for recruiting students,
and for training faculty, but are also creating their own content. With the
proliferation of small, affordable digital video cameras and smartphones,
grantees can now easily capture, produce, and share content. However, in many
cases, these home-grown video projects fall short of meeting their goals and
engaging their audience, largely for reasons having to do with the way the video
content is produced and disseminated. These time-consuming, well-intentioned
ventures thus lead to "digital dust." In this project, Pellet Productions will
develop an instructional process to support ATE grantees as they plan, produce,
disseminate, archive, and measure the outcomes of their own accessible digital
videos. In addition, content created by ATE grantees will be curated into an
online video library accessible to all users. These enhancements to ATETV will
support the spread of effective teaching-and-learning materials and strategies,
as well as the development of faculty expertise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project team will develop, test, and refine an "ATE Digital Video Content
Conceptual Framework" and support system. The framework will be based on the
industry standard video production process but will be carefully refined for
college faculty and administrators, with a sensitivity toward their skills and
resource constraints. The project team will also establish a tiered system of
support to ensure that grantees have the tools and confidence to produce high-
quality content that will engage their audience. A key component of this effort
will be a five-part course that presents the foundational skills for producing
digital video content, accompanied by an interactive e-book that will help
grantees organize their thoughts, articulate goals and objectives for their
videos, and follow a production checklist of necessary components. The e-book
will also include a series of templates (such as a goals-and-objectives
worksheet) and outline and scripting formats. The project team will work with a
subset of ATE grantees to test and refine the resources. The success of this
cohort of participants in producing and disseminating content will be shared
throughout the ATE community and with other groups of technician educators.