* 1601838
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Exploring the Evolution of Shifts in Reproductive Function in Hermaphroditic Fishes Using Gene Coexpression Networks
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2016,12/31/2017
* Jessica Maxfield, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 12/31/2017
* USD 18,389.00

Genes and gene pathways responsible for sexual development are highly conserved
across animal taxa; organisms as different as humans, fishes, and flies share
some of the same basic building blocks for determining if an individual develops
as a female or a male. This study will investigate the genetic basis of sexual
development in two species of fish. In most animals, sex is predetermined by
genetics, established during development, and is fixed for life. This pattern is
not true, however, for numerous fish species that exhibit the remarkable ability
to change their functional sex (referred to as hermaphroditism). Individuals are
neither female nor male and can shift between producing both sperm and eggs as
adults. We know very little about the genetic bases of shifting sexual function.
Understanding the ability of hermaphroditic fishes to produce new tissues for
generating sperm and ova throughout their lives could provide vital information
for solving fertility issues in humans, who do not have this ability. In
addition, based on the findings, the researchers will provide classroom material
for elementary and middle school students.

Sequential hermaphroditism, the ability to transition between gamete types at
some point in adult life, is a widespread strategy among teleost fishes. This
study aims to understand the development, evolution and diversification of
shifts in sexual function in the marine fish family Gobiidae. This family is an
ideal system in which to explore both the evolution and development of sexual
plasticity, as hermaphroditism has arisen independently as many as five times.
The study will compare two species, Eviota epiphanes with Lythrypnus dalliI.
Histological techniques will be used to generate a morphological time series of
fish gonads as they transition from ova to sperm production and sequence the
whole transcriptome (RNAseq) of brain and gonadal tissue as they transition.
These data will be used to construct gene coexpression networks that will be
compared between the two species. The results will provide insight into the gene
regulatory pathways that govern the sex change process and be used to test for
evolutionary conservation or change in those pathways.