* 1601811
* RUI: Novel Heavy Element Transition Metal Oxides; Low Dimensional Magnetism vs. Geometric Magnetic Frustration
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Shahab Derakhshan, California State University-Long Beach Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 06/30/2020
* USD 299,827.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

Magnetic materials have been the subjects of scholarly research for many years.
This project will focus on the investigation of a particular class of magnetic
systems having triangular arrangements of magnetic ions, which display unusual
and little-investigated behavior. The proposed parent materials will also be
subjected to chemical modification, and the resulting systems will provide a
great opportunity to elucidate the role of crystal symmetry and quantum aspects
on determination of the resultant magnetism. A major focus will also be devoted
to synthesis of magnetic materials and study of the effects of geometrical and
low-dimensional structural contributions. Some of these systems are particularly
important as they are expected to exhibit interesting electronic transport
properties.

The interdisciplinary nature of the project is attractive from an educational
perspective for many scientific communities, i.e. chemistry, physics,
electronics, materials, etc. Undergraduate and graduate students will be exposed
to a large variety of synthetic methods, characterization techniques, and
physical properties measurements in the field of solid-state materials
chemistry. Some of the research will be conducted in national laboratories,
offering valuable opportunities for students to collaborate with other
scientists and benefit from hands-on research experience in world-class research
facilities. Also, magnetism and magnetic materials are at the basis of many
components of daily human life (electric motors, data storage devices, medical
imaging technologies, etc.) and this project will advance public awareness of
the field of magnetic materials. It will also include development of new courses
and programs, attracting students to pursue academic studies in STEM fields,
organizing outreach programs in local high schools, and presenting results at
scientific conferences.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

In antiferromagnetic (AFM) materials with triangular arrangements of magnetic
ions, all the spin constraints cannot be satisfied simultaneously and
conventional static magnetic ordering is inhibited. This results in a
phenomenon, which is known as geometric magnetic frustration (GMF) where exotic
ground states with enormous degeneracies are present. Nonetheless, this
condition may be violated when the exchange interactions of different strengths
lift the degeneracy and the dominating interaction results in low dimensional
magnetism (LDM). This project aims to develop a profound insight into both
structural and electronic variables that determine the criteria for the two
above-mentioned regimes, LDM vs. GFM. The goals will be achieved by exploratory
syntheses, characterizations, and physical properties measurements of rationally
designed materials. These will include novel 4d and 5d transition metal oxides
in ordered NaCl structure type or in B-site ordered double perovskite structure
type, which are composed of triangular magnetic sub-structure. Moreover, the
successfully synthesized and characterized parent compounds will undergo further
systematic chemical modifications, by which the oxidation states of magnetic
ions and/or structural features will be altered. This in turn, will change the
degree of frustration and will enable understanding of the interplay between the
variables and the ground state magnetic structure. An essential component of the
program is the high level of undergraduate and M.S.-level graduate students'
participation, particularly those from underrepresented groups, in the
societally important area of materials science.