* 1601148
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Revealing the genomic targets of opposing natural selection that differ between females and males
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2018
* Robert Cox, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 05/31/2018
* USD 20,207.00

Males and females of the same species share a genome and express many of the
same traits. However, the two sexes often experience dramatic differences in
natural selection on these shared traits. This can create an evolutionary tug-
of-war when a trait and its underlying genes are beneficial in one sex, but
detrimental in the other. This study will investigate this selection conflict in
brown anole lizards. Such conflict can occur in any species with separate sexes
and is predicted to have important implications for the evolution of differences
between males and females, systems of sex determination, and the maintenance of
genetic variation. The researchers will genetically sequence individuals from a
wild population with extreme sex differences to identify genomic regions that
are subject to this selection conflict. In addition, this project will provide
research training for undergraduate students and the research will be used as
the basis for developing field-tested educational materials designed to build
skills for data interpretation in the K-12 classroom.

Despite its implications for so many major questions in biology, sexual conflict
has rarely been demonstrated in wild populations, and we have yet to identify
the actual regions of the genome that are subject to sexual conflict in natural
populations. This project has three aims: (1) test for sex differences in
natural selection on a variety of traits, (2) test for fitness costs of sexual
conflict by measuring the extent to which the genetic basis of fitness is
correlated between males and females, and (3) combine field estimates of fitness
with large-scale genomic data and powerful statistical methods to uncover
genomic regions associated with sexual conflict in a wild population of brown
anole lizards (Anolis sagrei). This work is being conducted using an island
population of more than a thousand adult lizards that is highly amenable to
large-scale studies of natural selection. The researchers will use their data to
test whether the same genomic regions contribute to fitness in each sex, to
measure the extent to which these genes are subject to sex differences in
selection, and to determine which components of fitness (survival, reproductive
success) give rise to intralocus sexual conflict.