* 1601168
* Central Virginia Advanced Manufacturing Initiative
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2021
* Hunter Moore, Piedmont Virginia Community College
* Standard Grant
* John Jackman
* 06/30/2021
* USD 438,964.00

This project at Piedmont Virginia Community College is developing an advanced
manufacturing education and training program to meet regional and statewide
employment needs. Developing and maintaining a highly skilled workforce is a
vital factor in sustaining a strong economy. This program responds to that need
by training, educating, and certifying a technical workforce to international
industry standards. The degree of collaboration among post-secondary faculty,
technical educators, and industry is improved by this initiative and the pathway
between secondary and post-secondary institutions is being strengthened. The
student recruitment plan is carefully designed to attract and retain a diverse
population. An organized effort is in place to disseminate the effective
practices and outcomes resulting from this project to a broad
audience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant is working towards the following
goals: developing an innovative education and training program in advanced
manufacturing; enhancing the advanced manufacturing career pathway between
secondary and post-secondary institutions; developing training capacity by
establishing an advanced manufacturing lab, an open access curriculum, and
project-based-learning (PBL) modules; and supporting regional economic
development in advanced manufacturing. The program is being developed by
incorporating the multiple fields of engineering technology into one integrated
curriculum. The new courses provide students with a broad understanding of
advanced manufacturing and the ability to apply the new knowledge in a lab
environment that simulates the work environment. By educating students in this
manner, as opposed to the usual route of focused training in one field, the
industrial base is being presented with well-trained employees.