* 1601288
* 2016 Gordon Research Conference on Environmental Sciences: Water: Opportunities for Aquatic Sciences to Impact a Changing World
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/2016,08/31/2016
* William Arnold, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 08/31/2016
* USD 40,000.00

1601288&lt;br/&gt;MacKay&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funding is requested to support
the June, 2016, Gordon Research Conference on Environmental Sciences: Water in
Holderness, NH. The 2016 conference theme is Opportunities for Aquatic Sciences
to Impact a Changing World and will focus on the critical contributions that
aquatic sciences will make in a world experiencing climate, population, and
resource pressures. The conference will bring together 180 participants from
multiple countries in an informal setting. The program will consist of plenary
talks by established and emerging researchers who are conducting the most
innovative and significant research on diverse aspects of environmental aquatic
science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In 2016, the Gordon Research Conference on
Environmental Sciences: Water, will continue its long tradition of surveying
priority and emerging issues across all aspects of aquatic environmental
science. The scope will span multiple disciplines (chemistry, biology, geology,
engineering, toxicology, human health), media (soil, groundwater, surface water,
atmospheric water, drinking water, wastewater), and scales (molecular, nano,
cellular, ecosystem, global). The overarching theme of the 2016 conference
recognizes that many of the challenges are intimately linked to water. This
proposal advances NSF's broader mission in several ways. First, there are direct
societal benefits that arise from the major application of work to be presented
at the conference. The need for sufficient amounts of water of appropriate
quality for human activities and protection of ecosystem health will be just one
discussed benefit.. Solutions to these problems require ideas from, and
interactions among, multiple disciplines to allow proper action and development
of environmental policy. Second, the conference advances discovery while
promoting teaching, training, and learning by offering a platform for graduate
student and postdoctoral researchers to present their research and participate
fully in the conference activities. The conference also provides a forum for
interactions between senior scientists and students and broad participation of
scientists from groups underrepresented in science and engineering. The
conference format provides an unusual and ideal means for the dissemination of
research results through close interaction of participants from industry,
government laboratories, and academia. Finally, the conference promotes broad
participation from diverse backgrounds, both through the speaker selection and
through special Gordon Research Conference funding mechanisms that target
underrepresented groups. Assessment of the broader impacts will be performed via
survey of participants at the conference.