* 1601166
* Creating Learning Opportunities for Undergraduates in Developing Technologies (CLOUDTech)
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2019
* Dane Schupbach, Trident Technical College
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie August
* 07/31/2019
* USD 432,117.00

The significance of the Creating Learning Opportunities for Undergraduates in
Developing Technologies (CLOUDTech) project is its development of an innovative
educational pathway in Cloud Computing Technology to address a critical industry
need. Because of the emerging nature of cloud technology, institutions of higher
education have not yet widely created curriculum and supporting labs to
effectively train technicians in this rapidly growing field. This project will
advance knowledge and learning by providing a new emphasis in the traditional
Network Systems Management program. The newly developed courses will strengthen
knowledge in cloud technologies, including virtualization, storage, networking
and cybersecurity. Both the courses and labs resulting from CLOUDTech will be
broadly disseminated for use by other institutions across the country. These
curricular additions will expand educational and career pathways, prepare
students for highly 足skilled and highly 足demanded occupations in this particular
region's burgeoning information technology sector, and will promote the
development of STEM education nationwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal
of CLOUDTech is curriculum and lab development for a series of virtualization
and cloud computing courses that will lead to a certificate with stackable
credentials toward an associates degree. This goal will be met through four
objectives: 1) Development of a rigorous curriculum that will foster an
environment of learning and success through hands 足on experience with Cloud
Technologies including virtualization, storage, Linux and Windows network
operating systems, and network cybersecurity; 2) Development and sharing of
curriculum and NETLAB focused hands足 on exercises with Regional ATEs such as
ACE, CSSIA, Cyberwatch, and CSEC; 3) Providing professional development for
faculty; and 4) Strengthening industry partnerships through collaboration in
developing and reviewing cloud technology curriculum, laboratories and student
learning objectives. Broad dissemination of the curriculum, labs, and other
materials developed by the project, including a User's Guide to facilitate
adaptation, have the potential to impact technical education at post-secondary
institutions on a national scale.