* 1601062
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   Lizards of the Family Teiidae: phylogeny, historical biogeography, and continental-scale species delimitation
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2016,08/31/2017
* Jack Sites, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* ashley dowling
* 08/31/2017
* USD 15,428.00

The Amazon racerunner (Ameiva ameiva) is distributed across four very different
South American biomes that cover an area larger than the continental US. This
project will perform the first distribution-wide, phylogeographic study of this
lizard species, providing opportunities to find cryptic diversity in the group
(i.e., new species) as well as a unique opportunity to evaluate competing
hypotheses of diversification in both rainforests and dry habitats. Data
collected for the Amazon racerunner will also be used to address future risk to
species due to climate change. The work is a collaboration with South American
colleagues to study key physiological traits (e.g., temperature preference and
performance) to reconstruct species distribution models and assess extinction
risk. Because modeling historical distributions is based on paleoclimate data,
these same models can be used to predict the effect that increasing temperatures
will have on future distributions of organisms. Results from this research will
be developed into a teaching module and used to show non-Biology major students
real-world observations used in hypothesis testing, here focused on speciation
and biogeography. Real examples from the researchers' extensive field and lab
work will personalize the data for students and enhance their appreciation of
the multi-faceted nature of science, and the nature of its
conclusions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Preliminary results suggests that Ameiva
ameiva represents a complex of species, which will be tested by sampling as much
of the distribution as possible, and generating a combination of Sanger,
NextGen, and several classes of morphological data to define species boundaries.
Researchers will visit three herpetological collections in Brazil to measure
morphological data from museum specimens. In addition to morphological data
collection, 100s-1000s of SNPs (ddRADseq) for 200 individuals of A. ameiva will
be incorporated into newly developed species delimitation (SDL) methods. A
recently developed SDL Bayesian approach that integrates morphological with
molecular data (iBPP) was shown to perform well under a variety of scenarios,
and this will be the preferred (but not exclusive) method used in this study.
Diversification hypotheses for the Amazon and Dry Diagonal of South America will
be compared using SNP data with programs that allow the analysis of historical
scenarios and a summary approach to estimate the strength of each hypothesis.