* 1601448
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Does Transgressive Segregation in Physiological Niche Explain the Rapid Spread of Invasive Genes into a Native Population
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2018
* Benjamin Fitzpatrick, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 06/30/2018
* USD 18,493.00

Major rapid evolutionary changes are well known, but the underlying mechanisms
and how these changes influence survival and reproduction are often unclear.
This project will address the process of rapid evolutionary change by
investigating whether the success and geographic spread of an introduced
salamander species is the result of interbreeding with a native species.
Although the introduction of non-native species is thought to lead to rapid
evolution, it is still not understood how often this occurs, the factors
involved, and whether this promotes the success and spread of the introduced
species. Sometimes introduced species hybridize with native species and produce
viable offspring that exhibit extreme trait values not present in either
parental species. For example, offspring may be bigger than either parental
species or have an increased tolerance to environmental stressors. Potentially,
such hybrid offspring can outcompete the parental species or colonize new
environments not occupied by either parental species. The production of extreme
trait values due to interbreeding - transgressive segregation - is rare in
viable offspring. However, when it occurs the offspring can interact with the
environment in entirely new ways, leading to rapid evolutionary change. The
researchers will study genetic mixing between an endangered native species, the
California tiger salamander, and a closely related introduced species, the
barred salamander, to test the hypothesis that transgressive segregation has led
to extremely rapid evolution in the native species. Data will reveal how life
history, physiology, and habitat combine to determine genetic pattern across a
region where the two species overlap and hybridize. The project also includes
the training of undergraduate and graduate students, educational programs
targeting K-12 students, and workshops for conservation managers.

Hybrids between Ambystoma tigrinum mavortium and A. californiense exhibit
transgressive segregation with respect to body size and exhibit a broader
thermal tolerance than natives. However, we still do not know whether
transgressive segregation of ecologically important traits is a major factor
affecting the extremely rapid spread of what are being labeled "superinvasive"
genes into native populations. The researchers will measure and compare
metabolic rates, rates of water loss, stress response to conspecific density,
and thermal tolerance at multiple life stages in native, introduced, and hybrid
tiger salamanders, the categories that matter for predicting spread on the real
California landscape. Data on native and hybrid salamanders will be generated
using a captive colony of salamanders of native and hybrid individuals.
Parental, non-native salamanders will be collected from several wild populations
within their native range and from an introduced population that is currently
outside the zone of overlap with the native species. Information learned will
then be used along with a novel population genetic simulation to generate robust
mechanistic predictions of dispersal and persistence of native and nonnative
genotypes within the real California landscape under current and potential
future conditions.