* 1601631
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Phylogenetic analysis of vision loss and gene expression in cave and surface adapted crayfish
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2018
* David Stern, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 05/31/2018
* USD 19,730.00

The repeated loss of pigmentation, eyes and vision in cave-dwelling animals
presents biologists with an excellent opportunity to understand the genetic
changes that have resulted in the convergent evolution of similar morphological
changes in unrelated organisms. Freshwater crayfish have evolved to live in
caves on at least seven occasions throughout their history, repeatedly losing
vision. This project will use a well-supported evolutionary framework of
freshwater crayfish to understand the role of gene regulation in producing
iconic cave morphologies. This research will promote training of undergraduate
and high school students in field, laboratory, and computational work. Data and
analysis pipelines will be made available to the public and will contribute to
invertebrate genomics research efforts. Ultimately, this research will advance
our knowledge of how organisms adapt to novel habitats and contribute to the
growing body of research in vision genomics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While the
genetics of vision loss has been studied in single species systems such as the
Mexican blind cave fish (Astyanax mexicanus), comparative studies across
multiple species aimed at revealing statistically significant and biologically
meaningful correlations have been lacking. The multiple transitions to cave
habitats by freshwater crayfish and the subsequent loss of vision in each case
make the group an ideal model to test hypotheses concerning the loss of complex
traits in response to a common selective pressure. These evolutionarily
independent replicates provide statistical power as well as the potential to
uncover biologically meaningful correlations. Researchers will use comparative
transcriptomics to develop a set of candidate genes related to vision loss and
cave adaptation in this system. Gene expression levels will be measured across a
set of these genes from multiple individuals of 14 species, both cave and
surface, and modeled as an evolving trait on the phylogeny. These data and
methods will be used to test if regulatory changes associated with vision loss
show a signature of adaptive evolution and if the transcriptome evolves in a
predictable way in vision loss events. This project will help to elucidate the
role of gene regulation in producing these iconic cave phenotypes, using a
unique framework, new technologies, and newly developed evolutionary models.