* 1601041
* Dissertation Research: Molecular Systematics of Porroglossum orchids: Phylogenetics, Floral Snap-Trap Kinematics, and Fragrance
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2016,12/31/2018
* Kenneth Cameron, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 12/31/2018
* USD 19,575.00

This project will study the evolutionary relationships of Porroglossum, an
endangered Neotropical orchid genus are distributed in the Andes. The flowers of
Porroglossum are unique because the labellum or 'lip' actively snaps inward when
touched in order to trap pollinators and ensure successful pollination. The
research will combine modern molecular approaches, high-speed videography, and
floral fragrance sampling to gain a multifaceted understanding of the
evolutionary relationships within the group and the processes underlying its
diversification. This project will train both undergraduate and graduate
students in modern molecular systematics techniques, including members of under-
represented groups, and will enhance collaborations with orchid researchers in
Ecuador.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to fully resolve phylogenetic
relationships within the Neotropical orchid genus Porroglossum. Researchers will
use reduced representation genome sequencing (e.g., genotyping by sequencing) to
collect a large number of SNPs from each species within the genus. The project
also will use high-speed videography to examine floral snap-trap kinematics
among species of Porroglossum. Velocity, acceleration, and kinetic energy data
will be collected from high-speed videos of the active floral snap-traps and
mapped onto the fully resolved phylogenetic tree, and phylogenetic signal will
be estimated for each data type. Lastly, this research will employ dynamic
headspace adsorption and a gas chromatography/mass spectrometry instrument to
investigate the patterns of floral fragrance evolution within Porroglossum.