* 1601680
* Cohomological and Birational Invariants of Algebraic Varieties
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2019
* Alena Pirutka, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Janet Striuli
* 04/30/2019
* USD 179,628.00

This award supports research at the interface of algebraic geometry, arithmetic
geometry, and number theory originating in the theory of Diophantine equations.
The main objects of study are algebraic varieties, defined by systems of
polynomial equations in several variables. Such systems of equations occur
throughout mathematics, science, and engineering. The idea of associating
discrete or linear invariants to algebraic varieties has been intensively and
successfully used in algebraic geometry to understand the properties of
algebraic varieties and to classify them. This project aims to employ modern
techniques that make use of the geometric properties of the variety to more
fully investigate these invariants, which may lead to decisive progress towards
the solution of several long-standing problems. One of the main objectives is to
understand to what extent an algebraic variety could be parametrized by
independent parameters. In this direction, even the case of cubics -- varieties
defined by a single equation of degree 3 in four or more variables -- is far
from being completely understood. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project addresses
four questions. The first is about birational properties of algebraic varieties.
The investigator plans to apply specialization techniques, based on properties
of Chow group of zero-cycles, to quadric fibrations over rational surfaces. The
second problem concerns Chow groups of cycles on algebraic varieties and the
cycle class maps to the cohomology groups: integral aspects of the Hodge and
Tate conjectures. These questions can be approached by computing unramified
cohomology groups. The project will investigate these and related geometric
properties, such as spaces of rational curves on varieties and R-equivalence.
The third problem concerns Galois-theoretic invariants and local-global
principles over function fields of curves. The cases of particular importance
are threefolds over finite fields or abelian varieties. The last problem focuses
on properties of classifying spaces of algebraic groups over algebraically
closed fields.