* 1601060
* Cyber Service! Interdisciplinary &amp; Experiential Education for Cyber Forensics Technicians
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2019
* Cynthia Roemer, Union County College
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 07/31/2019
* USD 199,987.00

According to the 2015 (ISC)2 global workforce study, the information security
workforce shortfall is widening as the demand for security practitioners is
dangerously outpacing the current supply. Of the almost 1,400 survey
respondents, 62% stated that their organizations have too few information
security professionals, which is a 6% increase from their 2013 survey. This
shortfall is serious and estimated to reach 1.5 million security practitioners
by 2020. This project entitled Cyber Service at Union County College (UCC) in
New Jersey is designed to address this critical cybersecurity workforce shortage
of the nation. The innovative curricular design focuses on the education of
middle skill cyber forensics technicians. Experiential education and service
learning are integrated into the curriculum to keep students engaged, to provide
critical workforce readiness skills, and to instill a commitment to community
service. By incorporating a community-based, service-learning capstone
experience into the associate-degree program. Cyber Service is designed to
advance a diverse group of students prepared to enter the well-paying industry
of cyber forensics as middle-skilled technicians. The project plans for least
35% of students in the program to be identified as belonging to a population
traditionally under-represented in science, technology, engineering, or
mathematics (STEM) fields (e.g., female, African American, and Hispanics). Cyber
Service has great potential to serve as a national model for other community
colleges. National dissemination of curricular and service-learning materials
specifically developed for cyber forensics technicians is planned through the
National CyberWatch Center, ATE Central, ATE TV, and the Association for
Computing Machinery Committee for Computing Education in Community Colleges (ACM
CCECC), as well as national cyber education and experiential education
conferences.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Cyber Service will address the urgent need to
increase the pool of skilled cyber forensics technicians to fill high-demand
jobs by employers in the northern New Jersey and New York City metropolitan
region, and to improve student retention and persistence in the attainment of
post-secondary credentials while preparing graduates with 21st century career
ready skills. The project will adapt four digital forensics courses from the NSF
ATE Advanced Cyberforensics Education (ACE) consortium. Cyber Service will then
extend the work of ACE by creating three new courses that complement the
consortium courses and by integrating innovative experiential education and
service-learning throughout the program courses. The three new courses are 1)
cloud computing and mobile device forensics, 2) cyber law and ethics, and 3)
service-learning cyber capstone. The expert project team will develop a series
of embedded, stackable certificates designed to culminate in an associate of
applied science degree in cyber forensics investigations that is mapped to
federal standards. Upon completion of the associate degree, students will be
well prepared to sit for industry certification exams appropriate to cyber
forensics, such the AccessData Certified Examiner. The new Cyber Capstone is a
culminating course that allows students to demonstrate their interdisciplinary
knowledge and technical skills learned in both the adopted and newly developed
courses, as well as to build 21st century career-ready abilities and civic
responsibilities through service-learning field experiences with community
partners. An extensive evaluation, based on the Program Evaluation Standards of
the American Evaluation Association,is planned to ensure that the project
documents its achievements and improves it effectiveness relative to student
success and employer satisfaction.