* 1601408
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Interactions among nitrogen and phosphorus through plant-microbial mutualisms in tropical rain forests
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2018
* Cory Cleveland, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* John Schade
* 06/30/2018
* USD 18,850.00

The tropics contain some of the largest, fastest growing and carbon-rich forests
on Earth. As they grow, tropical trees store large amounts of atmospheric carbon
dioxide in their biomass, slowing the increase in atmospheric carbon dioxide and
hence the pace of climate change. Yet, all trees require large amounts of soil
nutrients, especially nitrogen and phosphorus, to grow, and it remains unclear
whether the supply of soil nutrients will be sufficient to meet the demands of
predicted tree growth in the future. For example, soil phosphorus concentrations
are relatively low in tropical forest soils, and some research suggests that low
phosphorus supply may limit increases in tree growth and carbon storage.
However, previous work suggests that some tropical trees may be better than
others at obtaining scarce nutrients because of their relationships with soil
microorganisms that enhance the ability to scavenge nutrients. This research
will explore how different tropical trees access soil nutrients and whether
these microbial partnerships offer some trees an advantage over their
competitors. Overall, this research will improve the understanding of how
tropical forests may respond to global environmental
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Trees capable of symbiotic nitrogen (N) fixation, a
plant-microbial mutualism that converts atmospheric N into biological forms, are
abundant in tropical forests. Previous work suggests that N fixing trees have an
advantage over non-N fixing trees in acquiring soil phosphorus (P) via the
production of N-rich phosphatase enzymes that mineralize organic P and by
hosting arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi that scavenge for inorganic P. This
advantage could lead to competition for soil P in which N fixing trees
outperform non-N fixing trees. This project will explore the interactions
between N fixing and non-N fixing trees via an experimental seedling study on
the Osa Peninsula, Costa Rica in which multiple species from each plant group
will be grown alone or in competition under five P treatments that vary by the P
compound being delivered. In addition, previous work suggests that this N and P
interaction may not be constrained to trees that fix N, but may be evident in
trees that have high foliar N regardless of fixation. Thus, foliar N may be an
indirect control of P acquisition on an individual plant basis, as well as on a
landscape scale if plants with similar foliar N concentrations are aggregated.
Therefore, this research will also explore the relationships between foliar N, P
acquisition, and the biogeochemical consequences across a set of individual
emergent canopy trees and forest plots characterized by high and low foliar N.
The results from both projects have the potential to elucidate complex plant-
microbially mediated N and P interactions that operate above- and belowground,
and on multiple spatial scales.