* 1601106
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: A trait-based approach to characterize microbial community composition
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2017
* Michaeline Nelson, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 05/31/2017
* USD 20,085.00

One of the most surprising scientific discoveries is the critical role that
bacteria and other microbes play in human and environmental biology. These small
organisms determine the availability of nutrients that are essential to all
life. Little is known about the factors that influence where microbes live,
however, or how they work together to provide life's basic needs. This project
will determine the importance of factors such as temperature, water, birth,
death, and movement to the size, location, and composition of natural microbial
communities. It focuses on microbes that cycle nitrogen, a nutrient that is
critical for plant, animal, and human health across the globe. The project will
advance the education and training of a doctoral student in modern scientific
techniques and their application to natural communities. Results have the
potential to improve agriculture and industrial output as well as human health.
They will be translated to the general public through educational media and
presentations at a California state park. The investigators will present their
research to local communities through the Discovery Cube Science Center of
Orange County, a non-profit organization with a goal to inspire citizens through
science education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate the
contribution of deterministic versus stochastic forces to variation in microbial
community composition and function. Two hypotheses will be tested: 1) Stochastic
variation of functional gene diversity will be lower than that of microbial
taxonomic diversity and 2) Stochastic variation of functions carried out by
fewer taxa (narrow functions such as nitrogen fixation) will be higher than
stochastic variation of functions carried out by many taxa (broad functions such
as ammonia assimilation). Deterministic variability derives from theoretically
predictable factors such as precipitation or nutrient availability. In contrast,
stochasticity affects diversity mainly through drift, which is in turn
influenced by dispersal. This project will use bags filled with plant litter to
replicate natural microbial communities. A crossed experimental design will
manipulate a known, deterministic effect (ambient versus added precipitation)
and dispersal (open versus closed to immigration). Metagenomes will be generated
from three replicate samples per bag and for the initial inoculum. This genetic
information about the microbial community will then be compared within and
across treatments, looking both at taxonomic composition and functional genes,
with a focus on the nitrogen cycle. Results will significantly advance current
understanding of the primary factors affecting natural microbial communities.