* 1601071
* Research Initiation Award: Toward Bionanoscience - Binding of Amino Acids with Graphene and N-doped Graphene
* EHR,HRD
* 08/15/2016,01/31/2022
* Dinadayalane Tandabany, Clark Atlanta University
* Standard Grant
* Emanuel WAddell
* 01/31/2022
* USD 299,986.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities-Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
Research Initiation Awards (RIAs) provide support to STEM junior faculty at
HBCUs who are starting to build a research program, as well as for mid-career
faculty who may have returned to the faculty ranks after holding an
administrative post or who needs to redirect and rebuild a research program.
Faculty members may pursue research at their home institution, at an NSF-funded
Center, at a research intensive institution or at a national laboratory. The RIA
projects are expected to help further the faculty member's research capability
and effectiveness, to improve research and teaching at his or her home
institution, and to involve undergraduate students in research experiences. With
support from the National Science Foundation, Clark Atlanta University (CAU)
will conduct research aimed at understanding the binding properties of graphene
and nitrogen-doped (N-doped) graphene with amino acids that may be useful for
the development of biosensors. This project will be used to enhance teaching and
learning at CAU and thus, help to prepare the next-generation of
underrepresented African American undergraduate students by training them in the
research area of Bionanoscience at CAU. The research and educational efforts
will contribute to the University's goal to increase research related to
computational sciences and to increase student engagement with faculty outside
of the classroom through undergraduate research. In addition, the combined
research training and education for the CAU students will result in graduates
that are well-prepared to manage graduate school and well-qualified to compete
in a diverse workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the proposed study is
to investigate the binding of all twenty naturally occurring amino acids (AAs)
with graphene at gas phase and aqueous medium using quantum chemical
calculations. The computations will be extended to examine the binding of AAs
with nitrogen doped (N-doped) graphene to gain insight on the effect and the
type of N-doping in graphene. The specific aims of this project are to: (1)
obtain a fundamental understanding of the binding of amino acids (AAs) with
graphene and N-doped graphene through computational investigations in gas phase
and aqueous medium; (2) compare the computed results with the experimental data;
and (3) prepare the next-generation of underrepresented African American
undergraduate students by training them in the research area of Bionanoscience
at CAU. The findings from this study will provide significant knowledge that
will be useful for the development of biosensors and drug delivery applications
using graphene-based nanomaterials. In addition, the proposed research will
enhance our current knowledge on how to engineer graphene for biological
applications. This project will be conducted in collaboration with Jackson State
University.