* 1601538
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Plant defenses in African savannas: testing the effects of induced and associational defenses on plant phenotype, fitness and diversity
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2018
* Robert Pringle, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 05/31/2018
* USD 16,380.00

Understanding the ways in which plants modulate their vulnerability to
herbivores is central to understanding patterns of biodiversity and ecosystem
functioning. Many plants have physical defenses such as spines, thorns, or
prickles that protect them against large mammalian herbivores (e.g., elephants,
giraffes, deer, and elk); however, producing and maintaining these defenses is
energetically costly. As a result, plants that produce more spines and thorns
are less vulnerable to herbivory, but also have fewer resources to invest in
growth and reproduction, two critical components of plant fitness. This tradeoff
is particularly acute for plants in dry or infertile African savannas, where
resources (e.g., water and nutrients) are scarce and the risk of being eaten by
large herbivores is high. As a result, theory predicts the emergence of
strategies that maximize the effectiveness of defenses while reducing their
cost. Two such strategies are induced defenses (produced rapidly in response to
damage by herbivores) and associational defenses (reduced incidence of herbivory
derived from growing in close proximity to a well-defended neighbor).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to evaluate the relative
effectiveness of, and interactions between, these anti-herbivore strategies and
to determine how positive associational interactions among plants of different
species alter patterns of resource investment. Plants facing the same
evolutionary pressures frequently converge on similar suites of defensive
characteristics, known as defense syndromes. In African savannas, individuals of
the same species can exhibit strongly contrasting defense syndromes depending on
their proximity to well-defended neighbors. Plants growing beneath thorny tree
canopies, for example, produce fewer spines and exhibit a diminished induced
response to simulated herbivory relative to conspecifics growing in open
habitat. The researchers hypothesize that this difference is maintained by a
disparity in the environmental cues that govern defensive investment in plants
and will test this hypothesis using transplant experiments of focal plant
species conducted inside and outside of large-herbivore exclosures in the Mpala
Research Centre, Kenya. The researchers will also perform surveys of multiple
species to evaluate how common intraspecific variation in defense syndrome is
across plant taxa. By investigating the biotic and/or abiotic forces that
maintain discrete intraspecific defense syndromes, this research will elucidate
the independent and interactive effects of different anti-herbivore strategies
on plant fitness and help inform the management of rangelands and the
conservation of native vegetation in African savannas.