* 1601455
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   Does Hormone Provisioning Link Maternal Social Environment and Offspring Phenotype?
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2018
* Katherine Crocker, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 05/31/2018
* USD 15,979.00

In animals, when ones' body and behavior are matched to the environment success
is maximized. Animals often rely on steroid hormones to adapt to the
environments they are in. But in young individuals small differences in the
concentration of hormones during development can profoundly alter later survival
and behavior. During development a mother's hormone levels impact her developing
offspring, and therefore impact more than her own immediate survival but also
that of the young she produces. Many studies have tested the idea that steroid
hormones provided by mothers to their offspring could help offspring exploit
their later adult environment. However, these studies have used animals that
take care of their offspring after birth. Can mothers use steroid hormones alone
to optimize offspring, or is parenting behavior also necessary? This project
will investigate that question by measuring the effects of a steroid hormone on
offspring development and survival in an insect species that provides no
parental care to its offspring. The results will show whether mothers can use
steroid hormones to prime their offspring for future behavioral environments
without relying on parental care. Because every mother transmits hormones to her
offspring regardless of species, the results of this study will amplify our
general understanding of how hormones function across generations. As such, it
will likely be especially relevant to conservation of endangered species and
environments, and individualized medicine. This broad applicability will also
facilitate outreach to local K-12 students and findings will be presented to the
scientific community through publications and presentations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will investigate maternal effects and
aggressive behavior in an invertebrate (Acheta domesticus, the house cricket)
that provides no care to offspring, but which naturally experiences variable
social environments. Previous data shows that higher levels of ecdysteroid
hormones (ESH) in eggs are associated with increased fitness for hatchlings.
Proposed research addresses the question of whether and to what extent parents
that have no later contact with their offspring can alter the development and
behavioral phenotype of said offspring in response to social environment and
through endocrine maternal effects alone. Female house crickets will be raised
in four social environments (high and low total density, high female density and
high male density), and their egg ESH deposition and total reproductive output
will be measured, also. Research proposed here will disentangle the effects of
maternal hormone provisioning and parental care on offspring life history by
measuring hormone provisioning in a system without parental care. This work will
also provide more information about ecological and evolutionary functions of
ecdysteroid hormones (ESH), which have until now been studied primarily in the
context of embryogenesis and molting and are generally underappreciated as
mediators of long-term 'organizational' effects. Finally, this research tests
the current behavioral endocrinology framework established using vertebrate
study systems by considering hypotheses in the independently evolved insect
endocrine system.