* 1601875
* Enhancing an Energy Technology Associate Degree Program to Meet Employer Needs
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Eugene Jones, Lake-Sumter State College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 07/31/2020
* USD 199,986.00

Local, regional and national energy providers have a critical and long-term need
for highly qualified substation and relay technicians to support the sensitive
components of the national grid. This project at Lake Sumter State College
(LSSC) in Florida is designed to meet this labor force need, with support from
Duke Energy and other energy providers, by enhancing an engineering technology
specialization in Electrical Substation and Protective Relay Technology (ESPRT).
Through a strategic recruitment project, students will be recruited to join a
hands-on technician education and training program that will culminate in a
paid-summer internship and high skill, high wage employment. The project will
focus on widespread dissemination of technical and general industry information
that will result in the advancement of this and other similar education and
training programs across the country. It will implement strategies to improve
the overall science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) culture in
the service district of the college. It will also strive to attain much needed
racial and gender diversity within faculty and student groups and the energy
industry at large. The ESPRT Program leaders will focus on developing an on-
going collaboration for program improvement with the Florida ATE Center (FLATE,
DUE 1204751), the Advanced Technology Environmental and Energy Center (ATEEC,
DUE 1204958), and existing energy industry partners. The college will engage in
on-going external and internal research including focus groups, surveys, and
advisory board feedback and formal assessments that will result in data-driven
decision making and program adjustments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ESPRT Program
will introduce an academically and technically rigorous next step for students
and educators, with both populations attaining knowledge and skills that are
instrumental to the success of energy technicians. The primary objectives of the
project are to:&lt;br/&gt;(1) Upgrade program course content and materials to
reflect current industry practices as identified by industry partners and
provide students with knowledge and skills necessary to meet the employment
needs of industry for a highly skilled, advanced technology energy workforce for
today and the future.&lt;br/&gt;(2) Strengthen partnerships between industry
partners, secondary educational institutions, and post-secondary educational
entities to ensure that all stakeholders are working collaboratively to meet
this existing, substantial workforce need.&lt;br/&gt; (3) Inform targeted
populations about careers in energy systems protection and control, resulting in
a pipeline of secondary school students for future ESPRT Program cohort
groups.&lt;br/&gt;(4) Recruit and enroll no less than 20 students (with a
particular emphasis on students from underrepresented racial and/or gender
groups) into the ESPRT Program for each enrollment period. &lt;br/&gt;(5) Focus
on student retention, student completion, student placement, and workforce needs
by placing ESPRT Program students in internships with energy partners and other
energy companies.