* 1601520
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Migration-selection balance in the evolution of insecticide resistance in Aedes aegypti
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2018
* Gonzalo Vazquez Prokopec, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 03/31/2018
* USD 16,367.00

The study will investigate the relative roles of the pattern of insecticide
applications and mosquito movement in the evolution and propagation of
resistance in wild-caught Aedes aeygpti mosquitoes. Programs relying on heavy
use of insecticides are now used for control. The effectiveness of insecticide-
based control strategies is being threatened by the evolution of insecticide
resistance. Resistance has increased globally yet the mechanisms behind this
spread are still largely unknown. Insecticide application exerts a selection
pressure, yet this pressure is not constant in time or space. Additionally,
mosquitoes can spread resistance to new areas as populations mix. These
mosquitos are a major public health problem as they transmit multiple viral
diseases including dengue fever, chikungunya, and zika virus. The research will
have notable broader impacts as it informs insecticide resistance management and
will be helpful in developing novel mosquito control strategies. The most common
form of insecticide resistance in Aedes aegypti is driven by point mutations in
the para-orthologous sodium channel gene, which confers resistance to pyrethroid
insecticides. Named kdr for "knock-down resistance", these point mutations may
carry a fitness cost, rendering the resistant individuals less fit in the
absence of insecticide pressure. Variation in the location and timing of urban
insecticide applications creates a patchy environment of insecticide-free
refuges, where susceptible mosquitoes may gain a fitness advantage, and areas
with insecticide, where only resistant mosquitoes survive. There is also
variation in the quality of larval habitats, which leads to density-dependent
competition between individuals for resources. Under this complex selection
scenario, the relative fitness of genotypes may change based on the presence of
insecticide or larval density. To better understand these dynamics, researchers
will conduct cage experiments under semi-natural conditions to quantify the
relative fitness of kdr genotypes exposed to all combinations of two different
treatments: with versus without insecticide, and high versus low larval density.
These experiments will contribute to understanding the selection dynamics of kdr
in Aedes aegypti and help explain patterns of resistance frequencies observed in
field populations over space and time.