* 1601587
* AM-WATCH: Additive Manufacturing - Workforce Advancement Training Coalition and Hub
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Thomas Singer, Tennessee Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 07/31/2021
* USD 900,000.00

Additive manufacturing (AM) is rapidly changing the design and production of all
kinds of products, from those used in daily life to critical parts utilized in
advanced technologies. With the increased national and global focus, there is
clear evidence of the growing demand for technicians in AM. The Additive
Manufacturing Workforce Advancement Training Coalition and Hub (AM-WATCH) is
being established to address gaps in the knowledge base of 21st century
technicians to ensure they are prepared for advanced career placement. This
project is significantly enhancing and expanding AM resources developed by prior
NSF projects (including remote facilities, learning curriculum, and educator
workshops) to encompass hands-on desktop 3D printer-building modules, equipment
operation/maintenance curriculum, and additional remotely-accessible equipment
laboratories. In addition, AM-WATCH is establishing a number of cutting edge AM
innovations and targeting the engagement of students, including those in
underserved and under-represented groups, in STEM and other technical careers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of AM-WATCH is to address gaps in the
current knowledge base of technicians through the development of curriculum and
educational materials, delivery of professional development activities, support
provided to 30+ community college and high school instructors per year, and
expanded outreach activities targeting K-12 and community college teachers and
students. Tennessee Technological University is collaborating with Community
Colleges (CC), four-year universities, the ATE National Resource Center for
Materials Technology Education, a national laboratory, industry, and government
in the development of cutting-edge and multi-dimensional curriculum, activities,
and toolkits for instructors.