* 1601359
* Creating a High School Pipeline for the Next Generation of Manufacturing Employees
* EDU,DUE
* 04/15/2016,03/31/2020
* David Alsip, U of Kentucky Madisonville Community College
* Standard Grant
* John Jackman
* 03/31/2020
* USD 458,319.00

Madisonville Community College and the Hopkins County Career Technology Center
are collaboratively delivering a manufacturing certificate program that prepares
students for the Manufacturing Skill Standards Council's (MSSC) Certified
Production Technician exam and employment as process technicians. The project's
intellectual merit lies in attracting high school students into manufacturing
education, which research suggests they and their parents are not presently
considering. The dual credit manufacturing program is familiarizing students
with modern manufacturing and changing their perceptions regarding its
desirability as a career. The project's broader impact involves the
dissemination of improved marketing techniques that are increasing the number of
students enrolling in postsecondary STEM-based manufacturing programs, entering
the STEM workforce, and pursing further STEM education. The project is also
evaluating a modularized curriculum and hybrid online delivery model that
effectively shares complex, expensive technician training resources between
secondary and postsecondary educational institutions and efficiently allocates
faculty time and effort. This model is especially impactful for smaller
secondary and postsecondary institutions in rural settings with limited human
and fiscal resources who wish to launch innovative technical
programming.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is evaluating the effectiveness of
MCC's marketing of its manufacturing curricula to high school students and
making adjustments as necessary. It is also evaluating the use of experiential
advising techniques such as industry mentoring. Additionally, it is using a
"hybrid" online delivery model for dual credit programming that effects
operational benefits for both partners. Finally, it advances the partners'
existing efforts to address workplace readiness skills such as effective self-
management, communication skills, teamwork, dependability and work ethic.