* 1601794
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   Interaction of gene flow, selection and genomic architecture on the genetics of adaptation
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2018
* Patrick Phillips, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 05/31/2018
* USD 18,850.00

Organisms live in complex environments that shape the genetic basis of complex
physical traits in varying and unpredictable ways. Understanding the genetic
basis of such traits, which can be affected by hundreds of genes, is vital to
understanding how populations respond to environmental change. Species in the
wild often exist in subpopulations spread across different environments, and
each environment may experience different conditions. However, subpopulations
can be connected because individuals travel across space and then mate with
individuals in other subpopulations. Recent studies on species in the wild have
shown that even though migration and gene flow occurs, populations in different
environments retain their uniqueness. Scientists are interested in determining
how populations retain this genetic separation. Therefore, studies of the
genetic basis of particular traits may shed light on this phenomenon. This study
focuses on a system where the researchers can control migration and then examine
the genetic underpinnings of traits that are unique to different populations. In
particular the researchers are interested in how organisms respond to a novel
heat stress environment. The work will aid in the training of a graduate student
and underrepresented minorities.

This study will use the model nematode Caenorhabditis remanei to (1) examine how
migration interacts with selection to affect the ability of a population to
adapt to a novel heat stress environment, and (2) dissect the genetic basis of
heat stress resistance. This project will use experimental evolution and next
generation sequencing to dissect the genetic basis of chronic heat stress
resistance. By including the effects of migration of non-adapted individuals
into a heat stressed environment, this study will not only find the determinants
of the genetic basis of heat stress resistance, but will also directly test the
hypothesis that low levels of migration increase the strength of the genetic
signal underlying novel adaptations.