* 1601261
* Training Tomorrow's Technicians in Lightweight Materials: Properties, Optimization, and Manufacturing Processes
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Gene Liao, Washtenaw Community College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 06/30/2019
* USD 200,000.00

There is an emerging and imminent need for employees equipped with skills in
advanced manufacturing and automotive technology in the area of lightweight
materials. While some of these lightweight materials have been studied and used
in prototyping for years, they are now being used more broadly in production.
Consequently, there is a need to translate the theoretical findings related to
these materials and how they are used in design and manufacturing into
applications and implementation in production, finishing, and repair. In
addition to educating technicians who will be directly applying these skills and
knowledge in their work, this project at Washtenaw Community College (WCC) in
Michigan is also designed to address the critical need to teach and train the
high school teachers and college faculty who will pass that knowledge on to
their students. It also tackles the sustainability of the advanced manufacturing
industry by facilitating engagement and recruitment of youth into the talent
pipeline by joining with Square One Educational Network (SQ1) to develop a
pipeline into lightweight manufacturing starting with K-12 students

Key activities for this project include (a) developing an introductory
multidisciplinary and project-based course on lightweight materials around an
existing vehicle design project for the SQ1 Full Scale Innovative Vehicle Design
Challenge; (b) creating interdisciplinary community college faculty and K-12
teacher professional development centered on lightweight materials properties,
optimization, and manufacturing processes; (c) establishing a talent pipeline
extending from K-12 to community colleges and four-year universities; and (d)
developing and contributing to a repository of light weighting curricula. The
college is partnering with Wayne State University (WSU) to develop integrated
curriculum in the emerging technologies surrounding lightweight materials
properties, optimization and manufacturing processes. The goal is to also engage
industry and educators in developing a talent pipeline and initial curriculum
addressing the material properties as well as optimization and manufacturing
processes associated with lightweight materials at the high school and community
college levels to meet emerging industry needs for technicians in the
manufacturing industry. A central element of this proposal entails the
introduction of a new arrangement of course design and delivery. With the advent
of lightweight materials and manufacturing processes, the manufacturing industry
is shifting to a systems approach rather than the traditional silo manufacturing
practices. WCC will utilize this project to create a model for community college
curriculum development utilizing this systems approach. The overview course will
be multidisciplinary, project-based and designed around specific lightweight
materials or categories of materials (aluminum alloys, plastics and polymers,
carbon fiber composites, etc.) rather than focused on specific manufacturing
disciplines. For each material or group of materials, the course will be
arranged so that an overview of the material properties, applications, design
for manufacturability, and manufacturing processes will be presented. As an
introductory course, this will facilitate students identifying specific areas of
interest in which to continue their studies. It will also provide a broader
context for these students to build a systems approach into their study of
advanced manufacturing or advanced transportation. A comprehensive evaluation is
being developed to continuously enhance the project activities and provide
opportunities for researching and evaluating the success of the project and its
deliverables, as well as the sharing of best practices.