* 1601785
* Unmanned Aircraft Systems Technology Education Consortium (UASTEC)
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Phillip Davis, Del Mar College
* Standard Grant
* John Jackman
* 08/31/2020
* USD 788,027.00

Geospatial Technology (GST) is a general term that relates to the use of
technology for collection and processing of geospatial data in a variety of
contexts and applications. GST applications range from environmental monitoring
and remote sensing to drug and law enforcement, pipeline inspection, agriculture
and ranch management. With the widespread availability of high resolution
satellite imagery equipment, desktop software for Geographic Information Systems
(GIS) and inexpensive Global Positioning Systems (GPS) receivers, geospatial
technologies are currently at the forefront of the revolution in the acquisition
and analysis of critical data that impacts daily life. An integral part of
geospatial technology equipment is the unmanned aircraft system (UAS) also known
as the "drone". UAS are subsystems used to collect aerial data, hence they
include instruments such as digital cameras, sensors and radiometers. The goal
of the proposed project is to improve geospatial technology education at the
community and technical college level to increase the number, diversity, and
quality of geospatial technology professionals. This is achieved primarily
through the establishment of a unique broad-based consortium of key stakeholders
called the Unmanned Aircraft System Technology Education Consortium (UASTEC).
The members of the consortium are Del Mar College (DMC, a public two year
community college), Texas A&amp;M University - Corpus Christi (TAMUCC) a 4-year
institution, the Camber Corporation (a DOD contractor) and the Lone Star UAS
Center of Excellence. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The UASTEC project will create a new
four-course DMC certificate in UAS Technology that can be earned in as little as
two semesters. The new UAS curriculum will prepare technicians to assist in the
maintenance and operation of expensive UAS equipment with a solid understanding
of the technology and regulatory requirements for their legal commercial
operation. The project simultaneously emphasizes both career and technical
education and workforce professional development. Through an articulation
agreement with TAMUCC, the DMC UAS certificate will transfer seamlessly. The GST
workforce will be able to enroll in the UAS Certificate program through a
continuing education arrangement that bypasses tedious college application
processes while permitting academic college credit for a nominal fee.
Additionally, the project reaches out to high schools to train secondary school
teachers in UAS in order to give high-school students the opportunity to earn
college credit by enrollment in dual-credit college level GIS courses.