* 1601260
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   Can the degree of mimicry predict levels of genetic structure among populations? A test using mimetic ground beetles
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2018
* Carlos Munoz Ramirez, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 05/31/2018
* USD 20,150.00

This project will analyze spatial patterns of genetic diversity in a novel
mimicry system from South America to investigate whether the processes driving
resemblance in mimicry systems can also promote diversity within species.
Mimicry systems, where multiple species evolve mutual resemblance to reduce
predation, are excellent natural laboratories to study the processes generating
biodiversity. Species in mimetic systems often exhibit diverse geographic
morphologies, which raises questions about how this diversity originated and is
maintained. Addressing this question will quantify the role of natural selection
in promoting and maintaining genetic differentiation among populations.
Additionally, this research will provide a basis for using morphological traits
to predict levels of genetic structure. The later will be especially useful for
conservation purposes, particularly in groups or systems in which genetic data
might not be available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These goals will be addressed by
conducting a fine scale landscape genetic study on mimetic beetles from the
genus Ceroglossus using next generation sequencing data. Samples will be
collected across areas with different geographic morphs and levels of phenotypic
matching, and from two or three different species. Correlation tests between
color differences and genetic differentiation will inform whether selection for
mimicry can impact levels of genetic structure, whereas model-based demographic
inferences will provide statistical rigor to distinguish between specific
mechanisms driving such patterns. This project will encourage collaborative work
with Chilean researchers and students on the study of a new and fascinating
model system.