* 1601813
* Early Career Undergraduate Research Experience (eCURe)
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2019
* Veronica Jaramillo, Pasadena City College
* Standard Grant
* Heather Watson
* 08/31/2019
* USD 850,936.00

The Early Career Undergraduate Research Experience (eCURe) program is an
innovative model for improving STEM education at the community college level.
Based on the effective practices demonstrated at the university level, the eCURe
project seeks to use undergraduate research as a platform for engaging students
in STEM education, promoting STEM careers, improving STEM skills training and
enhancing critical thinking. More specifically, the project will be
investigating how early research experiences for community college students lead
to improved success and retention in their STEM academic path. This program, in
collaboration with four-year institutions and industry partners, will create an
employer-driven accelerated contextualized STEM pathway that provides more
research-like experiences on a community college campus via redesigned
curriculum and instructional methodology, and lead to summer internships for
students at partner institutions. This project will allow underrepresented and
economically disadvantaged students from the community college to have a similar
experience as their counterparts at four year schools. These early research
experiences will better prepare these students for both the workforce and
transfer. This project will develop model curriculum that can be adopted at
other community colleges and lead to increased diversity in the STEM fields.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The eCURe model includes purposeful redesign of STEM
curriculum, including the scaffolding of research knowledge and skills across
multiple STEM disciplines. Furthermore, the model will develop three levels of
research experiences beginning with research exposure and building to full
research internships similar to the National Science Foundation's Research
Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) model. The incorporation of current
research methods into introductory level STEM course work is unique at the
community college level and the eCURe project will serve as a national model for
building research capacity in two-year programs. Providing community college
students with authentic research training and experiences within industry,
government and university laboratories promises to increase real-world applied
skills in STEM students. The eCURe project will serve as a pilot for determining
the most effective means of providing STEM education that include required
research knowledge and skills. The size and diversity of Pasadena City College
makes it a prime candidate to adopt such a project and to serve as an exemplar
for other community colleges throughout the nation. The project has been
developed with a broad intent to ensure the ability to replicate the model at
other institutions.