* 1601477
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Molecular basis of hummingbird distributions in the high Andes
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2018
* Catherine Graham, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 05/31/2018
* USD 20,524.00

This project will investigate the link between the distribution of hummingbird
species across an elevational gradient in South America and the molecular basis
of genetic adaptation to extreme conditions. We know that environmental
variation effects the evolution and distribution of species. However, we do not
know the molecular bases for how organisms adapt to this variation. A major
challenge is to understand how molecular processes occurring in local
populations relate to global species' distribution patterns over evolutionary
time. This is difficult because evidence of adaptation can disappear over time,
and because population genetic patterns can mimic adaptation. This project will
compare several populations and species of Andean hummingbirds. Modern genetic
methods will be used to measure natural selection on proteins while also taking
account of population genetic structure. In addition, the project will include
the training of high school and undergraduate students, and produce educational
materials for genomic workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will bridge
the gap between macroevolutionary distribution patterns and microevolutionary
processes of adaptation. The goals are to test for genetic adaptation to high-
altitude conditions in Andean hummingbird populations while controlling for
demographic history, and to test for parallel evolution across populations that
independently colonized the high Andes. Hummingbirds are an excellent system for
studying genetic adaptation across altitudinal gradients. There are more than
300 species, they occur across a vast gradient - sea level to over 4000 meters -
despite having the highest basal metabolic rates of any bird group, and there
have been at least four independent colonization events of high-altitude
habitats. The researchers will collect genomic data from 6-30 populations of two
low and two high altitude species to test the hypothesis that adaptive changes
in protein-coding genes shape altitudinal distributions in hummingbird
populations that have recently colonized the high Andes. Researchers will use
the genomic data to detect signatures of positive selection, an indicator of
genetic adaptation, and measure population genetic structure across populations.
The results of these analyses will provide critical insight into the mechanisms
of colonization and adaptation to high elevation ecosystems.