* 1601237
* 2016 Plant Volatiles GRC/GRS: Diversity of Targets, Effects and Applications of Plant Volatiles (Jan 31 to Feb 5, 2016, Ventura, CA)
* BIO,IOS
* 01/15/2016,12/31/2016
* Dorothea Tholl, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 12/31/2016
* USD 10,000.00

Odor is the most frequent and chemically diverse carrier of biological
information. Volatile compounds released by plants serve multiple functions,
including cell to cell signaling, plant-plant communication, attraction of
beneficial organisms such as pollinators, and defense against pathogens. In the
human perception, plant volatile compounds are the odors, aromas or flavors of
flowers, fruits or spices, the ingredients of perfumes and aromatizing products,
or the active components of essential oils and other plant-based applications in
traditional and alternative medicine. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In spite of
intensive research efforts over the last three decades, many central questions
in the young research field of plant volatile organic compounds (VOCs) remain to
be answered. The Gordon Research Conference 'Plant Volatiles' (GRC-PV) (Jan 31
to Feb 5, 2016, Ventura, CA) has been designed to initiate a transformation of
plant VOC science by boosting the exchange of knowledge and research
philosophies among multiple disciplines with the goal to understand the
molecular mechanisms that underlie the incredible diversity of VOC-mediated
interactions of plants with their environment and to enhance our awareness of
the potential of plant VOCs in an array of applications. The conference will
focus on four major areas of knowledge:&lt;br/&gt; -VOC biosynthetic diversity,
molecular regulation, and mechanisms of emission at the single cell and plant
systems level&lt;br/&gt; -The diverse roles of plant VOCs in intra- and
interspecific interactions&lt;br/&gt; -Molecular mechanisms of the organismal
perception of VOCs &lt;br/&gt; -Technologies and concepts for applying VOCs as
bio-based products and biocontrol agents in sustainable
agriculture&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 2016 GRC-PV will host speakers from 16
countries ranging from postdocs to senior scientists in 9 sessions. Both the
GRC-PV and the associated Gordon Research Seminar (GRS) for junior scientists
will foster the participation of students and early career scientists and
enhance the proportion of underrepresented groups among the attendees. GRS
participants will have the opportunity throughout the conference for informal
discussions with mentors from academia, science publishing, and industry about
future directions in plant volatile science and career developments. This
initiative will engage and retain the next generation of talented junior
scientists in the multidisciplinary field of plant volatile research. The
conference aims at enhancing the presence of representatives of the industry to
facilitate the search for putative applications of VOCs. Social media and press
releases will promote the awareness among future scientists and the general
public of the importance of the 'silent language of plants'.