* 1601595
* The Information Assurance Auditing Project
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Robert Loya, Riverside Community College District/Moreno Valley Campus
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 06/30/2019
* USD 199,917.00

In order to create a more highly qualified and diverse technology workforce in
information assurance to better serve the security needs of business and
industry, this project at Moreno Valley College (MVC) in southern California is
designed to develop a new Information Systems Auditing (ISA) associate degree
and certificate program. To improve training and increase the number of
certified ISA technicians while advancing the role of community colleges in
Career and Technical Education (CTE), the college will address emerging ISA
needs of industries and organizations. The core ISA certificate program is
designed to serve low-income, first generation, and traditionally
underrepresented student populations and meet their educational, economic, and
career needs, which will model the culture of collaboration and partnership
established between the college and regional business and industry, government
and workforce organizations, K-12 districts, the community, and four-year
universities. Focusing on the expertise of leaders in the field and these
partnerships, the project will develop networks to support current and future
technical workforce needs, internships, and other aspects of implementation. It
will encourage participation by low-income, underrepresented, and/or minority
students including women, with a target goal to increase and improve computer
information systems (CIS) education not only at the college, but nationwide. The
outcome of the efforts will affect students and instructors from high schools to
colleges and universities and will positively impact the growing industries
relocating to the region by improving the quality, quantity, and diversity in
the workforce available to them, while making small to medium businesses more
secure through regular security assessments. Project findings will be widely
disseminated as it is designed to build an improved model of internship/work
experiences that can be replicable at community colleges and universities
nationwide and can be modified in order to meet the needs of individual
institutions. A rigorous evaluation process will be employed to enhance the
project activities and provide opportunities for researching and determining the
success of the project and deliverables.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
includes student internships and work experiences; experiential learning; the
application of knowledge for students; and systems security audits for local and
regional businesses and industry. Students will gain soft and technical skills
necessary to become highly-skilled ISA technicians in a business environment.
The project provides an opportunity for students, primarily first generation or
underrepresented, to gain a rigorous education in ISA and participate in
relevant information systems opportunities and work experience through
internships. The project will also provide faculty members with professional
development opportunities to enhance researched pedagogy and teaching strategies
in technology disciplines. It will create a blueprint for project improvement
that incorporates a new model of success by developing or modifying core and
transferrable CIS courses. Building on the foundation of regional workforce
needs, the project will improve the training and quality of ISA technicians in
the service areas of the college. With student success and employment
preparation at the core of the planning and development, the second step will be
the development of an Associate of Science (A.S.) transfer degree program in
Information Systems (IS) to follow the certificate program.