* 1601245
* 2016 Gordon Research Conference in Industrial Ecology: Opportunities for the Critical Decade - Decoupling Well-Being from Environmental Pressures and Impacts
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/2016,08/31/2016
* Heinz Schandl, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 08/31/2016
* USD 30,000.00

1601245 &lt;br/&gt;Schandl, Heinz&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Gordon Research
Conference on Industrial Ecology (GRC-IE) will be held at the Stoweflake
Conference Center, Stowe, Vermont, June 19 to 24, 2016. A companion meeting for
graduate students and post-doctoral researchers, the Gordon Research Seminar on
Industrial Ecology (GRS-IE), will be held in conjunction with the GRC-IE. This
is a grant for U.S. participant support: conference fees and travel focused on
post-docs and students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Industrial ecology is an emerging
field that examines local, regional and global uses and flows of materials and
energy in products, processes, industrial sectors and economies as a means of
exploring opportunities for sustainable production and consumption. The 2016
Gordon Research Conference on Industrial Ecology will examine decoupling human
well-being from environmental pressures and impacts. This conference will
investigate the newest insights from the science of industrial ecology to
support technological solutions, policy innovation and new business models for
sustainable development. Industrial ecology has the potential to contribute
importantly to the development of knowledge, technologies and policies that can
reduce the environmental impacts of industrial systems directly and by situating
technological analysis in a broader economic and social context as a basis for
private strategy and public policy.