* 1601947
* Infinite Dimensional Lie Algebras, Quantum Groups and their Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Nicolai Reshetikhin, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 08/31/2019
* USD 161,999.00

This research project lies at the interface of algebra, geometry, and
mathematical physics. One of the central problems in modern theoretical physics
is to construct a mathematically consistent theory of fundamental interactions.
The paradigm for this construction is known as quantum field theory. An
underlying theme of the research is the role of the boundary of "space-time."
One way to think about this is the usual evolution of time over a finite
interval. In this case the boundary of space-time is the union of the space at
the initial time and at the target time. Quantum field theory on a space-time
with boundary is important not only for high energy physics, but also for low
energy physics, for example insulators and other states of matter where the
surface (the boundary) has distinguishing physical properties. This project will
develop algebraic tools to study two and three dimensional quantum field
theories. It will also construct quantum field theories with infinite
dimensional symmetries.

The proposal consists of three parts. The common theme is the effect of the
boundary on local quantum field theory and on local spacial models in
statistical mechanics. The first part is focused on representation theory. The
main goals are to connect coideal subalgebras to boundary q-Knizhnik-
Zamolodchikov equation by studying vertex operators for principal series
representations of the corresponding quantum affine algebras; to study
integrable systems on symmetric spaces; and to construct invariants of knots
with flat connections in the complement using R-matrix intertwining
representations of quantum sl(2) at roots of unity and construct the
corresponding invariants of 3-manifolds via surgery. In the second part the
goals are to construct perturbative topological quantum field theories, which
involves constructing perturbative topoplogical quantum field theory for
manifolds with boundary; and to construct semiclassical asymptotic for q-6j
symbols for simple Lie algebras of rank grater then one. The goal of the third
part is the study of limit shapes in statistical mechanics. This part is closely
related to the second part and can be regarded as the study of the semiclassical
limit of spin models in statistical mechanics. The main concept is that the
thermodynamical limit is similar to the semiclassical limit. The models in
question involve the stochastic 6-vertex model, ASEP models and others.