* 1601479
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: How do plant genetics, soil microbes and the environment determine plant and soil function across global change gradients?
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2018
* Michael Van Nuland, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 06/30/2018
* USD 19,630.00

How well plants weather changes to their environment and the success of plants
in new environments will depend not only on their genetics but also on
interactions with soil organisms. Knowing how plant genetics relates to growth
in stressful conditions, and whether soils contain "friends or foes" that
improve or reduce plant growth is key to predicting the future success or
failure of environmentally and economically important plants. This project will
explore how plant genetics and soil organisms (bacteria and fungi) can help
plants perform well where they are now or help them in new sites if their
current environment becomes more stressful. This project builds on 15 years of
research demonstrating genetic links between plants, soil organisms and soil
fertility in different types of places. These genetic links maintain the
diversity of plants and soil organisms and determine how energy flows through
ecosystems at large scales. The results will provide land managers fundamental
insights into how trees respond to environmental stresses, such as rising
temperatures, longer and more severe droughts, and nitrogen pollution.
Identification of soil organisms that influence plant health will be applicable
to a wide range of environmental change issues. The study will provide training
in diverse lab and field techniques and opportunities to develop independent
research projects to several undergraduate students.

With the rapid rate of environmental change, plant populations that are well
adapted to sites today are likely to be locally maladapted in the future. As
stress causes plant populations to adapt or migrate to more favorable habitats,
predicting adaptation will rely on understanding patterns of genetic diversity,
while migrations will be determined by factors that influence species range
dynamics. Since plants experience multiple abiotic and biotic environments
simultaneously that affect their performance, it is critical to study genetic
resources under realistic conditions that incorporate interacting species such
as soil bacteria, fungi, and archaea (i.e., the soil microbiome). Current
research shows that genetic variation in plant-soil-microbiome linkages will
dictate how above- and belowground systems respond to global change. The goal of
this study is to discover plant genetic and soil microbiome mechanisms that
allow or impede plant adaptation and migration in response to environmental
change. To achieve this, the project will conduct a greenhouse experiment to
characterize plant genetic-soil microbe-abiotic environment interactions along
experimental gradients of temperature, water availability, and soil nitrogen
based on previous field surveys. Researchers will measure plant and soil
responses across the gradients, plant-soil conditioning effects, and soil
community effects on ecologically important plant traits. In addition, they will
identify specific combinations of plant genotypes, soil microbiomes, and abiotic
environments that result in nonadditive effects on plant productivity and
nutrient dynamics. This approach will provide insight for ecological feedbacks
that are important to: 1) non-additive responses of plants to abiotic stressors;
2) the maintenance of plant genetic variation and soil microbial phylogenetic
diversity; and 3) resilience and stability of soil nutrient pools (e.g., C and
N).