* 1601183
* A Regional Partnership to Improve Access to and Academic Quality of Technician Education for the Incumbent Worker
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Lyn Potter, U of Kentucky Madisonville Community College
* Standard Grant
* John Jackman
* 08/31/2020
* USD 899,072.00

This project addresses two persistent issues in higher education: maintaining
academic rigor in online technical coursework and improving cooperation between
colleges' academic and workforce development units to make continued technical
education accessible to incumbent (currently employed) workers. Research shows
that concerns about loss of rigor are a significant factor in preventing the
adoption of accessible delivery models such as online learning. Demonstrating
effective methods of preserving rigor while making technical education more
accessible will spur their adoption and make for-credit technical education a
viable option for the incumbent workforce. Further, the project eliminates the
competition between colleges' academic and workforce development units by
offering workforce development a superior, for-credit product to sell to
employers in lieu of non-credit offerings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Madisonville
Community College (MCC) will provide technical assistance to partner colleges in
three states to adapt and disseminate its Advanced Integrated Technology (AIT)
curriculum and delivery model. Each partner college is part of a statewide
system of community and technical colleges that provides a natural outlet for
project dissemination. The project extends work developed with prior NSF
support, during which a hybrid online competency based, college credit
curriculum was developed to make technical education more accessible to
employers and incumbent workers for skills upgrades. Courses are broken into
competency-based, college-credit modules that allow students to target specific
skills in four core areas - Mechanical, Electrical, Fluid Power, and
Programmable Logic Controllers (PLCs). Modules will be customized to target
specific employer and employee training needs, and skills demonstrations are
being delivered in a flexibly scheduled laboratory setting enabling students to
schedule application exercises without sacrificing work time. The work of this
project focuses on adapting the MCC curriculum and delivery model to conform to
a variety of organizational cultures, policy and procedure frameworks, and
employer and employee needs. Educating the incumbent workforce also presents
special student support and advising challenges. MCC will make effective use of
a career coach position who assists incumbent workers with the admission and
registration process and monitors each worker's course performance and
credential progress. MCC is working with partner colleges to identify their
incumbent work advising and academic support needs and assisting them in
adapting the position accordingly. In addition, partner colleges are conducting
post-enrollment research to identify incumbent workers' challenges and unmet
needs in order to create a documented tool kit of strategies and local support
services.