* 1601156
* Research Initiation Award - Experimental and Multiscale Simulation Study of Nanoscale Thermal Transport and Evaporation/Boiling Heat Transfer using Self-assembled Nanoemulsions
* EHR,HRD
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2022
* Jiajun Xu, University of the District of Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 04/30/2022
* USD 299,934.00

Research Initiation Awards provide support for junior and mid-career faculty at
Historically Black Colleges and Universities who are building new research
programs or redirecting and rebuilding existing research programs. It is
expected that the award helps to further the faculty member's research
capability and effectiveness, improves research and teaching at his home
institution, and involves undergraduate students in research experiences. The
award to the University of the District of Columbia (UDC) has potential broader
impact in a number of areas. The goal of the project is to investigate
multiscale thermal transport and energetics of phase change inside self-
assembled nanoemulsions in a non-invasive way through characterization of
thermophysical properties and structural dynamics at precisely controlled
interfacial structure, surface chemistry and external fields. Undergraduate
students will gain research experiences and high school students are involved in
the project. The principal investigator also offers tutorials at conferences,
conducts a research symposium and workshop on multiscale thermal transport at
UDC, and invites collaborators to give talks to students and faculty.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work is expected to reveal the fundamentals of
intermolecular thermal transport and interfacial thermodynamics inside self-
assembled nanoemulsions. The following questions will be addressed: How can
different surface effects such as wettability be separated from roughness on
boiling heat transfer? Can the highly disordered nucleate boiling process
including bubble dynamics be precisely controlled? and What are the mechanisms
behind boiling in micro/nanosized confined space and how do they affect phase
change heat transfer? The questions will be answered by obtaining high spatial-
and temporal-resolution data of boiling heat transfer and bubble dynamics of the
phase changeable self-assembled nanoemulsions on a customized heater via a
synchronized high speed camera and infrared thermography. A simulation model
that can predict the multiscale and multiphase thermal transport processes of
colloidal fluids on micro/nanostructured surfaces will be developed. The
knowledge obtained from this project will contribute to a better understanding
of multiscale and multiphase thermal transport, provide critical technical and
simulation solutions to enable rational design of advanced thermal management
systems, and promote further development of next-generation communication,
medical and energy technologies.