* 1601004
* Regulation of sleep in the Mexican cavefish
* BIO,IOS
* 08/10/2015,02/28/2017
* Alex Keene, Florida Atlantic University
* Standard Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 02/28/2017
* USD 133,778.00

While sleep is nearly universal throughout the animal kingdom, the physiological
functions and biological factors regulating sleep remain unclear. This project
seeks to understand how diet and metabolism influence sleep duration using the
blind Mexican cavefish as a model system. The Mexican cavefish is an extremely
informative system for examining behavioral and genetic adaptations. These fish
were trapped in caves ~1-8 million years ago, and have adapted to these
nutrient-poor environments by dramatically reducing sleep and developing
numerous physiological changes, including altered metabolism, eye-loss, and
albinism. This project will determine the evolutionary basis for the reduction
in sleep. The differences in habitat between river-dwelling surface and cave
populations of these fish present a unique opportunity to examine the effects of
ecology and evolutionary history on sleep. Sleep will be measured in fish fed
either a high or a low-fat diet to determine whether high-calorie diets are
capable of restoring normal sleep in cavefish. Furthermore, genetic hybrid fish
will be tested for sleep and other foraging behaviors to determine whether
distinct or overlapping genes regulate reduced sleep and altered feeding
behaviors. Taken together, these experiments will determine the evolutionary
basis for sleep loss in Mexican cavefish. Work produced in this project will
contribute to our understanding of the biological basis of sleep with potential
extension to a better understanding of the relationship between diet and sleep
in humans. In addition to contributing to scientific knowledge across life
disciplines, this project will provide opportunities for student training and
outreach in the local community. Teaching laboratories will be developed with a
local high school to expose students to behavioral ecology and neuroscience
research. All developed lab protocols will be made available online for access
and use at other high schools and teaching institutions. Additionally, this
project will fund students enrolled in programs for first generation and
minority college students to work in the research laboratory.