* 1601475
* Topics in Applied Nonlinear Analysis: Recent Advances and New Trends
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2017
* Dejan Slepcev, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 03/31/2017
* USD 31,600.00

This award will provide support for participants of the conference on "Topics in
Applied Nonlinear Analysis: Recent Advances and New Trends," to be held at the
Center for Nonlinear Analysis (CNA) at Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh,
in July 18-20, 2016. The conference will be devoted to the topics of applied
analysis that in many ways revolutionized the field, especially for our
understanding of behavior of materials and design of materials with desired
properties. These areas are of critical importance to maintaining US leadership
in science and technology as evidenced, for instance, by the recently launched,
multi-agency Materials Genome Initiative. The conference will continue the CNA
tradition of offering extraordinary networking and training opportunities for
students and junior researchers to interact with a remarkable group of leading
national and international researchers in applied analysis. This conference will
provide an exceptional venue for top researchers in applied mathematics and in
materials science to interact and share recent advances with a diverse audience.
The impact of the conference is expected in both the mathematical and
engineering communities. Detailed plans have been made to help recruit a diverse
group of participants from the scientific community, including women and
minorities. Scientific and social activities will be organized to give young
trainees exposure and promote their excellence. These include a poster session
with awards for four best posters, identified by a group of judges selected from
top experts in both fields. The results of the conference will be disseminated
by means of a dedicated website featuring video recordings of all invited
presentations: &lt;br/&gt;https://www.math.cmu.edu/CNA/kinderlehrer75/index.html
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This conference will bring under one umbrella
contemporary trends in nonlinear analysis, emphasizing two scientific areas
where the interplay between the classical and the modern, the theoretical and
the applied in analysis has been especially prominent: (1) Optimal Transport and
(2) Mathematics of Materials. Among others, the topics will include:
&lt;br/&gt;- Recent advances in variational inequalities, non-convex variational
problems, Gamma-convergence and optimal transport;&lt;br/&gt;- Applications to
PDE;&lt;br/&gt;- Modeling and Analysis of Problems in Materials Science:
materials microstructure and design of smart materials;&lt;br/&gt;-
Computational Methods with Application to Problems in Materials Science and
Mathematical Biology: recent developments in Finite Element Methods, Virtual
Element Methods and Quasi-Continuum Methods.&lt;br/&gt;New collaborations that
are likely to emerge from this activity will have a potential to catalyze
research at the interface between theoretical/applied partial differential
equations and various engineering disciplines, and will result in cross-
pollination of ideas.