* 1601565
* Collaborative Research: Demographic structure and recruitment patterns of the scyphozoan, Chrysaora melanaster, in the Bering Sea: the influence of climate on ecosystem function
* GEO,OPP
* 11/01/2016,10/31/2020
* Mary Beth Decker, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Marc Stieglitz
* 10/31/2020
* USD 61,569.00

In the eastern Bering Sea, jellyfish biomass increased dramatically after 1990
and peaked in 2000. Biomass increased again during the cool period of 2007-2012.
Overall, moderate to cold conditions tend to favor jellyfish in this system.
During times of population increase, jellyfish likely have major impacts on the
Bering Sea food web, including Walleye Pollock fisheries, because the medusae
directly feed on young life stages of fish and compete with fish for food. This
project will estimate the age structure and age-specific abundances of the
predominant jellyfish in the Bering Sea, Chrysaora melanaster, and will relate
this to adult medusa abundance in order to understand how their population
structure changes with time. The ultimate goal is to estimate the reproductive
capacity and success of this jellyfish in relation to climate variability and to
investigate the potential for increases of this jellyfish to become a recurring
pattern in the Bering Sea given future climate
scenarios.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will contribute to STEM workforce
development through the support for the training of a graduate student. The
investigators will participate in K-12 teacher training workshops. Undergraduate
students will be entrained into the research through an existing Research
Experience for Undergraduates program. Elementary school students will be
introduced to marine science through visits to the principal investigator?s
laboratory. A website for the project, including novel imagery, will be
developed. Open-source code for image processing will be posted on the World
Wide Web as a resource for the larger scientific
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The importance of incorporating age-specific
abundances and age structure in assessments of the population dynamics of a
species in relation to environmental change is well-established in fisheries
science and other disciplines that attempt to understand the temporal variation
of populations. Rigorous investigations will be conducted to estimate the
abundance and fine-scale spatial distribution of C. melanaster including both
their early planktonic and adult stages, to determine their age structure, and
to construct a population model to identify recruit success and recruitment
timing. This research will examine how gelatinous zooplankton populations
respond to large scale environmental changes and will also facilitate
understanding of the reoccurring jellyfish population increases in the Bering
Sea. The sonar imaging technologies (ARIS1800) are effective in sampling adult
forms of the congener C. quinquecirrha and an advanced optical ZOOplankton
VISualization (ZOOVIS) system can sample small jellyfish effectively. The
combination of net sampling and new aging techniques will provide much needed
information on the age-structure within cohorts and will facilitate
understanding of recruitment processes, e.g. single cohort versus multiple
cohorts. This will in turn enable forecasting of jellyfish abundance and their
predatory impacts in the Bering Sea ecosystem.