* 1601036
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The functional consequences of antagonism in fungal communities
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2018
* Mark Bradford, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 05/31/2018
* USD 21,543.00

Understanding how the Earth's climate will change over the next century is of
enormous scientific, social, and economic importance. In order to make these
projections of future climate, scientists will need to understand how the
world's smallest organisms, fungi and bacteria, respond to changing
environmental conditions. These microbes play a critical role in the Earth's
carbon cycle. They decompose dead plant material, releasing carbon dioxide back
into the atmosphere. Current climate models assume that the rate of this release
is determined by environmental conditions, such as temperature, moisture, or
soil pH. Changes in these conditions are expected to "turn the dial" on
microbial activity. If it gets warmer, microbes will release more carbon
dioxide; if it gets colder, microbes will release less carbon dioxide. Yet this
assumption ignores a key aspect of most microbes: they are highly skilled
warriors. Fungi and bacteria release an astonishing number of chemicals and
compounds intended to kill their fellow microbes and colonize their territory.
This warfare, however, comes at a considerable cost. A microbe must choose
between using its energy for combat or using its energy for growth. In the
proposed work, the researchers will quantify how microbial combat affects
decomposition rates across environmental conditions, helping to understand where
and when microbially-driven carbon dioxide releases will respond unpredictably
to changing environmental conditions. The investigators will also train a high
school student and develop outreach activities with a natural history museum.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building on previous diversity-function studies, the
researchers will develop a generalizable model to disentangle the relative
importance of antagonistic competition versus environmental conditions as
drivers of microbial-mediated decomposition rates. Using baseline trait data
collected on 44 wood-decay fungi, 100 unique communities will be selected with
varying levels of combative ability, average stress-tolerance ability, and
species richness (from 3 to 12 unique species). The communities will be
assembled in realistic microcosms and incubated under both optimal conditions
(warm and wet) and stressful conditions (cold and dry). Total wood decomposition
will be measured after 12 weeks. This study will allow the researchers to
address three main questions: (1) Does community-level decomposition differ from
what is predicted using the microbes' individual decomposition rates? (2) Do
these differences depend on whether the individuals are combative fungi or
stress-tolerant fungi? and (3) Does the relative importance of antagonistic
interactions differ between stressful and optimal environmental conditions? The
answers to these questions will ultimately help restructure existing climate
models and better project how global carbon dioxide fluxes will change over
time.