* 1601531
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Stress-induced Parental Effects on Offspring Mate Choice: Ultimate Drivers and Proximate Mechanisms using the Threespine Stickleback (Gasterosteus aculeatus)
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2019
* Robin Tinghitella, University of Denver
* Standard Grant
* Karen Mabry
* 05/31/2019
* USD 19,535.00

The influence of parents on their offspring depends on the parents' own
experiences. Often, these parental effects prepare offspring for the parental
environment. For instance, parents exposed to predators can produce offspring
that are better able to survive the same predators. Offspring reproduction may
also be influenced by parental experiences, but this remains an untested and
important question. Parental effects are one way that organisms can respond
quickly to rapid environmental change. Yet, parental effects could be bad for
offspring if parent and offspring environments do not match. This project tests
whether stress experienced by parents influences the mate choices made by their
offspring much later, measures the costs and benefits of these effects in a
changing environment, and identifies the underlying genomic mechanisms. This
project will also lead to the publication of a new, active-learning case study
based on this research, and use it to bring modern evolutionary research to
middle school classrooms.

The proposed work capitalizes on an emerging model system, threespine
sticklebacks (Gasterosteus aculeatus), in which both parents make substantial,
distinct contributions to offspring development and females have quantifiable
preferences for male traits. This proposal will reveal the relative importance
of maternal, paternal, and parental experience on offspring reproductive
phenotypes (Aim 1), whether transgenerational plasticity is adaptive or
maladaptive when parental and offspring environments do or do not match (Aim 2),
and if epigenetic states underlie changes in offspring mate choice behavior (Aim
3). No parents, mothers, fathers, or both parents will be exposed to predation
and the mating decisions of their offspring tested under conditions in which
parent and offspring environments do or do not match. Preliminary analyses show
that paternal predator-exposure tends to shift daughters' mate preferences,
while maternal predator-exposure alters daughters' interest in mating. If
parental effects modify mate choice, they may facilitate rapid responses to
environmental change, but whether these effects are adaptive depends on
agreement between parent and offspring environments. Finally, parental effects
on mate choice may be underlain by genome-wide variation in epigenetic states,
specifically DNA methylation. Aim 3 uses new techniques to compare genome-wide
methylation patterns of offspring from families in which no parents, mothers,
fathers, or both parents were exposed to predation. This proposal will establish
the role of parental effects on reproductive phenotypes for individual fitness
and population dynamics in anthropogenically altered environments.