* 1601502
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Hybridization and polyploidy as drivers of species diversification and niche evolution during rapid radiations
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2016,07/31/2018
* David Barrington, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 07/31/2018
* USD 18,526.00

The South American Andes are among the most species-rich and imperiled hotspots
of biodiversity on Earth. Conservation of this region is especially important
given its high level of species endemism; of the 45,000 species of plants native
to the tropical Andes, nearly half are found nowhere else in the world. In order
to effectively conserve this diversity, it is critical to understand the
relationships among species as well as how those species form with respect to
time and space. However, such an understanding is lacking for many plant groups
in this region. This research aims to improve our understanding of diversity in
the genus Phlegmariurus, a widespread group of ancient land plants that are
represented by approximately 100 species in the high mountains of the Andes, by
identifying how hybridization and genome doubling led to the formation of new
species in the group. This research provides funding for the researchers to
collect these plants in forests and alpine grasslands in Colombia and Ecuador
and to use newly developed DNA sequencing technologies to resolve the
evolutionary history of this ancient and ecologically prominent group of plants.
Further, this funding will allow the researchers to disseminate their results
through national and international meetings and peer-reviewed scientific
publications, and to train undergraduate students in cutting-edge molecular
biology techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Species relationships and the
evolutionary signature of hybridization in tropical American Phlegmariurus will
be inferred using an approach that combines DNA sequencing and genome size
estimation via flow cytometry. To supplement materials previously collected in
Central America, the researchers will collect leaf material from plants in the
Andes of Colombia and Ecuador. Dried leaf material will be used both to extract
DNA for sequencing and to infer genome size using flow cytometry. Four nuclear-
encoded genes, which can be used to infer if a species is of hybrid origin, will
be sequenced using the recently developed sequencing approach on the Pacific
Biosciences next-generation DNA sequencing platform. By combining this approach
with genome size estimation via flow cytometry, the researchers will be able to
identify the number of species in the group that originated from inter-species
hybridization and subsequent genome doubling (polyploidization). Using
computational phylogenetic methods, the researchers will infer the age of
lineages in the genus, the evolutionary relationships among species in the
group, and the impact of hybridization on rates of species diversification.
These results will not only provide insight into the evolutionary relationships
among American species of Phlegmariurus, but improve our understanding of the
mechanisms underlying the formation and maintenance of species diversity in the
Andean conservation hotspot.