* 1601605
* Moduli Theory of Sheaves Over Low-Dimensional Varieties
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Alina Marian, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 08/31/2020
* USD 173,001.00

This project is in the field of algebraic geometry, one of the oldest yet
currently most active areas of mathematics. At its core, algebraic geometry is
the study of geometric spaces cut out by solution sets of systems of polynomial
equations. The subject goes back to Greek antiquity on the one hand, while its
modern development provides the mathematical foundation for current efforts to
understand the physics of the early universe. For theoretical physics, the most
relevant area of algebraic geometry is moduli theory, which deals with the
classificaiton and deformation properties of important geometric objects of the
same type. The current project will investigate moduli theory of sheaves,
objects which correspond to the notion of physical (gauge) fields, such as the
electromagnetic field. Mathematical invariants associated with moduli spaces of
sheaves calculate amplitudes of high-energy processes in particle physics.
Studying the structure of these invariants therefore bears on essential
questions in both geometry and high-energy physics; the completion of this
project will thus improve our understanding of both mathematics and theoretical
physics. The endeavor fits in the important current research goal of setting
needed mathematical foundations to contemporary theoretical physics.

This project will focus on the study of the geometry of moduli spaces of sheaves
on low-dimensional varieties, including the important setting when the variety
is allowed to vary in moduli. In particular, the virtual intersection theory of
Grothendieck Quot schemes over K3 surfaces, in a relative setting, will be used
to study the tautological Chow ring of the moduli space of quasipolarized K3
surfaces. Special Chow classes, such as the Chern classes of Verlinde sheaves
over the moduli space, will also be investigated. More generally, the virtual
intersection theory of higher-rank Grothendieck Quot schemes over an arbitrary
surface will be used to deduce results on the structure of important invariants
on fundamental spaces such as Hilbert schemes of points. The higher-rank Quot
scheme geometry also bears interesting connections to questions in
representation theory.