* 1601273
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   Carnivorous plant syndromes: The role of volatile emissions in the diversification of the pitcher plant genus Sarracenia
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2016,11/30/2017
* Russell Malmberg, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 11/30/2017
* USD 18,840.00

Identifying the mechanisms that drive diversification within a lineage is a key
interest of evolutionary biologists. For plants, interactions with insects are
thought to be important drivers of biodiversity, most obviously through
herbivory and pollination. Carnivorous plants are unique in that, while they
largely rely on insects as pollinators, they also prey upon them as a vital
nutrient resource. This research studies how plant-insect interactions have
contributed to carnivorous plant evolution using the North American Pitcher
Plant genus, Sarracenia, as a model. Specifically, it studies how these
interactions have contributed to the chemical signaling that carnivorous plants
use to attract and capture insects as prey, while simultaneously avoiding
capturing their insect pollinators. One undergraduate will be mentored in field
and laboratory techniques. Results from this research will be incorporated into
K-12 education programs and undergraduate classes, and will be broadly
disseminated to the public. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous research suggests
that there are 'carnivorous syndromes', or tightly correlated trapping traits
(e.g., trichome density, height) that are associated with prey specialization or
prey partitioning. This research will examine whether 'attractive' trap traits,
specifically volatile emissions, are additionally correlated with prey
partitioning across Sarracenia species. By using a recent phylogeny generated by
the researchers as a framework and an outdoor common garden maintained by the
Atlanta Botanical Garden, this project examines whether mechanisms to alleviate
capturing pollinators have further resulted in prey specialization. Volatiles
emissions will be collected from 14 putative Sarracenia taxa over the 30-day
lifespan of the traps. Statistical correlations among volatile profiles and
previously measured trap traits will be examined using a phylogenetic
generalized least square analysis. The resulting volatile emissions will be
compared to prey captured also using a phylogenetic generalized least square
analysis. Flower volatiles will be examined and compared to pitcher volatiles to
test for variation in chemical cues. Temporal and spatial separation between
flowers and traps will additionally be measured and analyzed statistically to
test the overarching hypotheses.