* 1601315
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   Comparative ontogeny: dinosaur growth, development, and intraspecific variation
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2018
* Mark Norell, American Museum Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 05/31/2018
* USD 15,631.00

Shifts in metabolic rates often accompany major evolutionary transitions in
organismal function and ecology. Examples include the evolution of endothermy
(warm-bloodedness) and elevated metabolism in archosaurs (birds and their close
relatives, ~12,000 species) and mammals (~5,000 species). High metabolic rates
are thought to be a key component of mammalian and archosaur species radiations,
by allowing individuals to exploit a wider range of environmental and temporal
niches (lifestyles). For their body size, extant birds have some of the highest
growth rates and metabolisms of any vertebrates. High avian metabolic rates are
also associated with highly canalized development, as seen in the relative lack
of body size variation for individuals of a given age. The primary aim of this
research is to understand how these extreme physiological and developmental
specializations arose within the dinosaur ancestors of birds. This project will
produce two major broader impacts. First, data and interpretations generated by
this project will be incorporated into updates to an exhibit currently in
development at the American Museum of Natural History (AMNH), ?Dinosaurs Among
Us.? This exhibit is a multi-media showcase of the various lines of evidence
supporting the hypothesis that birds evolved from non-avian dinosaurs. It uses
fossil specimens, models, graphics, and interactives to reveal the latest
findings about the dinosaurian origins of many typically avian traits. The PIs
are actively involved in consulting on the scientific content of the exhibit,
which, together with associated museum events and an extensive online presence,
will reach a large portion of the 5 million annual visitors to AMNH and many
others globally. Educational materials from the exhibit will reach a diverse
group of students, many from underserved communities in New York City. Second,
this project greatly enhances the infrastructure of the AMNH paleontology
laboratory to conduct histological research on fossil tissues. Training in
histological techniques will enable the PIs to further train AMNH staff and
students, developing the human resources of the laboratory to support projects
involving histological analysis for years to come.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
Calculation of dinosaur growth rates (a proxy for metabolism) from their bone
microstructure has demonstrated that the transition to modern avian endothermy
did not occur in a single step. The earliest birds, for example, grew more
rapidly than non-avian reptiles, but more slowly than their extant descendants.
However, the origin of elevated metabolic rates among the earliest theropod
dinosaur ancestors of birds remains unknown. This project seeks to fill this gap
in knowledge, by using bone histology (examination of the microscopic
organization of bone tissue) and gross morphology to measure growth rate and
ontogenetic canalization for a phylogenetically basal theropod dinosaur,
Coelophysis bauri. As it is one of the only extinct dinosaurs with a large
sample size (hundreds of specimens) available from single populations,
histological sectioning and growth curve construction for Coelophysis bauri will
shed light on the metabolic condition of some of the earliest diverging theropod
dinosaurs, and provide a framework within which the transition to rapid growth
rates and developmental canalization among bird-line archosaurs may be assessed.