* 1601279
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Scaling Plant Physiology to Ecosystem Ecology: Assessing the Role of the Plant Community in Preventing Nitrogen Losses Following Fire
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2019
* Justin Wright, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 05/31/2019
* USD 20,403.00

DEB-1601279 Wright, Justin P., Duke University: DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Scaling
Plant Physiology to Ecosystem Ecology: Assessing the Role of the Plant Community
in Preventing Nitrogen Losses Following Fire.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
availability of soil resources, such as nutrients and water, influence the
diversity of plants at local and global scales. Disturbances such as fires can
drastically change resource availability to plants. For example, ecosystems that
experience frequent fires also experience surges of nitrogen availability after
the fire. Although nitrogen is a crucial resource for all plants, nitrogen not
captured by plants can be washed away and contribute to the pollution of streams
and lakes. As such, it is important to understand how plant diversity might
change if nitrogen availability changes, and subsequently how the ability of the
plant community to retain nitrogen might also change. Investigators will examine
whether plant communities that have experienced frequent pulses of nitrogen are
better able to capture nitrogen and prevent it from leaving the ecosystem than
are plant communities that have not experienced nitrogen pulses. This research
will help to predict how plant communities respond to changes in nitrogen
availability, and how patterns of nitrogen retention and loss are affected by
fire frequency. As part of this project, one undergraduate student will gain
hands-on experience in field ecology and laboratory chemical analyses. In
addition, the investigators will develop teaching activities to improve
understanding of N cycling at local and global scales by undergraduate students.
Data from this study will be added to a database used to estimate the global
carbon cycle. The findings of the study will be disseminated in peer-reviewed
journals and at national conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is an
empirical field test of patterns identified in greenhouse studies of
interspecific differences in pulsed nitrogen assimilation. The researchers will
trace the fate of nitrogen into different ecosystem compartments in a longleaf
pine (Pinus palustris) forest, using isotope analysis in sites with contrasting
historical fire frequencies (annual burns or fire suppression). Researchers will
measure the amount of isotope stored in microbial biomass, aboveground and
belowground biomass of dominant plant species, and the bulk soil pool. By
comparing the amount of nitrogen stored in different compartments between sites
under annual burn or fire suppression regimes, they will assess the extent to
which plant communities exposed to frequent nitrogen pulses are adapted to
capturing this ephemeral resource. Further, they will test whether these
interspecific differences in the capacity to capture pulsed nitrogen scale up to
influence ecosystem-level nitrogen retention patterns in the field. The
researchers predict that shifts in community composition favoring species
adapted to assimilating ephemeral nitrogen will result in increased nitrogen
retention in frequently burned sites, as compared to fire-suppressed sites.