* 1601644
* PFI:AIR - TT:  Non-Intrusive Position Measurement in Oscillating Piston Applications
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2016,09/30/2018
* Zongxuan Sun, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 09/30/2018
* USD 212,000.00

This PFI AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating research for
determining the spatial location of a magnet into technology to fulfill the need
for piston position measurement in piston-cylinder actuators. The developed
sensor is important because it can enable automation in a number of industrial
and mobile machines. The project will result in a robust prototype of a piston
position measurement sensor. The proposed sensor will be non-contacting, non-
intrusive, inexpensive, will not require line-of-sight access, and will involve
minimal effort for installation on a cylinder. Due to these advantages, the
proposed sensor has an opportunity to establish a significant market share in
the piston position application domain. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
addresses the following technology gaps as it translates from research discovery
towards commercial applications:&lt;br/&gt; a) The need to place the sensor at
an off-axis location on top of the actuator requires the development and use of
complex two-dimensional magnetic field models.&lt;br/&gt; b) The sensor
prototype needs to address problems due to hysteresis when the cylinder is made
of soft steel which gets magnetized and demagnetized in real time due to
oscillatory motion of a magnet.&lt;br/&gt; c) Extension of the previous linear
position sensor technology to rotational applications requires new sensor
architectures, development of new models, and new estimation
algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific solutions to address the above
challenges will be fully developed and evaluated in the project. The proposed
solutions include development of analytical two-dimensional magnetic field
models, development of a new analytical model for hysteresis that has
significant advantages over the traditional Preisach model, and development of
robust auto-calibration algorithms. In addition, a graduate student and a post-
doc involved in the project will receive technology translation experience
through prototype development and industrial
interaction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project engages three major actuator
companies to evaluate the sensor prototype on their actuator products, as the
technology is translated from research discovery towards commercial reality.