* 1601080
* Realistic Treatment of Plasma-Surface Interactions in Simulations of Low Temperature Plasmas: From a New Diagnostic to Optimization of Process Control
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2020
* Felix Schulze, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 07/31/2020
* USD 435,000.00

This project will develop a new experimental diagnostic and an improved
computational model to characterize interactions between a material surface and
a low temperature plasma, a weakly ionized gas composed of electrons, ions, and
neutral atoms and molecules. Low temperature plasmas are essential for modern
life as they form the basis for manufacturing a variety of high-technology
products ranging from laptops and smartphones to displays and solar cells. They
are also relevant for a variety of medical applications such as sterilization of
medical equipment and wound healing. All these applications are based on the
ability of the plasma to induce distinct surface reactions in a controlled way.
In order to optimize these applications, plasma simulations, including a
realistic implementation of plasma-surface interactions, are crucial. In this
project, a new diagnostic to measure key aspects of the plasma-surface
interaction physics will be developed, and results will be implemented into a
computational model. Results obtained from this research will also be
incorporated into graduate level lectures on low temperature plasma
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most simulations of capacitive radio frequency
plasmas (CCP) only include constant ion induced electron emission and electron
reflection at guessed probabilities. Any dependencies on the incident particle
energy, angle, and surface material as well as other effects are neglected. This
leads to an incorrect description of the particle heating dynamic and flux-
energy distribution functions (FEDF). For many surface materials and gases
secondary electron emission coefficients induced by electron, ion, and neutral
impact as well as particle reflection and sputter rates are unknown in the
presence of plasmas that alter the surface conditions. In this project, a novel
simulation based diagnostic to measure effective gamma-coefficient by Optical
Emission Spectroscopy in the plasma will be developed. Realistic energy and
surface dependent electron emission and reflection coefficients for different
incident particle species will then be implemented into PIC simulations of CCPs.
The simulation code will be benchmarked against experiments and the effects of
realistic surface coefficients on the electron heating dynamics and the control
of FEDFs of different particle species will be studied. All investigations will
combine state-of-the-art simulations with experiments.