* 1601493
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  The Mechanisms and Evolution of Social Recognition in Rocket Frogs
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2018
* Mark Bee, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Karen Mabry
* 04/30/2018
* USD 19,760.00

Humans are not the only animals that recognize familiar individuals. In fact,
many animals can recognize their social partners. However, we still know little
about the sensory and learning processes by which animals come to recognize
familiar individuals and how this behavior evolves. This project uses playback
experiments in the wild to compare the processes by which frogs learn to
recognize their neighbors. By comparing the behavior of two closely-related frog
species that differ in this ability but share a recent evolutionary ancestor,
the project will also test how recognition behavior evolved. This project will
provide an international experience for undergraduate students, and create
materials for both a course at the University of Minnesota and a public museum
exhibit at Kaieteur National Park in Guyana. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Male Golden
Rocket Frogs recognize and respond less aggressively to the calls of familiar
territorial neighbors, while male Kai Rocket Frogs show no evidence of
recognition. This project uses habituation-discrimination experiments with
natural and synthetic calls to compare the perceptual basis of neighbor
recognition in these two species. In the first experiment, the ability of males
of both species to discriminate between the calls of different individuals will
be examined to test the hypothesis that neighbor recognition evolves by
narrowing the specificity of learned social categories. In the second
experiment, synthetic calls, in which acoustic properties can be manipulated
independently, will be used to test the hypothesis that male golden rocket frogs
discriminate between the calls of different individuals using the most reliable
acoustic cues of identity.