* 1601128
* Experimental Study of Heavy Flavor and CP Violation with the LHCb Experiment at the CERN LHC Collider
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2019
* Abolhassan Jawahery, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Randy Ruchti
* 05/31/2019
* USD 1,279,999.00

This research program involves a study of proton-proton collisions at the Large
Hadron Collider (LHC). A major goal of the study is to search for and examine
possible evidences for new particles and laws of nature beyond those described
in the so-called Standard Model, which represents our current understanding of
the fundamental constituents of matter and the laws that govern their
interactions. The Standard Model is believed to be incomplete, as it fails to
account for some important findings and questions, such as the apparent
imbalance of matter with respect to antimatter in the universe and strong
evidence for dark matter, inferred from astronomical observations. This project
will involve performing precise measurements of differences in behavior of
matter particles compared with their antimatter counterparts, the results of
which may reveal information on the origin of the observed matter-antimatter
imbalance in nature, which is crucial to understanding how the universe evolved
to its current state. In addition to these fundamental research goals, the
funding for this research program enables the training of the next generations
of scientists and engineers at all levels, including undergraduates, PhD.
graduate students, postdoctoral researchers and engineers working at the
frontier of particle physics research with the state of the art data analysis
and computing techniques, electronics instrumentations and particle and
radiation detection techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is carried
out with the LHCb particle detector at the LHC collider at the CERN laboratory.
The specific focus of the research is on studies of reactions involving
particles that contain the bottom quark or the charm quark. These studies allow
for precise tests of the Standard Model, which may reveal possible deviations
from its predictions. The findings, together with expected results from
experiments at the energy frontier, could help uncover new laws of nature and
point the way to the structure of new physics beyond the Standard Model. The
research program also involves the upgrade of the LHCb detector, which is
required for operations at higher luminosity of the LHC collider. The detector
upgrade effort is focused on the design of electronics instrumentation for
extracting and recording electrical signals from a silicon strip tracking system
located just upstream of the LHCb magnet.