* 1601115
* CAREER: Unlocking the neural code with spikes, currents and conductances
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Jonathan Pillow, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Rebecca Hwa
* 08/31/2017
* USD 387,960.00

This project aims to develop new mathematical and computational tools for
understanding the basic information-processing strategies of neurons and neural
populations in the brain. Recent technological advances have enabled large-scale
recordings of neural activity from intact neural circuits, but there is a severe
shortage of theoretical methods for revealing what this activity means--that is,
what information it carries, and how it gives rise to behavior. The research
described in this proposal will address these questions using novel statistical
techniques for studying the neural code in single neurons and neural
populations, using both extracellularly and intracellularly recorded neural
data. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are at least two important statistical aspects
to the proposed research: first, new methods for reliably estimating the
neurobiological variables of interest (e.g., spikes, membrane currents, synaptic
conductances, etc.) from noisy experimental recordings; and second, powerful,
flexible, model-based methods for understanding the complex, high-dimensional,
and time-dependent relationship between sensory stimuli, behavioral responses,
and neural activity. The three specific aims of the proposal focus on: (1) the
encoding and decoding of decisions from multi-neuron spike trains in parietal
cortex; (2) intracellular signals in visual cortex, at the level of membrane
potential and synaptic currents, and their relationship to the information
conveyed in spike trains; and (3) advanced methods for adaptive, "closed loop"
neurophysiology experiments, leading to more informative experimental designs
and more interpretable neural datasets. All three aims will involve intensive
collaborations with experimental groups and will tightly integrate theory and
experiment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will reveal new features
of visual and cognitive representations in cortex, and will unlock the neural
code at multiple levels of biophysical detail in sensory, motor and cognitive
systems. More broadly, the research will shed new light on information flow in
groups of neurons, with implications for both the treatment of brain disorders
and the design of new technology.