* 1601323
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   Chromosome inversions and reproductive isolation in an avian hybrid zone
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2017
* Trevor Price, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 05/31/2017
* USD 19,693.00

Scientists' understanding of the way in which two species arise from a common
ancestor has greatly improved since the time of Darwin. We now know that the
most common way species form is when different populations become geographically
separated from each other and begin to genetically diverge. We also know that
this process can take millions of years. But at any time, during the process of
splitting, populations may come back into contact and form a narrow zone of
contact where individuals from one group mate with individuals from the other
group (a hybrid zone). While hybridization generally leads to a slowdown in the
rate at which new species form because their genomes are no longer separate,
several mechanisms have been identified whereby hybridization can actually
promote divergence. This project focuses on the evolution of chromosome
inversions, rearrangements to the structure of the genome that act as genetic
barriers between young species that share some gene exchange in narrow hybrid
zones. This information is critical to understanding the natural consequences of
geographic divergence, periodic gene exchange, speciation, and the resulting
biodiversity that is present on Earth. Education-related public outreach efforts
at the Field Museum of Natural History, where the research takes place, will
involve Chicago area high school and undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These researchers study a hybrid zone between
subspecies of the long-tailed finch (Poephila acuticauda). Subspecies differ in
beak color (yellow vs. red) and hybridize across a narrow contact zone in
northern Australia. Genetic differences between subspecies are largely
restricted to one chromosome. Several large chromosome inversions are on the
same chromosome. The researchers will examine the genomes of individual birds
from across the hybrid zone to identify the genes encoding a reproductive
isolating trait: beak color.