* 1601224
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The nexus of observation and modeling of methane emissions from inland water bodies
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2017
* Gil Bohrer, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* louis kaplan
* 08/31/2017
* USD 19,065.00

The impacts of climate and wetlands on each other are currently not well
understood. While wetland plants consume carbon dioxide from the atmosphere,
wetlands also produce methane, a powerful greenhouse gas that influences the
global climate. Methane production and its movement within the soils of wetlands
results from many simultaneous processes. Microorganisms living in wetland soils
where there is no oxygen can produce methane. Methane, being lighter than air,
works its way through the soil and can escape into the atmosphere. However,
during transport through soils, specialized bacteria can consume methane if the
local chemistry is favorable to that process. Additionally, plants can
facilitate the movement of methane from soils to the atmosphere. This project
will study the transport of methane through wetland vegetation and improve
mathematical models of that process. This will be accomplished by developing new
measurement techniques that can more accurately predict how much methane is
transported through wetland plants. Results from this work will improve our
general understanding of how wetlands function with respect to release of
methane gas, a potent greenhouse gas important in climate
modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plant transport is perhaps the most complex and
least understood of the common methane pathways from the soil to the atmosphere.
Moreover, wetlands are frequently comprised of a tight mosaic of land cover
types. However, few models currently account for the effects of plant
heterogeneity within the wetland on the total methane flux. Plants move methane
both through their root aeration system, aerenchymous tissue, and through their
xylem and stomata. It has been hypothesized that methane dissolved into the pore
water at the plant root zone is mobilized by the plant as it transpires.
However, the role of stomatally conducted methane is not clear and is almost
always ignored by modern methane emission models. In this project, researchers
will design and deploy novel chambers to quantify plant-mediated fluxes of
methane from wetlands and use those data to parameterize a general model of the
process. The study site for chamber deployment will be the Old Woman Creek
National Estuary Research Reserve. These activities are part of a comprehensive
measurement campaign involving traditional static chambers to measure diffusive
fluxes through the water column, pore-water dialysis peepers, which provide a
profile of methane concentrations in the soil, and an eddy-covariance tower,
which will provide site level measurements of methane flux into the atmosphere.
The plant hydrodynamics model, FETCH2, and a wetland methane model will be
coupled to simulate the methane emitted through plants.