* 1601885
* Qualitative Studies of Some Partial Differential Equations and Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2021
* Changfeng Gui, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2021
* USD 275,000.00

The Allen-Cahn equation was first proposed by materials scientists as a model
for studying phase separation between different materials as well as phase
transitions between different phases of the same materials. An important aspect
of the equation is that it enables the display of interfaces separating
different physical regions of interest. Such interfaces often share significant
features with soap bubbles or, in more precise mathematical terminology, with
minimal surfaces. The equation has also found applications in many other area of
science and engineering such as astrophysics and image processing. In addition
to its significance in advancing knowledge in mathematics and other sciences,
the Allen-Cahn equation provides an excellent tool for training students and
junior researchers in interdisciplinary research. The principal investigator
will engage in both the research and the training activities related to the
equation and will involve students at both the undergraduate and the graduate
levels, using the theoretical study of the equation to develop better algorithms
for medical image analysis. Postdoctoral fellows and junior researchers will
also participate and be trained in the project.

The principal investigator plans to study saddle solutions and traveling wave
solutions of Allen-Cahn-type equations, including the classic scalar equations
with double well potentials and vector-valued equations with multiple well
potentials. He will focus on the existence of special saddle solutions with
prescribed level sets as well as on the level set structure of solutions of
finite Morse index, in particular, on the relation between the level sets of
solutions and minimal surfaces. He intends to use various identities, as well as
Morse index information, to develop new approach for these nonmonotone,
nonminimizing solutions. The long-term goal of the project is to understand
general entire solutions to both scalar and vector-valued Allen-Cahn equations
and to gain insight into the stability and dynamics of triple junctions or
quadruple junctions. The nodal sets or singularities of the solutions will
receive special attention in the study, for not only do they play an important
role in the theoretical analysis of the equation, but they also represent in
applications the interfaces or junctions of interfaces of different phases or
grain boundaries in materials such as crystalline alloys. The project will
broaden the participation of underrepresented minorities, including Hispanic
students, in mathematical and interdisciplinary research.