* 1601430
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   Weedy Brassica rapa in Mexico: a unique study system to investigate potential ongoing "redomestication" of a feral crop
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2018
* Alex McAlvay, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 04/30/2018
* USD 19,862.00

This project investigates the domestication of an important food source, weedy
field mustard (Brassica rapa L.). Understanding the transition from wild to
domesticated plants provides both important knowledge for crop improvement and a
unique opportunity to study evolutionary change because domestication often
involves selection for preferred traits. Most humans rely on crops that were
domesticated from wild plants thousands of years ago, which makes it a challenge
to determine the dual roles of humans and environment in domestication. Examples
of people domesticating plants today may provide insights into this process. The
researchers will study an ongoing relationship between seven Mexican cultural
groups and weedy field mustard to get at the ecological and cultural aspects of
domestication. Field mustard was domesticated in Europe and Asia and selected
for many diverse forms, such as turnips, bok choi, and Chinese cabbage. It is
unclear which domesticated or weedy forms were introduced to Mexico and what
region they were introduced from. This project integrates information from
genetic data, physical measurements, chemistry, and interviews with farmers, to
study an ongoing domestication process. In addition, the project will include
the training of undergraduate and graduate students, and contribute to our
understanding of crop domestication, food security, and control of an invasive
species.

Weedy Brassica rapa provides a powerful study system to elucidate plant ferality
and domestication. The availability of extensive genomic tools and the plant's
short life cycle facilitate the use of inferentially powerful techniques to
clarify the nature of local adaptation and artificial selection of invasive
field mustard across a country-wide transect of Mexico. The research involves
the novel application of RNA-sequencing, reciprocal transplant experiments,
glucosinolate chemistry, and semi-structured and structure interviews, to study
ongoing domestication of an important food source. Data will quantify the
genetic structure and introduction history of B. rapa in Mexico, local uses and
management practices of field mustard by different ethnic groups, and how
different management regimes drive local population adaptation of the plant.