* 1601515
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: A Phylogenetic Context for the extent of Genomic Introgression between Spotted and Barred Owls
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2018
* Rauri Bowie, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 06/30/2018
* USD 20,410.00

The ranges of Barred and Spotted Owls have recently come in contact, and they
now broadly co-occur and hybridize across western North America. Seven of the
other twenty-one wood owl species also hybridize. This project will use new
genomic sequencing methods to infer the evolutionary relationships of these owl
species. It also will determine whether the species that hybridize recently
diverged or whether they diverged elsewhere geographically and have recently
come into contact. In addition, this research will provide information on how
best to cost-effectively unlock the genomic resources of museum specimen
collections. Genome-wide data will produce a deeper understanding of the
biogeographic history and genetic divergence of these two competing and
hybridizing owl species and will help elucidate the genetic implications of
modern species range shifts. This project will also train one full-time graduate
student in laboratory and analysis techniques, including the generation and
interpretation of genomic data. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will use a previously assembled Spotted Owl (Strix occidentalis) genome as a
resource to analyze breeding between Spotted and Barred Owls at a genome-wide
scale. Researchers will employ sequence-capture methodology to obtain DNA
sequences of markers distributed across the genome for 21 species within the
genus Strix. These data will be used to construct a multilocus phylogeny to
address questions concerning the following: 1) the phylogenetic relationship of
the Spotted and Barred Owl, 2) the evolutionary and biogeographic history of
currently hybridizing Strix species, and 3) which of two different sequence
capture methods (ultra conserved elements and restriction enzyme digest markers)
captures the most informative data from degraded DNA isolated from museum
specimens. Utilizing the assembled reference Spotted Owl genome, this research
will identify the precise genomic locations of the regions captured and examined
in their analyses, and determine whether the instances of interspecific
hybridization in other Strix species occur between recently diverged taxa or
whether the hybridizing taxa diverged elsewhere geographically and have newly
contacted.