* 1601093
* Dissertation Research:   Functional Genomics of Ornament Production in a Warbler
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2019
* Amberleigh Henschen, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 05/31/2019
* USD 18,359.00

Ornamental traits, such as the long tails and bright colors of some birds, are
thought to be honest indicators of male quality to potential mates, because only
males with relatively more resources can afford to produce them. However, in
some cases the energetic cost of producing an ornament does not appear to be
large, and, thus, it is not clear what limits individuals from producing
elaborate ornaments. In common yellowthroats (Geothlypis trichas) males with
larger black facial masks are preferred as mates by females, yet producing the
color of the mask feathers is not thought to be costly. In this project, the
researchers will examine the physiological processes associated with producing
larger black ornaments by studying the expression of genes in developing
ornamental (facial mask) and non-ornamental (back) feathers. The goal of this
research is to test three hypotheses that predict which genes are of importance
during the development of ornaments and, thus, determine what information these
ornaments are signaling to potential mates. A deeper understanding of feather
development will also be of interest to other disciplines, including those
concerned with avian disease and husbandry. The researchers will share the
results of this study through public presentations at local nature centers, in
addition to presentations at scientific conferences and publications in peer-
reviewed journals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The production of elaborate ornaments
selected through mate choice is likely affected by the expression of genes
involved in important physiological processes. Genes that may be of particular
importance during ornament development include those involved in oxidative
phosphorylation (OXPHOS hypothesis), immune function (Hamilton and Zuk
hypothesis), and growth (e.g., insulin and insulin-like growth factor genes;
insulin/IGF hypothesis). In common yellowthroats the black facial mask is
thought to honestly signal male quality because mask size is positively related
to immune gene (MHC class II) variation, antibody production, and resistance to
oxidative stress. In this study, researchers will use RNA-sequencing to
determine if genes involved in important physiological functions (e.g., OXPHOS,
immune, insulin/IGF) are more highly expressed in developing feathers that form
part of a sexually selected ornament (the mask) than those from other non-
sexually selected parts of the plumage (the back). This research will provide
the first comparison of transcriptomes of developing ornamental and non-
ornamental feathers.