* 1601603
* Anti-Counterfeit Printing and Packaging Technology
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Gareth Burns, Central Piedmont Community College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 08/31/2019
* USD 199,902.00

A highly skilled technician workforce with expertise in anti-counterfeit
processes and measures will ensure that products distributed locally and
globally are more secure, reduce the risk associated with counterfeit products,
and maintain the competitiveness of manufacturers. This project at Central
Piedmont Community College (CPCC) is designed to meet the increasing need for
product and packaging security by developing a new certificate embedded in an
associate degree program focused on Functional Printing with an emphasis on the
emerging role of anti-counterfeit printing and packaging technology. CPCC is one
of the three colleges in North Carolina that offers an Associate of Applied
Science degree in Graphic Arts and Imaging Technology, and the only institution
in the Charlotte region, which serves as an operations base for over 200
printing, manufacturing and distribution enterprises that employ 12,000
individuals. The project will support the needs of both regional and national
employers, as the project will share results from the project that can inform
how companies implement security processes and measures that address brand
protection and the integrity of their products. Implementation of the project
will result in a talent-rich pipeline of technicians who will implement security
and protection changes within manufacturing and distribution facilities, know
how to modify security features demanded by manufacturers, and understand the
baseline processes for anti-counterfeit printing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By
researching the evolving and emerging field of functional printing, CPCC faculty
will establish a multidisciplinary certificate program in anti-counterfeit
printing and packaging technology to address the need for technicians who
understand security printing and brand protection measures. By engaging
university-based research entities and other external partners, the college will
design a transformational curriculum that is unique to two-year colleges.
Through the project activities of research, curriculum development and faculty
professional development, the educators involved in this project will gain
additional expertise and be able to introduce technology innovations and trends
to inform the development of the program. Recognizing the potential for a broad
range of career pathways, the project team will bring greater understanding to
this emerging technology through articulation agreements with area universities.
The project will also be guided by an Advisory Committee comprised of local,
regional, and national members who will ensure that the technical education
meets the needs of employers and industry. Project activities will include
course development and adaptation leading to a new technician certificate
program offered at the two-year college as well as continuing education for
incumbent workers, faculty professional development, and cultivation of business
and industry partnerships. A formative and summative evaluation process will be
employed to continuously enhance the project activities and provide
opportunities for researching and evaluating the success of the project and
deliverables, as well as the sharing of best practices. Results will be
disseminated with the NSF community, as well as employer and business partners,
and research entities focused on anti-counterfeiting processes and technologies.
In addition, partnerships with entities focused on similar themes will promote
continued collaboration and expansion of the body of knowledge to better serve
business and industry as well as educational institutions.