* 1601562
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Phylogenomic insights into the origins and evolution of anticoagulants and bloodfeeding in leeches
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2016,08/31/2017
* Mark Siddall, American Museum Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 08/31/2017
* USD 18,622.00

Anticoagulants are a class of proteins that help prevent the coagulation of
blood. Anticoagulants are widely reported from blood-feeding leeches and are
used extensively in medicine and for pest control. This research will document
the presence and evolution of anticoagulants in the closest relatives of
leeches. Finding anticoagulants in immediate leech relatives will shed light on
the origin of the proteins and may lead to the discovery of novel anticoagulant
compounds. Two underrepresented inner-city high school students will be mentored
and trained in laboratory methods. Additionally, the researchers will produce an
extracurricular teaching module for inner-city high school students focused on
natural selection, based on the evolution of anticoagulants.

This research will reconstruct phylogenetic relationships among Acanthobdellida,
Branchiobdellida, and leeches that will help resolve long-standing questions
about the evolution of segmented worms. The resulting evolutionary framework
will then be used to investigate: 1) the distribution of anticoagulants within
Acanthobdellida, Branchiobdellida, Lumbriculida, and leeches, 2) whether there
is evidence of positive selection along the branches from leech relatives to
leeches, coincident with the evolution of obligate blood-feeding, 3) whether
Acanthobdellida are the sister group to leeches, and 4) whether the
Rhynchobdellida (proboscis leeches) are monophyletic in line with feeding
apparatus morphologies, and the pattern of family relationships within the
group. Source material will be collected on field expeditions within the U.S.A.
and Sweden. Salivary glands will be aseptically dissected for each sampled
species and then RNA will be extracted, checked for quality, and sequenced.
Phylogenomic and comparative phylogenetic analyses will then be used to
reconstruct relationships and test for evidence of positive selection among
orthologous genes.