* 1601935
* PFI:AIR - TT:  Using A. niger as a host to express recombinant endolysin
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2016,10/31/2018
* Steven Harris, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 10/31/2018
* USD 199,396.00

This PFI:AIR Technology Translation project focuses on an important agricultural
and human-health related problem. For over 50 years, it is has been common
practice in the agricultural industry to add low doses of traditional (i.e.,
"medically important") antibiotics to animal feed to improve production
efficiency of food animals. While these "antibiotic growth promoters" provide
tremendous economic benefit, this practice also leads to antibiotic-resistant
bacterial strains which have the potential to infect humans. As a result, the US
Food and Drug Administration has implemented measures to stop this practice.
While numerous alternatives to medically important antibiotics have been
proposed, most have not been commercially successful as they are not adequately
effective. As an alternative to medically important antibiotics, the use of
antimicrobial proteins has great promise, but a significant limitation to their
commercial production has been cost. Thus the ability to economically
manufacture antimicrobial proteins would represent a significant benefit to the
agricultural industry as it would allow farmers to maintain high levels of
productivity while not generating antibiotic-resistant strains that pose a
danger to humans. This proposal explores the potential of replacing medically-
important antibiotic feed-additives with antimicrobial protein (AMP). Work
described here seeks to generate proof-of-concept data, expressing model AMPs,
at commercially viable titers, using recombinant filamentous
fungi.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project employs a commercially-relevant fungal
species (Aspergillus niger), to express model endolysin proteins with
demonstrated bactericidal activity. To increase both expression and
extracellular secretion of two different endolysin enzymes several approaches
will be used, exploring the impact of genomic location, transcriptional
promoter, and secretion signal sequence. Employing several approaches will
increase the likelihood for success and will also allow identification of the
most relevant factors leading to a high-producing recombinant fungal strain.
This understanding will allow efficient generation of additional production
strains for different proteins or peptides. In addition, personnel involved in
this project, both a postdoctoral scientist and several undergraduate students,
will be trained in a cross-disciplinary environment that will increase their
research capacity. Personnel will also participate in entrepreneurial education
experiences, through conducting customer discovery activities related to this
project. This will primarily involve contacting potential stakeholders, along
the entire value chain, to test hypotheses related to future commercialization.