* 1601057
* Research Initiation Award: The ecology of microbial communities in relation to red deep sea crabs and their surrounding environment
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Indu Sharma, Hampton University
* Standard Grant
* Carleitta Paige-Anderson
* 08/31/2022
* USD 410,285.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities-Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
Research Initiation Awards (RIAs) provide support to STEM junior faculty at
HBCUs who are starting to build a research program, as well as for mid-career
faculty who may have returned to the faculty ranks after holding an
administrative post or who need to redirect and rebuild a research program.
Faculty members may pursue research at their home institution, at an NSF-funded
Center, at a research intensive institution or at a national laboratory. The RIA
projects are expected to help further the faculty member's research capability
and effectiveness, to improve research and teaching at his or her home
institution, and to involve undergraduate students in research experiences. With
support from the National Science Foundation, Hampton University (HU) will
conduct research aimed at understanding the ecology of microbial communities in
relation to red deep-sea crabs and their surrounding environment. This study
will provide academic and experiential opportunities for undergraduate students
in an effort to encourage them to pursue post-graduate study and careers as STEM
research scientists. The project will help to enhance the university's research
infrastructure and expand HU's ability to access advanced, innovative resources
through collaborative partnering arrangements. Thus, HU will be positioned to
educate the future members of STEM workforce with the knowledge to conduct
innovative research and to enhance local, state, national, and global
competitiveness. In addition, this study is aligned with HU's current strategic
initiative to raise its research profile and competitiveness in the STEM
sciences as well as to become a High Activity Research
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the proposed study is to understand
the microbial ecology of decapods inhabiting the slope of the mid-Atlantic
Ocean. The specific aims of this project are to: 1) characterize the in situ
midgut microflora of the red deep-sea crab and the microbiome in the in situ
benthic ocean environment of the red deep-sea crab; and 2) characterize the
stability of microbial communities after exposure to surface water microbiome in
a controlled closed system. This study will contribute to our understanding of:
a) the effect of dispersal on microbial communities by comparing datasets from
three geographic locations; b) the role of environmental microbial flora in
establishing the stable symbiotic communities within the crab; c) the effect of
seasonal variation on the microbial communities from benthic environment and
those associated with crabs. It will also set a biological reference point for
future research. Findings from this study will contribute to our understanding
of microbial ecology specifically: microbial dispersal, the effect of seasonal
variation and how the crab gut communities are influenced by their environment.
This project will be conducted in collaboration with the J. Craig Venter
Institute (JCVI), University of Delaware and Atlantic Red Crab Company (local
fishing industry).