* 1601787
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Do gut microbiota affect caterpillar herbivory and fitness?
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2017
* Noah Fierer, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 05/31/2017
* USD 16,113.00

Recent studies have shown that some animals, including humans, are heavily
dependent on trillions of bacteria and other microorganisms that inhabit their
gut ("gut microbiota") to digest food and provide nutrients. Although this
microbial partnership likely occurs in all animals, it remains unexplored in
most. This project assesses the role of gut microbiota in caterpillars, some of
which are globally destructive crop pests and thus of major economic interest.
Understanding whether caterpillars are reliant on gut microbiota for feeding and
growth could help in designing strategies for controlling them more effectively.
Researchers will conduct an experiment using the tobacco hornworm caterpillar, a
common pest of tomato and tobacco plants. Findings of this project will advance
scientific understanding of how much animals and microbes have evolved to depend
on each other. This study will also provide research experience for a community
college student and will engage the public through an educational workshop and a
museum event.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Investigators will experimentally test the
hypothesis that gut microbiota in the tobacco hornworm, Manduca sexta, affect
host feeding behavior and fitness. The experiment will be based in southeastern
Arizona, where a large population of wild M. sexta feed on the plant Datura
wright-ii. To manipulate gut microbiota, researchers will use antibiotics to
selectively remove microbes from D. wrightii without altering leaf chemical or
nutritional properties. Feeding rates and development of the caterpillars, as
well as fecundity of the resulting adult moths, will be measured and compared
between control and antibiotic-treated groups. In addition, the size and
composition of gut microbial communities will be characterized using DNA
sequencing and fluorescence microscopy. Previous DNA sequencing data indicate
that the number of microbes in the M. sexta gut is extremely low relative to
other animals. Further, extreme chemical conditions within the caterpillar gut
suggest that the gut microbes detected there are unlikely to be metabolically
active. Therefore, the researchers anticipate that gut microbiota will not play
a large role in host feeding or fitness. This result would challenge the current
paradigm that animal growth and reproduction typically depend heavily upon
microbial symbiosis.