* 1601356
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   The phylogenetic consequences of mutualism and antagonism in the coevolution of palm flower weevils.
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2018
* Bruno de Medeiros, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Weeks
* 05/31/2018
* USD 21,970.00

Palms are widely distributed throughout the tropics and subtropics, and many of
them produce massive floral displays that attract dozens of insect species.
These insects interact with the plants that they visit in different ways. Some
are pollinators and beneficial to the plant, while others feed on seeds and
flowers. Still other insects are visitors that have little impact on the
survival and reproductive success of the plant. A very common group of visitors
to palm flowers belong to a family of beetles known as weevils. Weevils are
incredibly diverse, with around 60,000 species already described and many more
still unknown to science. This project will test ideas about how different kinds
of insect-plant interactions, beneficial, harmful or otherwise, may affect the
evolution of these herbivore insects. A wealth of data will be generated on the
diversity and natural history of weevils associated with the Queen palm genus,
Syagrus, which includes the several palms widely used for landscaping in
tropical and subtropical areas. Results from the research will be disseminated
in technical articles, and also in formats broadly accessible to the general
public. Finally, undergraduate and graduate students will be trained in diverse
molecular techniques for studying insect evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
palm genus Syagrus has over 50 species distributed throughout South America.
Following a comprehensive survey of weevils associated with nearly 70% of the
species of Syagrus, this study will use target enrichment and high-throughput
DNA sequencing methods to obtain dozens of molecular markers across ~300 weevil
species and reliably estimate the phylogeny of the group. The resulting
phylogeny will be used to infer when this group diversified and the influence of
insect-host interactions on diversification. By combining information on weevil
and plant phylogenetic histories, and mode of interaction between each species
of weevil and its host plant, this study aims to address how palm weevils are
related to each other, whether antagonistic weevils are more specialized than
mutualistic one, and whether the phylogeny of mutualistic weevils matches the
phylogeny of their hosts more closely than the phylogeny of antagonistic
weevils.