* 1601425
* Dissertation Research: Cooperation and the Covariance between Genetic Monogamy and Limited Dispersal
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2019
* David Westneat, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 04/30/2019
* USD 18,980.00

Many animals, including humans, live in extended family groups where both
parents and mature offspring share the responsibility of caring for young. This
type of social system, called cooperative breeding, is frequently associated
with monogamy across a diversity of animal groups. This association is thought
to result from the fact that helpers in monogamous groups share on average 50%
of their genes with their full siblings - the same proportion they share with
their own offspring. Therefore, from a gene's eye view, helping can be as good a
strategy as reproducing independently when helpers can assist in rearing full
siblings. Although staying near home to help can be beneficial in some
circumstances, the benefits of cooperating could be reduced or even cancelled
out if helpers find themselves competing with close relatives for resources when
they do not disperse from the area where they were born. This project
investigates the contexts in which cooperation and competition occur to
determine if animals can balance these costs and benefits through dispersal
behavior. This proposal also tests a novel alternative explanation for the
observed association between monogamy and cooperation, asking whether this
relationship could be due to environmental factors that similarly influence both
mate fidelity and helping behavior. The role of sibling relatedness in the
evolution of cooperation is of major interest in the field of behavioral
evolution, and the studies proposed here could have profound influences on our
understanding of family-based cooperative societies, such as our own. The
project will also provide multiple training opportunities for graduate and
undergraduate students in a range of modern scientific skills, including the use
of the most cutting edge DNA sequencing techniques. The work will be shared with
the public through a community science festival and scientific illustration
classes.

This research investigates the relationship between mating systems and social
systems using cooperative bess beetles as a model organism. First, fine-scale
population structure will be assessed to test the hypothesis that beetles
cooperate locally within their highly related family group before dispersing to
compete globally with unrelated individuals, allowing them to avoid the costs of
competing with kin while maximizing the benefits of cooperating with relatives.
The second objective in this study will test the novel hypothesis that certain
environments may favor both monogamy and cooperation simultaneously, leading to
a correlation between mating and social system that is consequential rather than
causal. Conceptually, this hypothesis suggests that the terms in Hamilton's Rule
(rB-C>0) may covary in certain environments. Specifically, this study will test
whether a single ecological factor, low resource density, reduces the costs (C)
of helping (by increasing the costs of dispersal) while simultaneously
increasing the relatedness between helpers and their siblings (r) by reducing
extra-pair paternity. To assess this possibility, paternity and dispersal will
be investigated in response to resource density in both natural and experimental
populations of bess beetles. The results of this study could suggest that the
terms in Hamilton?s Rule are not modular, but rather covary under certain
conditions, changing the way we understand both the correlated evolution of
social and mating systems as well as the association between relatedness and
cooperation.