* 1601401
* Fostering Student Success in Cybersecurity and Information Assurance
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Mete Kok, CUNY Borough of Manhattan Community College
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 08/31/2021
* USD 770,000.00

Keeping computers and information systems secure is a major challenge. Business,
industry, and government need well-prepared technicians who can prevent, detect,
and investigate cybersecurity breaches, and the growth of cyber-threats has
created a need for many more workers who have appropriate, specific knowledge
and skills. Borough of Manhattan Community College's Computer Information
Systems Department offers programs in Computer Information Systems (CIS) and
Computer Network Technology (CNT) leading to an Associate in Applied Science
(AAS) degree. These programs enroll hundreds of majors, over two thirds of whom
are Black or Hispanic. In this project, faculty will create a concentration in
cybersecurity in each of the two AAS degree programs. Six new courses will be
developed or adapted from models at other institutions, and nine existing
courses will be revised. The project team will recruit high school students into
the new cybersecurity concentrations, prepare students for employment by
offering internships and support for industry certification exams, and assist
students who wish to transfer into related four-year degree programs. The
project will play a significant role in preparing students for cybersecurity
positions and in expanding opportunities for underrepresented minorities in the
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project team will work with representatives from
the New York City College of Technology, Manhattan Bridges High School, the
Center for Systems Security and Information Assurance (CSSIA), and the National
CyberWatch Center to adapt and implement exemplary educational materials and
pedagogical strategies aimed at increasing the number of students who pursue
studies in cybersecurity and information assurance. The curriculum will
integrate new and emerging technologies such as mobile computing, cloud
computing, and the Internet of Things (IoT). To support the new curriculum, the
project team will launch a comprehensive faculty development program,
cybersecurity workshops for high school students, a pre-freshman summer bridge
program, supplemental instruction and tutoring, test preparation workshops
targeting industry cybersecurity certifications, cybersecurity internships for
students, expanded articulation agreements with the NYC College of Technology,
and a state-of-the-art cybersecurity lab utilizing virtualization technology.
The project evaluation will look at students' achievement of learning goals,
skills, and industry certifications; retention and graduation rates; educational
pursuits and advancement beyond the associate degree; participation in
internships; and placement as technicians in technology companies.