* 1601259
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   Evolutionary Consequences of Pathogen Strain Competition in an Emerging Fungal Disease
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2018
* Timothy James, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 05/31/2018
* USD 20,150.00

This project will investigate the interplay of ecological competition and
evolutionary dynamics among different strains of pathogenic fungi. Newly
discovered, emerging diseases are a significant threat to biological diversity
and human health. Many of these emerging diseases are caused by fungal
pathogens. Yet few studies have addressed the evolutionary ecology of disease-
causing fungi. A notorious emerging fungal disease is the amphibian-killing
chytrid fungus, which is contributing to worldwide amphibian declines and
biodiversity loss. Despite intensive research since its discovery in 1999, the
origins and evolutionary trajectory of this disease remain a mystery. This
project will investigate a region of high chytrid diversity in the Atlantic
Forest of southern Brazil to understand how competition among different fungal
strains determines the success and evolution of these pathogens. Understanding
how emerging diseases evolve will be critical to controlling future disease
outbreaks. The project includes the training of undergraduate and graduate
students, along with K-12 outreach programs and museum displays that highlight
effects of introduced diseases on ecosystem health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prior
research suggests that divergent amphibian-killing chytrid strains in Brazil's
Atlantic Forest are competing for hosts. According to theory, competing disease
strains should evolve to have faster rates of growth and increased virulence
until a single most successful strain has eliminated all others. This project
will investigate how these chytrid disease strains initially came into contact,
and the ecological and evolutionary outcomes of this contact. The researchers
will reconstruct the divergence history of Brazilian Atlantic Forest disease
strains using whole genome sequences of pathogen isolates collected from the
region. They will then conduct a cross-strain competition experiment on a model
amphibian host. The genomes of experimental pathogen strains will be sequenced
before and after the experiment to link genotypic changes to phenotypic change
in post-competition virulence. These data will allow the researchers to
establish the timing of contact between pathogen populations, and to determine
if accelerated virulence evolves due to direct competition among strains.