* 1601396
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   The role of Maternal Hormones in Programming Offspring Aggression
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2018
* Kristen Navara, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 05/31/2018
* USD 18,719.00

A mother's hormonal response to her current environment can cause permanent
changes in her developing offspring, potentially determining whether those
offspring live or die in their future environment. Females breeding in more
competitive environments tend to transfer more testosterone to their offspring
prenatally, which permanently makes offspring more aggressive. This maternal
effect may help offspring adapt to competitive environments, yet it is still
unclear how maternally derived testosterone permanently impacts offspring
behavior. Without knowing how it happens, it is difficult to characterize the
heritability of this maternal effect and how it fits into larger evolutionary
frameworks. This research is among the first to test if molecular mechanisms,
such as changes in gene expression and control, mediate the effects of maternal
testosterone on offspring aggression using birds, in which this maternal effect
is best studied. This research will take a novel approach by exploring
differences in aggression-related genes from several brain pathways. The results
of this research will help clarify what contributes to long-lasting variation in
aggressive behaviors and why differences in animal behaviors exist. The
researchers will also train undergraduate students in laboratory methods and
bioinformatics. Additionally, this research has lent itself to a citizen science
project with songbird breeders throughout the United States to explore factors
influencing avian reproduction.

Specifically, the researchers will experimentally determine if an epigenetic
mechanism (i.e., DNA methylation) underlies the programming of offspring
aggression by maternal hormones in songbirds. Birds are excellent models for
maternal effects because their young develop externally in eggs and females
allocate substantial amounts of testosterone to their egg yolks. The researchers
will inject zebra finch eggs with a control vehicle or testosterone and measure
aggressive and competitive behaviors (i.e., growth rate and begging rate) in the
resulting offspring. In a subset of these offspring, the researchers will test
for evidence of epigenetic programming. Aggressive behaviors are initiated
across many interacting genes (i.e., steroid receptors, histamine, dopamine,
somatostatin, arginine vasotocin, etc.). Thus, the researchers will use RNA-seq
and methyl-seq analyses to explore genome-wide differences in mRNA expression
and site-specific methylation patterns of aggression-related genes in two
socially-relevant brain regions, the telencephalon and diencephalon. This
research will greatly expand our knowledge of how different gene networks
interact across brain regions to express aggression and will provide one of the
first avian DNA methylomes. All data generated in this project will be archived
in appropriate electronic repositories.