* 1601526
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The influence of plant-plant interactions on pollination and plant reproduction near poleward range margins
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2016,12/31/2017
* Rebecca Irwin, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 12/31/2017
* USD 17,366.00

Climate change may alleviate stressful environmental conditions, such as cold
temperatures and a shorter growing season, that directly hinder flowering plants
in northern regions. In addition, climate change may alter interactions between
plants and other organisms. Will competition with neighbors affect whether
plants respond to increasing temperatures? Observations and experiments on
shrubs and pollinators at different distances from a glacier will answer this
question. The scientific workforce will be strengthened through support for the
education and training of a doctoral student and participation of
undergraduates. Science communication will be enhanced through citizen scientist
participation and outreach to middle-school and high-school students.

The stress-gradient hypothesis, which posits that plant-plant interactions
transition from being competitive to facilitative with increasing stress, will
be extended to include pollinator networks. The low-shrub tundra of
Kangerlussuaq, Greenland, which is near the poleward range edge of many plants,
including our focal species, Vaccinium uliginosum (Ericaceae) encompasses a
gradient of 3 degrees C, which mirrors the expected temperature increase in West
Greenland over the next 70 years. Using a vegetation removal experiment, how co-
occurring plants affect the reproduction of Vaccinium will be determined. Plant
traits associated with pollinator attraction and pollinator visitation will be
observed, and pollen supplementation treatments will assess pollen limitation.
Fruit set and seed production will be measured to assess pollinator-mediated
mechanisms in the stress gradient hypothesis. The outcome will improve
understanding of the processes of increasing shrub cover in Arctic tundra.