* 1601438
* Quantum Invariants, Enhanced Moduli, and Integrable Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Tony Pantev, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Spiroff
* 06/30/2020
* USD 121,397.00

This award supports research in the field of algebraic geometry. The research
sets the stage for understanding the basic structure of fundamental problems in
a way suitable for pragmatic use in a broad spectrum of applications. The
results of the work are intended to be immediately relevant to questions in the
theory of integrable systems, string theory, gauge theory, and the study of
topological insulators. In addition, the research project aims to have concrete
applications to field theory and quantization. The project also aims to build a
new arsenal of geometric techniques applicable to the theory of algebraic
cycles, symplectic topology, and high energy physics. This will be achieved by
providing research opportunities on the interface of geometry and string theory
for graduate students and postdoctoral associates in mathematics and physics,
and by development of courses on formal localization and shifted quantization
and on Calabi-Yau integrable systems and higher Donaldson-Thomas theory.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project integrates ideas from derived geometry and
quantum field theory to unravel the hidden complexity of moduli problems, to
extract new enumerative invariants of varieties, and to study completely
integrable systems. The resolution of these questions will consolidate and
demystify several existing quantization schemes in geometry, symplectic
topology, and field theory. Three directions will be studied. The first aims to
characterize those moduli spaces that admit a realization as the critical locus
of a potential. The characterization requires the development of the formalism
of shifted symplectic and Poisson structures in derived geometry and the theory
of isotropic foliations. In the second project a new method will be investigated
for constructing motivic orientation data on non-abelian cohomology by building
explicit Lagrangian foliations and computing the associated potential functions.
The project aims to construct higher Chern-Simons functionals, and sets the
stage for extracting enumerative invariants from higher dimensional quantum
field theory. The final project searches for Calabi-Yau integrable systems that
realize the tame or wild meromorphic Hitchin fibrations for ADE structure
groups.