* 1601699
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   Gene Regulation Evolution and Speciation in House Mice
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Michael Nachman, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 06/30/2019
* USD 20,357.00

This project will make use of controlled laboratory experiments utilizing the
model system of house mice (Mus musculus) to understand the role of gene
regulation in speciation. A primary goal of speciation research is to uncover
the genetic differences between species that underlie reproductive isolation.
While much of the work in this field has focused on identifying specific genes
that contribute to reproductive isolation between species, gene regulation may
play a large role in this process. Despite this, there are been few systematic
attempts to link regulatory evolution to reproductive isolation. Characterizing
regulatory evolution between house mouse subspecies will provide novel insight
into how regulatory networks evolve and diverge which has broad implications for
our understanding of the evolution of complex phenotypes as well as the
speciation process. In addition, the investigators will engage in research with
undergraduates from underrepresented groups and provide public and K12 outreach
on this project.

Taking advantage of a cross between house mouse subspecies, where hybrid
dysfunction is largely unidirectional, the proposed work will use a variety of
genomic methods (i.e., ChiP-sequencing, mRNA-sequencing, and ribosome profiling)
to characterize changes in gene regulation on the transcriptional and
translational level that are associated with hybrid sterility. This dissertation
work will address the following questions: 1) What is the role of different
levels of gene regulation to species divergence? and 2) What is the role of
regulatory divergence in reproductive isolation between species? The work
outlined here will be the first to: 1) characterize divergence in translational
efficiency between mammalian species, and 2) examine the relationship between
hybrid sterility and gene regulation on the transcriptional and translational
level.