* 1601155
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   Biological Uptake of Dissolved Organic Matter in Streams and Self-Priming Effect
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2019
* Peter Raymond, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 05/31/2019
* USD 21,264.00

Rivers and streams connect the land and the sea, and serve as the main transport
channels for not only living organisms but also for chemical substances derived
from plants, soils, animals, and humans. Inland waters, which include streams,
rivers, ponds, lakes, and reservoirs, are also dynamic ecosystems where these
substances are consumed and transformed. Among the major compounds in aquatic
environments are organic molecules dissolved in the water, and they include a
complex solution of individual molecules that can affect water color, drinking
water quality, light availability, dissolved oxygen levels, and ecosystem
function. Nevertheless, the understanding of how these organic molecules are
processed remains limited, and this is especially true for larger systems like
major rivers or entire drainage networks. This issue is addressed in this
graduate student research project as the student seeks to discover how much of
the organic molecules are removed by biological and non-biological processes in
three streams in New England. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study builds upon
existing research, applies a novel field method that characterizes the removal
of dissolved organic matter (DOM) in a scalable manner, and hypothesizes that
biological uptake of dissolved organic matter is a relatively minor component of
the total removal. This hypothesis is postulated upon the preliminary data from
a method where oxygen reduction due to heterotrophy accounted for only small
portion of dissolved organic matter removal in streams. The novel field method
involves pulse injection of filtered maple leaf leachate into three different
streams in Connecticut, Massachusetts, and Vermont where streams are constantly
monitored with multi-probe sondes to detect changes in conductivity, DOM
concentration, and oxygen level as the pulse of organic matter travels
downstream. The solute transport data and grab samples acquired during the
experiments are then used to calculate the total DOM removal, oxygen uptake due
to heterotrophy, and organic matter quality change due to heterotrophy. In
addition to the primary hypothesis, the preliminary data also hints at a novel
priming mechanism where in-stream utilization of organic matter pulse in streams
leads to boosted bioavailability by unlocking previous unavailable labile
organic matter. The second hypothesis, aptly named "self-priming," aims to
verify the presence and mechanism of this novel concept.