* 1601349
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   Quantifying the Strength of Spatial Coexistence Mechanisms in Experimental Metacommunities
* BIO,DEB
* 04/15/2016,03/31/2020
* Brett Melbourne, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 03/31/2020
* USD 19,266.00

Understanding the ecological processes that promote biological diversity and
allow multiple species to coexist is fundamental for conservation and
management. Understanding how the abiotic environment, such as light or nutrient
levels, changes from place to place and how individuals of multiple species are
clustered is often overlooked, but is critically important. This research will
develop a method to directly measure how structure in the abiotic environment
and in the clustering of individuals promotes coexistence between species. The
scientific workforce will be strengthened through support for the education and
training of a doctoral student and undergraduate students in theoretical and
experimental ecology, and a high school teaching module will be developed to
expose students to biological diversity experiments in
ecology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The role of landscape structure in promoting
diversity will be examined by combining a laboratory experimental system of
freshwater microorganisms with mathematical models. Two hypotheses will be
tested: (1) clustering of individuals will be the dominant mechanism leading to
coexistence, and (2) stochasticity will reduce the strength of coexistence by
weakening the effect of clustering. Diversity outcomes will be examined for
multispecies communities of aquatic microorganisms in replicated laboratory
experiments, where spatial structure, species abundance, dispersal, and abiotic
conditions will be systematically manipulated. Mathematical models tailored to
the experimental system will be developed to indirectly quantify and compare the
contributions of different mechanisms of coexistence. The performance of the
indirect method, which is commonly used for quantifying coexistence, will be
assessed against the new experimental method developed. The proposed work will
lead to a deeper understanding of how spatial structure promotes biodiversity.