* 1601516
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The interaction of environmental context and host attributes in driving parasitism
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2017
* Barbara Peckarsky, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 05/31/2017
* USD 16,380.00

At a time when ecosystems are rapidly transforming, it is important to clarify
how environmental change affects disease risk for animals. Understanding the
impact of warming on disease has gained special urgency due to climate change,
but its net effect remains controversial and elusive. This study will explore
how water temperature alters aquatic host-parasite interactions by testing
whether shifts in growth and development could mismatch the life-cycles of a
host and its parasite, a mechanism that is believed to be important in the
climate change context, although direct tests of it are uncommon. This study
constitutes a further step toward identifying which outcomes for disease are
likely to dominate as the climate changes and will contribute to a framework for
predicting effects of temperature on host-parasite interactions. The broader
impacts of this work include 1) teaching K-12 students and the public about
host-parasite interactions, 2) mentoring undergraduates, including under-
represented groups, to do independent research and engage the public through
outreach, and 3) developing the plot of an interactive children's book about the
mayfly-parasite relationship. All of these efforts focus on small animals (e.g.,
parasites and invertebrates) to increase awareness of the full scope of
biodiversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;After measuring a suite of environmental
variables in mountain streams (Colorado, USA), evidence suggests that warmer
temperatures decrease the prevalence of nematode worms infecting mayflies. That
observation, combined with previous findings that warmer temperatures accelerate
the developmental rate of mayfly hosts, suggests that the mismatched timing of
host and parasite life-cycles could decrease parasitism in warmer areas. Because
temperature cannot be readily disentangled from other environmental variables in
nature, a controlled microcosm experiment will be used to test the hypothesis
that warmer water causes faster development of mayflies, thereby decreasing the
overlap of susceptible (early instar) hosts with infective parasites, and
ultimately reducing parasite infections.