* 1601442
* Engineering Technology Instrumentation Project
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Laimutis Bytautas, Galveston College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 08/31/2020
* USD 199,530.00

Employers in the Texas Upper Gulf Coast region, like many areas of the United
States, need highly qualified advanced technology employees to meet current and
future workforce demand; however, they often find it difficult to find and hire
sufficient number of engineering technology graduates technicians to meet their
growing needs. This project at Galveston College (GC), a two-year Hispanic-
serving community and technical college, is designed to advance desired societal
outcomes through increased gainful employment for graduates and economic growth
of employers. The goal is to revamp the existing Electrical and Electronics
(E/E) Program into an advanced E/E and Instrumentation Program (INT) that will
produce highly qualified technicians able to meet current and future workforce
demands while substantially increasing the employability of technical graduates
from the college program. The disciplinary focus of the project is Engineering
Technology with an emphasis on Electronics Technology. Project partners are
members of the college Industry and Business Implementation Team (IBIT) and
include government agencies, businesses, and industries such as Marathon
Petroleum Corporation, Landrys Corporation, Pyramid Instrumentation, SpawGlass,
City Electric, Economic Development Division of County of Galveston, and
Galveston Independent School District. These partners typify stakeholders
providing almost 3000 new E/E &amp; INT job opportunities within the next few
years. The project will broaden opportunities for GC technician students, the
majority who are from groups typically underrepresented in STEM technician
fields, by supporting the social and financial investment needed to stimulate
industry-academic partnerships and develop curriculum based on documented
workforce needs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The project will advance knowledge and
understanding within community colleges of technician education by developing a
revised Integrated Curriculum Framework for Technician Education (ICF-TE). The
ICF-TE, adaptable to other technician education programs, will build industry-
academic partnerships that result in increased interactions between students and
employers, increased employability, and improvements in science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) technician teaching and learning. It will
adapt known strategies to support recruitment, retention, and completion of
students; and create articulation agreements with area secondary schools.
Critical components of the ICF-TE were established in coordination with the IBIT
who will continue to assist with implementation and outreach. These critical
components of the ICF-TE include: (1) industry recognized stacked
certifications, (2) problem-based teaching and learning, (3) advanced technician
skills training through progressive (stacked) modules, (4) work ethics
curriculum, and (5) practical training with real-world work experiences. IBIT
members will interact directly with students by providing opportunities for
employment, supervision, mentoring, and instruction. The primary project focus
is on the E/E Associate of Applied Science (AAS) degree and certificate students
and associated faculty and administration. Secondary audiences are future STEM
technician students recruited from area high schools and current workers seeking
to advance their technician skills. The college will expand successful practices
and instructional strategies learned from this project to the other STEM
technical programs. An evaluation is designed to determine best practices in
technician education to meet workforce needs.