* 1601895
* PFI:AIR - TT:  Sustainable Permanent Magnets For Advanced Applications
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2016,10/31/2018
* Laura Lewis, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 10/31/2018
* USD 251,999.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on directed development of
the crystal structure, microstructure and magnetic structure of equiatomic FeNi
(Iron-Nickel) to create an advanced permanent magnet entirely comprised of
easily accessible, earth-abundant elements. Advanced permanent magnets underlie
operation of myriad devices and machines, including hybrid/electric vehicles,
direct-drive wind turbines, motors and generators and thus are technologically
and industrially important. At present, advanced permanent magnets require rare-
earth metals that are in limited supply in the current situation of the global
supply chain. Equiatomic FeNi with the chemically ordered tetragonal structure,
known as tetrataenite, is found naturally only in selected meteorites subjected
to extraordinarily long cooling periods and has been confirmed to exhibit
excellent permanent magnetic properties. This PFI: AIR Technology Translation
project will deliver enabling proof-of-concept synthesis and processing
protocols, based on existing industrial metallurgical techniques, to greatly
accelerate the formation of tetrataenite to industrially-relevant timescales.
The end-stage magnets made from the synthesized tetratenite will not only
feature maximum theoretical energy products that approach 66% of those
characterizing the best rare-earth-based magnets, but are also anticipated to
exhibit high-temperature performance exceeding that of the best neodymium (Nd)
based magnets. In addition, complementing clear advantages in cost and supply
chain availability, such magnets would exhibit superior corrosion resistance and
associated extended technological lifetimes.

This project will provide enabling insight into the conditions and processes
necessary to favor the formation of tetrataenite, as well as inform
microstructural aspects of this material as it transitions from the research lab
to commercial production and application. In particular, techniques to
simultaneously apply controlled processing parameters, such as temperature,
strain and magnetic field, will be designed and implemented. Parallel
development of transport measurement protocols to identify the earliest stages
of desired phase formation from the parent alloy will be conducted. In addition,
personnel involved in this project (one post-doctoral associate, one graduate
student and undergraduate cooperative education internship students) will
receive experiences in the science, engineering and technology of permanent
magnetic materials, including industrial and global supply chain perspectives.

This project engages Rogers Corporation at the Rogers Innovation Center in
Burlington, Mass. and at Rogers Headquarters in Rogers, Conn., to build closer
linkages between academic research at Northeastern University, industry know-
how, and commercialization of research. In this manner materials solutions to
address global challenges for clean energy and safety and security will be
pursued, facilitating and accelerating translation from research discovery
toward commercial reality.