* 1601645
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Investigating the role of specialist and generalist host associations in a multi-level sea anemone symbiosis
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2018
* Marymegan Daly, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 04/30/2018
* USD 19,897.00

Symbiosis is an important driver of biodiversity and shapes all levels of
biological organization. As a biodiversity hotspot, tropical coral reefs achieve
much of their success and diversity from a network of multi-level symbioses.
Although this reliance on symbiosis is well recognized, we know very little
about how genetic diversity evolves within a symbiotic marine framework. Namely,
our expectations surrounding resource specialization and co-diversification come
primarily from the terrestrially biased literature, whereas discordant land-sea
processes that act at the population level may lead to different outcomes. This
research will test evolutionary hypotheses surrounding symbiosis and resource
specialization by studying multiple crustacean species that all live on the
corkscrew sea anemone on Caribbean coral reefs, yet vary in their host
specificity. Using genomic DNA sequencing, the researchers will identify and
describe previously unrecognized cryptic species, test whether increased host
specificity leads to more incidences of speciation, and whether patterns of co-
evolution can be recovered among these symbionts across the entire Caribbean.
This research will train one graduate student and provide undergraduate students
with research opportunities in the marine and molecular evolutionary sciences.
Educational materials will be developed to demonstrate co-evolutionary
principles in undergraduate biology courses, and public outreach events will
target the ornamental aquarium trade as all study species are collected
commercially.

Resource specialization is expected to leave a strong signature on the genome
and play an important role in species diversification. Species with narrow
ecological requirements are expected to have smaller, more fragmented habitats,
smaller effective population sizes, and ultimately, reduced neutral genetic
variation compared to generalists. These expectations are broadly referred to as
the specialist-generalist variation hypothesis (SGVH) and are an extension of
classic population genetics theory. Within a symbiotic framework, host
specificity should be especially useful for testing the expectations of the SGVH
because micro-evolutionary processes coupled with symbiotic association will
impact the population and evolutionary dynamics of each symbiont. Symbiosis
generates an a priori expectation of shared biogeographic history and co-
diversification, but variation in host specificity may lead to vastly different
demographic histories and evolutionary responses to historical environmental
conditions. Thus, the comparison of symbiotic taxa can potentially disentangle
the extrinsic forces that effect whole communities from the intrinsic aspects of
species biology, shed light on co-evolutionary processes and the emergence of
the symbiosis. This research will use high-throughput genomic DNA sequencing and
model-based coalescent analyses to delimit and describe cryptic crustacean
lineages, examine the role of specialism and generalism on the evolution of
genetic diversity, and explore patterns of co-diversification, demographic
expansion, and community level phylogeographic breaks across the tropical
Western Atlantic. This study will expand the taxonomic scope of the tropical,
marine, phylogeographic literature and provide insight into the evolutionary
processes that act on marine symbioses.