* 1601280
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   Untangling history and ecology to reconstruct the assembly of an iconic avifauna
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2017
* Joel Cracraft, American Museum Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 05/31/2017
* USD 20,127.00

This research will develop and test a conceptual framework for understanding the
assembly, and species composition, of mixed-species flocks of birds by studying
the roles of evolutionary history and ecological processes of flocks in the
Solomon Islands. The birds of the Solomon Islands have long served as a natural
laboratory for the development of community assembly theory. The results of this
research will form the basis of understanding in more complex natural systems.
By understanding community assembly history, it becomes possible to search for
the effects of that history on attributes of contemporary systems. For example,
if the order of species arrival into a community influences the functional roles
of species in a community, it may be possible to use community assembly history
to make predictions about the ecology of contemporary systems. Such a connection
would suggest that other attributes of communities, such as stability or
resistance to extinction, might be influenced by assembly history. Additionally,
the research will form the basis of in-country training for local communities to
develop skills necessary to survey biodiversity, build an appreciation for the
global significance of the Archipelago's diversity, will contribute to a growing
body of open access educational materials tailored to the Solomon Islands, and
will train a student in the New York City area in statistical and morphological
methods.

In order to reconstruct the assembly history of mixed-species foraging flocks in
the Solomon Archipelago, this research will use next generation sequencing of
ultraconserved elements from fresh tissues and ancient DNA. Historical
biogeography and demography will be used to reveal the sequence of colonization,
ancestral population sizes, and gene flow between populations for six lineages
of birds that form the nucleus of mixed-species flocks in the Solomon Islands.
These data will be related to morphological and ecological data to test for the
presence of a signal of island assembly history on contemporary morphology and
ecology. While assembly history may appear stochastic at ecological timescales,
it assumes a degree of predictability at evolutionary scales. This study will
test whether these predictable larger scale patterns influence the ecology of
communities. Ultimately, by reconstructing the processes that guide community
assembly, it may not only be possible to begin to characterize the history of
biotas, but potentially to make predictive statements about ecology based on
historical reconstructions.