* 1601050
* Dissertation Research:  A Hybrid Zone Lens on Rapid Speciation During Refugial Isolation in the Field Vole (Microtus agrestis)
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2018
* Jeremy Searle, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Weeks
* 06/30/2018
* USD 20,028.00

Hybrid zones are natural laboratories that allow researchers to identify the
changes that have caused populations to diverge into different, reproductively
isolated species. This project will investigate a hybrid zone where two
historically isolated populations of field voles now interbreed. Researchers
will sample multiple individuals across the hybrid zone and identify the genomic
regions involved in the formation of new species. One graduate student and a
number of undergraduate students from diverse educational, cultural, and
economic backgrounds will be trained in cutting-edge genetic techniques. This
research will also be used as an active learning tool during a course
specifically designed for first-year undergraduate students from historically
underrepresented groups in the biological sciences.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
vole genus, Microtus, is a model system to investigate the process of speciation
because it has a diversification rate 60-100 times higher than other
vertebrates. The distribution of genetic variation within the field vole
(Microtus agrestis) has been heavily shaped by glacial cycles. The species
includes distinct evolutionary lineages that survived in separate glacial
refugia during recent glacial maxima and are highly differentiated. This
research will focus on a hybrid zone between two of these lineages and use
transcriptome sequencing to identify fixed genetic differences between them.
These genomic regions will serve as targets for subsequent analyses of
individuals from across the hybrid zone. Using genomic cline analyses that
consider the genetic composition of individuals across this transect,
researchers will characterize variation across the hybrid zone revealing loci
that show restricted introgression. These loci will be considered candidate
genes related to reproductive isolation responding to factors, such as selective
differences associated with the differing environments of the hybridizing forms,
and genetic incompatibilities between them. The results from these analyses will
provide a conceptual and empirical groundwork for the genetic architecture
underlying speciation driven by isolation in glacial refugia and provide a set
of candidate loci to investigate speciation in other mammalian groups.