* 1601781
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Evolution of transcription factor specificity and cooperativity
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2016,04/30/2018
* Aarti Venkat, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 04/30/2018
* USD 16,459.00

This project will combine evolutionary genetics and biochemistry to dissect how
a fundamental system of gene regulation in animals has evolved. It will explore
how specific control molecules that can turn particular genes on or off have
evolved. This will be done by tracing the ancient evolutionary changes in the
structure of critical control molecules and their corresponding genes. It will
integrate laboratory tests of protein to DNA binding with computer analysis of
molecular evolution. Broader impacts include training of a graduate student in
the integration of computer and experimental approaches to molecular evolution.
Dissemination of techniques in statistical programming through software boot
camps and science outreach presentations will also increase the representation
of women in inter-disciplinary science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Transcription is
the first step in the expression of any gene and hence is thought by many to be
the fundamental step in regulation of the genome. Proper regulation of an
organism's genes depends on the correct pairing of thousands of different
proteins, called transcription factors, with their respective genes.
Understanding how new control pairing occurs without loss of original functions
is central to regulation in complex genomes. Steroid receptors are biologically
important transcription factors. They are also an excellent model system for the
study of transcriptional control since they consist of two related but
functionally divergent groups that differ in the way they bind to specific
genes. One group predominantly binds to a major groove of the DNA molecule; the
other group binds to both major and minor grooves of DNA. To understand the
evolution of DNA binding and recognition in these two groups this research
utilizes ancestral sequence reconstruction, along with functional laboratory
assays. Computational analysis of receptor function and evolution will be
combined with laboratory protein binding assays to explore the hypothesis that
the shape of the DNA minor groove as well as the DNA sequence was important in
the evolution of novel specificity. The proposed experiments will delineate the
genetic and physical mechanisms by which different modes of DNA recognition
diversified in this group of molecules.