* 1601303
* Convex Bodies, Algebraic Geometry, and Symplectic Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2016,05/31/2020
* Kiumars Kaveh, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Spiroff
* 05/31/2020
* USD 160,001.00

This project concerns questions at the intersection of algebra, geometry, and
combinatorics. The main areas to be explored are algebraic and symplectic
geometry. Algebraic geometry is one of the oldest and most fundamental branches
of mathematics. It has a wide range of applications from coding and data
security to high energy physics and string theory. The principal objects of
study are algebraic varieties, the sets of solutions of systems of algebraic
equations in several variables; classical examples are ellipses, parabolas, and
hyperbolas. Symplectic geometry is the modern framework of classical mechanics.
It also plays an important role in modern quantum theories in physics. The main
objects of study are symplectic manifolds, which are abstractions of the notion
of phase space from physics. An important class of symplectic manifolds are
algebraic varieties. Through this connection, the research project explores
interactions between algebraic geometry and symplectic geometry, with the goal
of advancing understanding in both areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A central theme
of this project is to associate convex bodies, known as the Newton-Okounkov
bodies, to algebraic varieties, encoding information about the geometry of the
variety. It gives a general framework to extend the scope of convex geometry
methods from toric varieties to general varieties. The project will explore
applications of this area in symplectic geometry and other directions. Some
fundamental topics to be addressed in the project are: (1) constructing
Hamiltonian torus actions on general projective varieties; (2) a general
approach to the "principle of independence of polarization" in geometric
quantization for a large class of projective varieties; (3) establishing
connections with tropical geometry and computational algebra; and (4)
investigating the notion of entropy from the point of view of the theory of
Newton-Okunkov bodies. Among the applications, the project is expected to
contribute to mathematical physics and quantum mechanics, via geometric
quantization. The project will also investigate connections with tropical
geometry, a branch of algebraic geometry connected to convex optimization.