* 1601743
* The Photonics Technology Education Project
* EHR,DUE
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2019
* Stephanie Gray, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 03/31/2019
* USD 199,450.00

Emerging applications of photonics, photonics-enabled technologies, and
precision optics impact both economic development and national security in the
United States. To help meet the expanding need for photonics and precision
optics technicians, this project at Montana State University Gallatin College
will develop a two-year photonics and laser technician program designed to
advance the knowledge and skill-sets of students entering the photonics
workforce, prepare students for rewarding jobs with photonics employers, and
provide employed technicians additional education and training to support
technical innovation. The project will enhance the photonics infrastructure in
the Gallatin Valley, which supports the goal of the Montana Photonics Industry
Alliance to make the Gallatin Valley one of the premier photonics region in the
nation. The project will advance rural technician education and broaden the
diversity of the technician workforce while it increases the number of photonics
trained technicians to support critical industries in the national economy. It
will expand productivity and efficiency of local companies by providing highly
skilled technicians for employment. It will improve industry connections to
academia through the participation of industry on an industry advisory board and
in curriculum review, an internship program, job placement, resource sharing,
and program feedback.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Following the framework developed by
the ATE National Center for Optics and Photonics Education (OP-TEC) (DUE
1303732) and advice from industry partners, this program will educate students;
teachers, and the community about photonics technology. To meet this goal the
project will (a) implement an Associate of Applied Science Photonics and Laser
Technology (AAS PLT) program, (b) adapt and further develop photonics curriculum
and coursework; (c) equip an optics/photonics laboratory for education and
training; (d) provide professional development for faculty to prepare them to
teach photonics courses in the AAS PLT program using the Fundamentals of Light
and Lasers curriculum of OP-TEC; (e) conduct outreach activities to promote the
new program in eight area high schools, offering career pathways and dual
enrollment; and (f) implement an internship program to assure that students have
exposure to local photonics companies. High school students and teachers will be
taught about the importance of photonics technology in the 21st century and thus
increase the knowledge of photonics by high school instructors, students, and
the community through direct recruiting, career fairs, dual enrollment,
professional development activities, and marketing strategies. All of the
results of this project will be fed back to OP-TEC and the broader photonics
community to advance their knowledge and help refine their framework for
enhancing Optics and Photonics education. A comprehensive evaluation will be
conducted to determine the success of the project and its deliverables.