* 1601340
* PFI:AIR - TT:  Wireless implantable pressure sensor for continuous monitoring of chronic disorders
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2016,10/31/2019
* Ellis Meng, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 10/31/2019
* USD 206,000.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating the first
wireless, microfabricated, microbubble-based pressure sensor for physiological
monitoring to fill the current technology gap in chronic, implantable diagnostic
sensors. The translated technology offers reliable pressure recordings in real-
time for patients suffering from chronic, often life-long medical conditions for
which elevated pressure is a risk factor or indicator, and removes the need for
bulky exterior diagnostic tools. The microbubble pressure sensor has the
following unique features: biocompatible construction, small footprint (less
than 0.1 sq. mm.), wireless control and power, and a microbubble transduction
mechanism. The microbubble transduction mechanism circumvents failures modes
such as mechanical fatigue and biofouling, which plague sensors that rely on
deflection in elastic membranes. These features provide for an unobtrusive,
reliable implant, with greater application to chronic in vivo monitoring
compared to current state-of-the-art in physiological pressure monitoring. The
project will result in a working prototype pressure sensor and critical data to
de-risk on-going development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses
current technology gaps by integrating wireless circuitry for power and
telemetry into the existing prototype microbubble transducer and by generating
critical characterization data on long term accuracy, precision and
repeatability, as necessary steps for translating the technology toward
commercial deployment. Graduate and undergraduate researchers will work to
finalize device electronics and packaging and calibrate the prototype pressure
sensor with thorough benchtop testing. In addition, all personnel involved in
this project, will benefit from translational education programs offered by our
I-Corps node and Coulter workshop series that will expose them to customer
discovery, customer interviews, Lean Startup methodology, medical device
commercialization, and regulatory and reimbursement strategy.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team is collaborating with neurosurgeons at the
Children's Hospital Los Angeles; they will provide guidance in design and
deployment of biomedical technologies for hydrocephalus. The team will also
leverage industry connections and technology commercialization programs for
guidance and training on commercialization, manufacturing, and financing as they
pertain to the potential to translate the technology into a competitive
commercial reality. The potential economic and societal impact of this project
include greater US competitiveness in biomedical sensing technology, and the
improvements in healthcare quality and reductions in healthcare cost realized by
new clinical pressure sensors, that offer data driven diagnostics and timely
medical interventions for chronically suffering patients.