* 1601065
* Holomorphic Symplectic Varieties, Mirror Symmetry, and Cluster Algebras
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Paul Hacking, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 06/30/2020
* USD 200,434.00

Hyper-Kähler manifolds, a type of geometric space with rich internal structure,
are key geometric objects in algebraic geometry and differential geometry. These
spaces play important roles in both mathematics and theoretical physics. The
main goal of this research project is to construct new examples, or to prove
that they do not exist. The research will investigate how hyper-Kähler manifolds
degenerate, or break into simpler pieces. The investigator will first study how
the known examples degenerate, to infer general patterns, and will then work to
reverse the process to construct new examples. The work will make use of mirror
symmetry, a remarkable correspondence between pairs of geometric spaces
discovered by physicists. For hyper-Kähler manifolds, mirror symmetry can be
understood quite explicitly. This provides information about degenerations of
hyper-Kähler manifolds, for example, the combinatorial way in which the
different pieces fit together.

This award supports research at the interface between algebraic geometry and
differential geometry on hyper-Kähler manifolds, which are important in geometry
and theoretical physics. Only a few types of examples are known, and previous
constructions have been based on classical algebraic geometry. The investigator
will use new techniques coming from mirror symmetry, cluster algebras, and
deformation theory to produce new examples, or alternatively, to discover
tangible obstructions to their existence. In prior collaborative work, he
developed a geometric interpretation of cluster algebras in terms of toric and
birational geometry. These geometric spaces, called cluster varieties, are
expected to form the building blocks of degenerations of hyper-Kähler manifolds.
In subsequent collaborative work, the investigator studied mirror symmetry for
cluster varieties. This involves piecewise linear geometric structures that can
be used to understand how to glue cluster varieties together to form a hyper-
Kähler manifold.