* 1601619
* Asymptotic Commutative Algebra and Multigraded Syzygies
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Daniel Erman, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Sandra Spiroff
* 07/31/2020
* USD 204,605.00

This research project concerns commutative algebra, which provides the
foundation for a broad range of mathematics, including algebraic geometry and
algebraic number theory. Commutative algebra finds application in many fields of
science and engineering, including computer science, cryptography, coding
theory, robotics, pattern recognition, and theoretical physics. Part of the work
in this project aims to connect the Kakeya needle problem, a classical analysis
problem about the amount of space needed to turn a needle in a full circle, with
modern ideas from commutative algebra. Another part of the project will use
commutative algebra to design new algorithms for performing geometric
computations about a class of shapes with extraordinary symmetries, among other
applications.

This research will build new frontiers between commutative algebra and other
fields. The first project connects commutative algebra with harmonic analysis.
The Kakeya conjecture is a central problem in harmonic analysis that has spawned
a parallel literature over finite fields. The project aims to expand this
parallel to the p-adic integers, yielding closer connections with the original
analytic questions. The second project develops homological algebra methods for
new geometric settings. For a variety embedded in something other than
projective space, free resolutions often fail to provide sharp connections with
geometry; this project will develop homological machinery better suited to toric
geometry. This multifaceted project offers an array of potential applications:
splitting theorems for vector bundles on toric varieties, rationality proofs for
Hurwitz spaces, and new sheaf cohomology algorithms.