* 1601077
* Dissertation Research: Effect of phoretic dispersal on the structure of parasite populations
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2018
* Sarah Bush, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 06/30/2018
* USD 19,053.00

By comparing differences in the population genetic structure of parasites that
disperse in different ways, this study will determine how increases and
decreases in dispersal influence that structure. Understanding how and why
populations are structured is a major goal of evolutionary biologists because
the resulting population genetic structure affects rates of local adaptation,
speciation and extinction. This study will examine the population genetic
structure of lice that live on the feathers of pigeons. Natural populations are
typically subdivided, or genetically structured, because geographic or
ecological factors influence the chance that two individuals will mate. One
major factor that influences population genetic structure is dispersal, the
movement of individuals from one place to another. When individuals disperse to
new populations, they mate with individuals in the new population reducing
population genetic structure. We know little about how dispersal affects the
magnitude of this structure. Host-parasite systems offer highly tractable
systems with which to study how different modes of dispersal influence
population genetic structure. This study will do so by examining population
genetic structure of different parasite species that are located on the same
host individuals. In addition, this study will produce an inquiry-based activity
aimed at middle-school students, "Hitchhikers guide to the city: Lessons from
lice," and will contribute to the training of graduate and undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this study, researchers will use a pigeon-
louse, host-parasite system to investigate how population genetic structure
differs between two species of parasitic feather lice (Order: Phthiraptera) that
differ in their ability to disperse. The study will investigate the role of
vertical dispersal and horizontal dispersal in structuring the populations of
wing lice and body lice that occur on Rock Pigeons (Columba livia). Although
these lice are ecologically very similar, wing lice can disperse phoretically
using flies, whereas body lice do not. Despite the pervasiveness of phoresy, the
affect that this dispersal mechanism has on the population structure of these
organisms is unknown. Researchers will use a nested sampling design to collect
lice from different host individuals, in different flocks, in different regions
of the world. They will sample in regions where flies are present, and where
flies are not present and phoresis cannot occur. They will use microsatellite
data to determine the relative role of vertical and horizontal-phoretic
dispersal in structuring louse populations.