* 1601552
* Opening Pathways to Employment through Nontraditional Geospatial Applications in Technical Education (OPEN-GATE)
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2020
* W. Frederick Limp, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 06/30/2020
* USD 898,073.00

Opening Pathways to Employment through Nontraditional Geospatial Applications in
Technical Education (OPEN-GATE) is a collaboration among four community colleges
in the University of Arkansas system and the University of Arkansas-Fayetteville
that will enable the development of a workforce with job-specific geospatial
skills for local industry and government. Regional surveys have shown a strong
interest among employers for employees with skills in location-based services
and other geospatial technologies as well as their industry-specific skills.
OPEN-GATE will develop geospatial technology skill sets in targeted business
sectors and emerging industries by augmenting existing programs of study at the
four two-year institutions with relevant and industry-specific geospatial
applications. The project will leverage educational materials developed by the
GeoTech Center, an NSF ATE-funded center, as well as online content already
developed by the University of Arkansas. Traditionally, the primary job market
for people with strong geospatial educations has been in large cities. The
selected integration of these skills with industry-specific training will help
increase efficiency, competitiveness, and sustainability of businesses and
government in the rural heartland.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The growing demand for
geospatial technicians across multiple domains illustrates the need for a
workforce which understands and utilizes spatial thinking and analysis, at the
same time that the rapid evolution and incorporation of geospatial technology
into daily life demands a spatially literate community. The goals of the OPEN-
GATE project are to increase adoption of geospatial technologies statewide and
to expand access to education and training in geospatial technologies in support
of industry and government, including transportation, oil and gas, local
government, and others. Working together, the UA system partners will formalize
agreements to develop a system-wide structure for shared degrees, technical
certificates, and/or certificates of proficiency to clearly articulate multiple
educational pathways. Employer Advisory Boards for each program of study, made
up of industry representatives and local employers, will advise the development
of educational curricula to insure that it meets industry needs and act as
liaisons between industry and educators. Annual industry-education partnership
conferences will facilitate ongoing interaction between industry, faculty, and
students, while outreach to secondary school teachers and students will foster
early awareness of geospatial technologies, shaping the future workforce and
economic development of the region. By enhancing the capacity of educational
institutions in the region, the project will expand opportunities for education
and training to regions of the state that are currently unserved or underserved.