* 1601544
* Mechatronics with Instrumentation and Controls (MwIC)
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Douglas Pauley, Central Community College
* Standard Grant
* John Jackman
* 08/31/2020
* USD 893,698.00

Central Community College (CCC) is developing a Mechatronics with
Instrumentation and Controls program in an effort to meet Nebraska's growing
need for Process Instrumentation and Controls (I&amp;C) technicians. The goal of
the project is to increase the number of qualified I&amp;C technicians to meet
the state's current workforce needs and promote a pipeline of future
technicians. To accomplish this goal, the project is leveraging CCC's state-of-
the-art Mechatronics Education Center and well-established business, education,
and community relationships to develop a Process Instrumentation and Controls
specialization within its existing Mechatronics AAS degree program. While the
fundamentals found in the first year of both the existing electromechanical and
the new I&amp;C program pathways are similar, the I&amp;C pathway distinguishes
itself in that the fundamentals are applied in a processing environment instead
of an advanced manufacturing environment. The I&amp;C pathway is the first AAS
degree program in Nebraska to focus primarily on the unique needs of Nebraska
processing facilities. This is important because there is a shortage of
qualified skilled technicians for both processing and manufacturing businesses,
and, prior to the project, processing facilities could only compete with
manufacturers for graduates of manufacturing-related technician programs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With guidance from its Business-Industry Leadership Team,
the project will modify/create up to 18 credit hours of new Process
Instrumentation and Controls material for integration and alignment with
existing coursework to form the new I&amp;C specialization. The I&amp;C
specialization will provide education and skills that emphasize properties of
liquids and gases using sensing and control devices that measure pressure,
temperature, flow, volume density, and chemical composition. The new
specialization will help create a pipeline of skilled I&amp;C technicians and
promote a Nebraska workforce with improved skills, knowledge, and abilities
ultimately leading to more competitive businesses. To build and promote early
college pipelines, the project is providing professional development and
awareness activities for secondary educators and their students so they can
introduce and integrate Mechatronics career pathways into the schools. To
increase the diversity of the program, the project is implementing strategies to
attract women, Hispanics, and military veterans from rural communities. To
enhance student retention and completion, the project is embedding proven
successful methods for engaging student cohorts throughout the curriculum and
college experience. The project is using formative and summative efforts to
document its impact on processing industries and to help urgent national calls
to increase the number of workers entering Mechatronics-related careers.