* 1601802
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Determining the impact of symbiont metabolic role in symbiont genome decay in Adelgidae (Hemiptera)
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2018
* Carol von Dohlen, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 05/31/2018
* USD 18,604.00

This research will test the assumption that symbiont genome size variation is
based on host diet as well as on the age of the symbiotic relationship. Plant-
sap feeding insects form close partnerships, or symbioses, with bacteria. These
partnerships allow the insects to feed on nutrient-poor plant-sap by
supplementing their diets. This association is beneficial for both partners and
it comes with consequences. One consequence is that the bacteria typically
evolve to have extremely small genomes. In many groups of insects these
bacterial partnerships are stable over millions of years. This study will test
if the genome size of a bacteria is determined by how long the insect and
bacteria have coevolved, or if it requires a more complicated explanation
involving the host's diet type. The study will broaden our general understanding
of bacterial-insect associations in nature, a topic that may impact agriculture
and conservation. Additionally, this project includes efforts to encourage
Native American students to pursue education in the sciences by providing them
with hands-on laboratory experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous studies have
revealed the extreme reductions in the genomes of symbiotic bacteria and the
loss of functions in critical nutrient-provisioning pathways. While recent
studies have begun to examine the details of mode and tempo of genome
degradation in symbionts, important questions remain. How important is selection
in driving smaller genome size? How important is the age of the symbiotic
associations? Do the particular metabolic or ecological roles of the symbionts
influence the change in genome size? Progress has been made, but studies have
been constrained by the fact that these factors are hard to disentangle. This
research introduces a novel system that removes several confounding factors to
allow a clearer view of what causes decreased genome size in symbionts. The
genomes of symbionts will be compared in closely related lineages of adelgid
insects that share a common symbiont but differ in the nutrients available
through host diet. This will allow the influence of host diet nutrient content
to be examined while controlling for the age of the symbiosis. A number of
symbiont genomes from within and across adelgid lineages will also be sequenced
for a more general survey of the causes of symbiont genome decay. Gene deletions
in all core metabolic categories, particularly nutritional provisioning will be
quantified. Patterns of genome decay will then be analyzed to detect correlation
between decay and age of the association, nutritional role and other factors.