* 1601675
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  The Genomics of Hybrid Sterility & Speciation in the Anopheles gambiae Species Complex
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2017
* Kevin Deitz, Texas A&M AgriLife Research
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 05/31/2017
* USD 19,305.00

This project will investigate genetic mechanisms driving speciation in a group
of mosquitos known to transmit disease. In this group of mosquitos the number of
different species has traditionally been underestimated because, while
indistinguishable in appearance, the group is actually comprised of multiple
genetically distinct species. Despite their importance to humans little is known
about how these species arose. This project addresses three questions in
mosquito genetics. First what genes are responsible for reproductive isolation
between the species? Second, how do those genes diverge across time leading to
speciation? And third is the pattern of change between two species consistent
across different pairs of species? Several of these species are the major
vectors of human malaria in sub-Saharan Africa. In addition to helping us
understand the genetic process that creates biological diversity, this project
therefore has additional societal benefits as it may help in the development and
implementation of novel genetic vector control measures by, identifying genes
causing sterility in mosquitoes.

The name Anopheles gambiae is actually associated with a species complex of
eight genetically distinct but recently diverged species that cannot be
identified based on morphology. The complex is an important study system for the
field of speciation genetics because species in the complex exhibit a wide range
of genetic divergence, including partially isolated sub-species. Therefore this
species complex allows these researchers to study speciation as it unfolds. When
different species of the complex hybridize, the male offspring are sterile and
females are fertile. If a hybrid female mates with a male of either parental
species, the resulting second-generation hybrids exhibit varying levels of
sterility due to genetic incompatibility. This allows genomic mapping of the
causes of sterility through sequencing of many backcross offspring. This study
will thereby map regions of the genome that cause male and female sterility in
backcross hybrids between two species (An. gambiae and An. quadriannulatus).
Combined with existing data on male and female sterility in backcross hybrids
between An. gambiae and An. arabiensis this data will determine if the same
genomic regions cause sterility across different species pairs. By comparing the
patterns of divergence and their causes across multiple species pairs the
research will increase our understanding of the factors driving speciation in an
important group of animals.