* 1601174
* Research Initiation Award: Investigation of Coherent Elastic Neutrino-Nucleus Scattering
* EHR,HRD
* 05/15/2016,12/31/2021
* Diane Markoff, North Carolina Central University
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 12/31/2021
* USD 288,902.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities-Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
Research Initiation Awards (RIAs) provide support to STEM junior faculty at
HBCUs who are starting to build a research program, as well as for mid-career
faculty who may have returned to the faculty ranks after holding an
administrative post or who needs to redirect and rebuild a research program.
Faculty members may pursue research at their home institution, at an NSF-funded
Center, at a research intensive institution or at a national laboratory. The RIA
projects are expected to help further the faculty member's research capability
and effectiveness, to improve research and teaching at his or her home
institution, and to involve undergraduate students in research experiences. With
support from the National Science Foundation, North Carolina Central University
(NCCU) will conduct research in coherent elastic neutrino-nucleus scattering and
formalize participation in the COHERENT research collaboration whose objective
is to measure this type of neutrino scattering. This scattering was predicted in
1974, but has not yet been observed. Once observed, the methods and results will
have an impact on research in astrophysics. This project will provide valuable
physics research experience and mentorship for several minority undergraduate
students at North Carolina Central University and also during their summers at
Duke University. The project will bring cutting-edge research and research
techniques into the NCCU classroom. In addition, the project will help North
Carolina Central University build its research capacity and enhance the
educational and research experiences of their undergraduate students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to participate in the
deployment and data acquisition of detector systems and to perform data analysis
and simulations of coherent elastic neutrino-nucleus scattering (CENNS)
measurements and associated background studies on key nuclear targets (such as
Germanium) and shielding materials (including lead). The COHERENT collaboration
will take advantage of recent advances in detector technology and the
availability of an intense source of pulsed neutrinos available as a byproduct
of the Spallation Neutron Source at the Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL) to
carry out the first CENNS investigation. The immediate COHERENT goal is to
compare CENNS measurements in selected nuclei to Standard Model cross section
calculations to test for neutrino non-standard interactions. In addition, the
measured reaction rates have direct implications for understanding detector
response and background in dark-matter experiments, and for modeling supernova
processes and detection. Collaborators include Duke University faculty at the
Triangle Universities Nuclear Laboratory (TUNL) and the Oak Ridge National
Laboratory.