* 1601586
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   Assessing gene- and site-specific support for deep amphibian relationships across nuclear loci that interact with mitochondria and ribosomes
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2018
* David Weisrock, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 06/30/2018
* USD 18,967.00

Life on Earth traces its origins back to a single common ancestor that lived
nearly four billion years ago. Yet today, life has diversified into tens of
millions of species. Reconstructing these evolutionary relationships is the aim
of phylogenetics, and its insights are critical to nearly all areas of biology.
The genomics revolution is radically altering the historically data-limited
field of molecular phylogenetics and genome-scale data are now easily generated
for any organism. Yet, simply collecting more genetic data, on its own, will not
be sufficient to resolve difficult branches on the Tree of Life because some
genes will support different evolutionary histories than others. This project
addresses the questions of which genes and which DNA positions in those genes
are most informative for resolving deep amphibian relationships, and conversely,
which may be misleading. Amphibians (frogs, salamanders, and caecilians) are an
ancient and diverse group typifying many of the difficulties of reconstructing
deep phylogeny. The relationships among the three amphibian orders have proven
one of the most difficult portions of the vertebrate phylogeny to resolve. This
work may serve as a general framework for tackling thorny problems in
phylogenetics and builds important avenues for graduate training in
bioinformatics, high-throughput sequencing analysis, and model-based
phylogenetic reconstruction - key skills in this post-genomic era. The research
will integrate undergraduate researchers from traditionally under-represented
groups across rural Appalachia and Kentucky. This research is of broad interest
to evolutionary biologists working on amphibians, and stands to make important
contributions to amphibian systematics. It addresses questions about how we
analyze genomic data to accurately reconstruct deep evolutionary
relationships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The researchers will test hypotheses about
the source of conflicting phylogenetic signals from mitochondrial and nuclear
genomes by analyzing site-specific patterns of topological support across
nuclear genes that interact with the mitochondrion and ribosomes. The
researchers will use a well-developed amphibian system in which previous
analyses of complete mitochondrial genomes, nuclear ribosomal RNA, and &gt;300
putatively neutral nuclear exons have each strongly supported conflicting
scenarios for basal amphibian divergences. This project tests the hypothesis
that mitochondrial and ribosomal genes and their nuclear-encoded functional
counterparts support the same tree topologies due to compensatory co-evolution
between mitochondrial and nuclear genomes. Leveraging genomic resources, the
researchers will develop a targeted capture kit to sequence multiple exons of
225 nuclear genes that functionally interact with the mitochondrion and
ribosomes in 144 amphibian taxa, representing each major lineage. Examining the
relative support for different inter-ordinal topologies across sites in each
locus, and with knowledge of which portions of these nuclear loci physically
interact with rRNA or mitochondrial-encoded proteins, this project will test
whether particular nuclear-encoded genes yield conflicting topologies because of
constraints on organellar structure and function.