* 1601119
* NSF-ATE: Partnership for Advanced Marine and Environmental Science Training for Pacific Islanders
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2016,12/31/2022
* Robert Richmond, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 12/31/2022
* USD 1,076,890.00

The Pacific Islands are an exceptional natural laboratory, with highly diverse
and unique coral reef and terrestrial ecosystems that are already under elevated
levels of stress and degradation due to the effects of changing global
environmental conditions, development pressures, and the effects of overfishing
and coastal pollution. The future of the Islands and their populations depends
on the technical skills and knowledge available to local resource managers,
policy makers and stakeholders. This project will provide critical access to
accurate and adequate technical information to strengthen the capacity of the
local institutions of higher education. Input from local agencies, businesses
and stakeholders have identified key technological skills needed by community
college graduates to fill positions within the governments, NGO community and
private sector. These students will develop strong STEM-related skills to enter
the U.S. Mainland workforce in technology related fields and to successfully
pursue 4-year and graduate degrees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
enhance marine and environmental science education at the five minority-serving
community colleges of the Pacific Islands: American Samoa Community College, the
College of Micronesia - FSM, the College of the Marshall Islands, Northern
Marianas College, and Palau Community College. The project will support relevant
curriculum development, the professional development of the college faculty,
internships and field experiences for students, and strengthen the scientific
infrastructure of the participating institutions. The focus will be on island
ecosystems and climate science, and activities will include advanced training
for faculty to modernize their courses, expanded use of new tools and
technologies, and support for student internships and research experiences.