* 1601788
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Assessing urbanization impacts on canopy epiphyte biodiversity and function in Pacific Northwest forests.
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2018
* Hannah Prather, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* John Schade
* 05/31/2018
* USD 17,588.00

---------------------------------------------------------&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&
lt;br/&gt;DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Canopies in the urban cloud:
assessing&lt;br/&gt;urbanization impacts on canopy epiphyte biodiversity and
function in&lt;br/&gt;Pacific Northwest forests&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While
relatively small in size, the lichens and mosses growing in forest canopies in
the Pacific Northwest have a big impact on how the forest works. One role they
perform is the cycling of nutrients in these forested ecosystems. Although
important, lichens and mosses are especially sensitive to the fallout from urban
pollution. Preliminary studies indicate that exposure to urban pollutants may
lead to dramatic shifts in the moss and lichen communities in forest canopies of
the Pacific Northwest, including the total loss of very sensitive, yet
ecologically important, lichens that can capture nitrogen from the air. Although
the extreme sensitivity of these lichens makes them particularly vulnerable to
atmospheric pollution, to date there has been no study to assess the impacts of
the spread of urban environments on these forest canopy lichen communities or
how nutrients are used in the canopy. This is particularly important as
transportation and transportation-sourced pollutants increase throughout the
Pacific Northwest. This research will create important new understanding of the
impacts of growing urban environments on nearby tree canopies and forested
ecosystems of the Pacific Northwest. The results obtained here will be useful to
estimate how much nitrogen forests receive through pollution. Collectively,
these efforts will aid researchers and government agencies in identifying canopy
areas at risk of being damaged around the rapidly increasing urban centers in
the Pacific Northwest. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biodiversity loss associated with
human alteration of ecosystems is a major planetary concern, and rapid expansion
of global urban areas contributes to this loss. Urbanization can replace endemic
species with widespread generalist species, creating a homogenized ecosystem
with resulting impacts on ecosystem function. While many studies have identified
land-use change as the main driver of terrestrial biodiversity loss, relatively
few studies, to date, have explored how the transport and exposure of urban air
plumes to downwind ecosystems may also be driving modern biodiversity loss. The
Pacific Northwest is known for its many pristine, and iconic, coniferous forests
that harbor an immense biomass and biodiversity of canopy epiphytes (lichens and
mosses). Recently, the Pacific Northwest has experienced rapid population growth
and many endemic tree canopy epiphytic species are extremely sensitive to the
increasing effects of urbanization (increasing reactive nitrogen and heavy metal
deposition). This research aims to assess how urban-induced shifts in epiphyte
community structure influence Pacific Northwest forest ecosystem process by
examining how community shifts in canopy epiphytes affect canopy nitrogen
cycles. This study will address how rates of canopy cyanolichen nitrogen
fixation vary across an established regional urbanization gradient and address
the overall contribution of moss-associated nitrogen fixation potential in
Pseudotsuga menziesii tree canopies, a previously unidentified source of canopy
nitrogen fixation in Pacific Northwest forests.