* 1601685
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   Relationship between Maternal Social Status, Offspring Health, and Female Dispersal Success in Wild Meerkats
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2018
* Christine Drea, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Karen Mabry
* 05/31/2018
* USD 19,063.00

Many animals leave their birth places as they become adults to avoid competing
or mating with relatives. However, traveling to and settling in a new area can
be dangerous as animals are exposed to new diseases, predators, and unfriendly
neighbors. This project is to identify the qualities that help these animals
along the way, and to test whether those that are better able to withstand
disease and to cope with stress are more successful. The research team will use
sophisticated GPS technology to monitor the health and survival of young female
Meerkats in the Kalahari Desert as they move from one social group to another.
The project will also train undergraduate students and engage schoolchildren in
the research through popular media and the Friends of Kalahari website. In
addition to advancing our knowledge of dispersal, the results of this study will
inform the ways in which we manage animals in fragmented and changing habitats.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In previous work on meerkat societies, the PIs found that
dominant females, which are hormonally "masculinized", have the weakest
constitutive immune responses of all group members, indicating a cost of
androgen exposure in females. Moreover, because androgen concentrations vary
with female social status, the PIs found evidence for organizational effects of
differential prenatal androgen exposure on the health of juvenile offspring
derived from dominant control (DC), subordinate control (SC), and dominant
treated (DT) dams receiving an androgen-receptor blocker. Here, the PIs will
follow the daughters of DC, SC, and DT dams over the next life-history stage
"dispersal" to study the transgenerational effects of maternal social
status/prenatal T on offspring dispersal. Using an integrated approach that
combines behavioral, hormonal, and immunological analyses with novel global
positioning system (GPS) telemetry data, the PIs will chart the health and
social trajectories of daughters over successive stages of dispersal (during
emigration from the natal group, a transience period, and settlement in a new
territory). Specifically, the PIs will (1) determine dominance relationships and
identify likely dispersers via regular behavioral observation; (2) fit GPS radio
collars to 25 pre-dispersal females and chart their movements on an hourly
basis; (3) measure immunocompetence (parasite burden and immune response) and
hormone concentrations (androgens and glucocorticoids) in (a) fecal samples
(collected prior to, over the course of, and following dispersal) and (b) serum
samples (collected pre-dispersal and post-settlement); and (4) evaluate the
health and survival of these females in their newly formed groups.