* 1601191
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Effects of experimental shifts in soil moisture and flowering phenology on plant-pollinator interactions
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2017
* Diane Campbell, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 04/30/2017
* USD 16,349.00

Most flowering plants and many of the world's food crops depend on animal
pollinators to reproduce. Recent changes in climate may disrupt these
ecologically and economically important relationships. Warm springs and early
snowmelt associated with climate change alter when plants flower and pollinators
emerge in the spring, which may make pollinators unavailable to plants that
flower too soon or too late. In addition, decreased snow cover and early
snowmelt likely reduce soil moisture during the growing season on mountain
slopes. Such drought conditions may decrease the number of flowers, their size
or the amount of nectar they contain, which may make them less attractive to
pollinators. This research tests effects of soil moisture and timing of flower
and pollinator emergence on pollination. The expectation is that drought will
greatly decrease pollination through both changes in flowering time and
attractiveness. This work will help reveal how the relationship between plants
and pollinators responds to climate change, and will improve the ability of
land-managers and policy-makers to plan conservation efforts. This project also
includes opportunities to engage undergraduate students and public school
teachers in field research, as well as providing gateway experiences for
children into science through two K-12 outreach
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project tests the hypothesis that
differences in flowering time interact with water availability to affect the
composition and number of pollinator visits. Using field-tested methods,
researchers will manipulate flowering time and soil moisture in a factorial
experiment with the sub-alpine wildflower Mertensia ciliata. They will measure
the impact on pollination and seed set via shifts in the composition and number
of pollinator visits, and will determine how those effects may be mediated by
changes in floral traits. Experimental results will be integrated with on-going
observational studies of individual, population, and community-level responses
to natural variation in soil moisture and flowering phenology. Similar field
experiments testing the impacts of abiotic and biotic shifts on plant-pollinator
interactions are rare. Yet, such experimental approaches can offer vital
insights into the mechanisms that determine how pollination systems respond to
climate change. All analyzed data under this award will be disseminated at
professional conferences, published in peer-reviewed journals, and made
publically available.