* 1601210
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Mechanisms of microbe-mediated plant species coexistence across spatial and temporal scales
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2018
* Jennifer Rudgers, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 06/30/2018
* USD 19,630.00

Interactions between plants and their unseen microbial associates are ubiquitous
in nature, yet their role in driving the diversity and coexistence of plants is
not well understood. One way microbes could enhance plant coexistence is through
negative plant-soil feedbacks: Plants often accumulate species-specific
pathogens in their roots and soils. As a plant species increases in number, so
do their pathogens, which limits unrestricted growth and can be a mechanism to
allow coexistence of many plant species. This mechanism has been tested in the
greenhouse, but we have little knowledge of its importance in nature. This
research aims to investigate plant-soil feedbacks and its consequences for
competition and coexistence between plant species by first testing it in the
greenhouse, and then examining it in a field experiment. New projects that focus
on culturing and sequencing the fungal associates of plants in the field and
greenhouse experiments will answer questions such as: Which microbes are most
important in plant-soil feedbacks? What are their effects on plant hosts? Are
these effects dependent on climate? The results of these investigations will
shed light on the drivers of coexistence in two foundational arid-land grasses,
and will be shared with land managers to improve stewardship. This research will
also provide research opportunities for undergraduate students, as well as
increase public understanding of arid-land ecosystems via summer camp
experiences for school children and outreach. Substantial theory and mechanistic
models predict that plant-microbe interactions contribute to species
coexistence, and greenhouse experiments show considerable evidence of microbe-
driven plant-soil feedback (PSF). However, field tests of the role of PSF in
long term vegetation dynamics are critical to determining the relative
importance of PSF compared to other mechanisms of coexistence, such as spatial
abiotic niche variation, operating in nature. Dissertation work fills that gap
by linking the strengths of PSF (measured in field experiments) to decades-long
variation in the stability of coexistence. Proposed improvements will resolve
questions that have arisen from dissertation work by characterizing the
belowground mechanisms of PSF using next-generation sequencing methods and
targeted greenhouse inoculation of fungal cultures. Results will advance
knowledge by increasing the ability to scale plant-microbe interactions from the
greenhouse to the field, resolving the degree to which fungal community
composition explains vegetation dynamics over spatial and temporal scales, and
determining the ecological roles of a poorly understood group of fungi (dark
septate endophytes), which has the potential to revolutionize current paradigms
on how plants respond to abiotic stress.