* 1601524
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:Sea level rise and vegetation regime shifts: implications for soil carbon storage and vulnerability in coastal wetlands
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2019
* Sean Charles, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 05/31/2019
* USD 16,380.00

Coastal wetlands filter water, buffer the coastline from storms, provide
important habitat and are globally important for the storage of carbon. Carbon
storage in wetland soils can be for the long-term and influences whether
wetlands will persist during sea level rise by increasing a change in sediment
elevation. Climate change and local freshwater management are increasing the
movement of saltwater into coastal freshwater wetlands, altering the conditions
of the wetlands and causing shifts in the types of vegetation growing there. In
many tropical and subtropical coastal wetlands, mangroves are replacing grass-
dominated marshes, with uncertain effects on the capability of soils to store
carbon. This is especially true of coastal wetlands, because of their
sensitivity to sea level rise. The goals of this study are to identify changes
in the storage of carbon in wetland soils and releases to the atmosphere of the
gases carbon dioxide and methane that occur as coastal wetland change from
marshes dominated by grasses to mangrove forests. The research findings will
provide valuable information for the conservation and restoration of the Florida
Everglades locally as well as coastal wetlands throughout the world.
Furthermore, the findings will provide a broader understanding of plant and soil
interactions and ecosystem function in a changing world. The project will
provide hands on scientific experience identifying and growing wetland plants
and restoring urban coastal wetlands for local high school students during
"Marsh Mangress", an outreach activity at Florida International University. This
activity will also provide undergraduate students with laboratory and field
experience at a majority minority institution.

This research will utilize a vegetation gradient in 10,000 Islands National
Wildlife Refuge in Naples, FL in which sea level rise and freshwater
manipulation have driven vegetation change and mangrove encroachment, in order
to understand how changing abiotic conditions and vegetation state change alter
carbon storage through time. Changing carbon storage will be measured as current
organic carbon stocks (above and belowground biomass, soil carbon content),
inputs (root productivity, sediment surface accretion) and carbon losses
(breakdown rates of organic carbon, gas flux measurements), past carbon
sequestration rate (radiometric soil dating), and potential future rates of
carbon loss (reciprocal transplant of organic matter to represent freshwater
restoration or continuing saltwater intrusion). Specifically, the goals of this
project are to: 1) Identify differences in carbon storage, accretion, and gas
flux among wetlands dominated by brackish marsh, saltwater marsh, and mangrove-
dominated vegetation communities. 2) Determine which abiotic and biotic
mechanisms drive differences in soil carbon dynamics among wetland types. 3)
Quantify the effect of time since mangrove establishment on soil carbon storage,
accretion and gas flux by establishing a chronosequence of mangrove encroachment
based on soil dating and historic aerial photography.