* 1601221
* Alamo Institute for Materials (micro, bio, nano) - Technology (AIM-TEC)
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2016,02/28/2022
* Robert Ehrmann, Northwest Vista College
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 02/28/2022
* USD 913,387.00

Nanotechnology is fundamentally changing the industrial world revolutionizing
transportation, aerospace, biotechnology, medicine and manufacturing. The state
of Texas has the fourth largest number of nanotechnology companies and
institutions in the U.S. with over 66 nanotechnology-related companies and 50
nanoscience-related research and community organizations. The proposed Alamo
Institute for Materials Technology (AIMTEC) project addresses the state's urgent
workforce development needs in nanotechnology as identified by the Texas Higher
Education Coordinating Board in its recent "Nanotechnology Forecast"
report.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Alamo Institute for Materials Technology (AIM-
TEC) at Northwest Vista College will create a self-sustaining and replicable
regional workforce model that leverages local resources and partnerships to
address the critical need by industry for quality technician education and
training in advanced materials technology. AIM-TEC will act as a regional hub
for 1) supporting the educational preparation of next generation technicians
with skills in micro-nano-bio technologies; 2) strengthening the transition
points from high school to college, and college to workforce and/or advanced
education through innovative student recruitment and retention strategies; 3)
increasing community awareness of nanotechnology and available educational and
career pathways. AIM-TEC will demonstrate effective ways that two-year
institutions can creatively establish and lead an interconnected network of
7-12, 4-year institutions, NSF Centers, and industry partners to meet regional
nanotechnology industry workforce needs. Through collaboration with national and
regional educational and industry partners, AIM-TEC will establish micro-bio-
nanotechnology curricula to produce graduates with industry-relevant technical
competencies. A sixty-credit Associate of Applied Science (AAS) in Advanced
Materials Technology embedded with two stackable Level-1 certificate options in
Nano-biotechnology and Semiconductor technology will be developed. These
curricular changes integrated with student experiential learning opportunities
will diversify student skill sets, thereby creating multiple career pathways
into nanotechnology-enabled industries. Additionally, AIM-TEC will pilot dual
credit courses that will facilitate seamless transition of high school graduates
to postsecondary educational institutions. The AIM-TEC project will increase the
participation of underrepresented individuals in STEM fields by providing
nanotechnology training, research opportunities and career development
activities in a supportive environment at Northwest Vista College, a Hispanic-
serving Institution.