* 1601022
* Research Initiation Award - Cellulosic Ethanol Production from Major Feedstocks: Insights from Yeast Transcriptomics
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2022
* Ananda Nanjundaswamy, Alcorn State University
* Standard Grant
* Carleitta Paige-Anderson
* 06/30/2022
* USD 297,773.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities-Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
Research Initiation Awards (RIAs) provide support to STEM junior faculty at
HBCUs who are starting to build a research program, as well as for mid-career
faculty who may have returned to the faculty ranks after holding an
administrative post or who need to redirect and rebuild a research program.
Faculty members may pursue research at their home institution, at an NSF-funded
Center, at a research intensive institution or at a national laboratory. The RIA
projects are expected to help further the faculty member's research capability
and effectiveness, to improve research and teaching at his or her home
institution, and to involve undergraduate students in research experiences. With
support from the National Science Foundation, Alcorn State University (ASU) will
conduct research aimed at understanding cellulosic ethanol production from major
feedstocks. This research will be used to enhance teaching and learning at ASU
and thus, the PI will gain hands-on training in yeast transcriptomics which the
PI expects to utilize as a tool in optimizing production of other bioproducts.
Alcorn State University, a land-grant minority institution, recently included a
dedicated bioenergy program to diversify its agriculture curriculum and research
portfolio. This research will complement these ongoing bioenergy initiatives at
Alcorn State University. Presently, Alcorn State does not have researchers
engaged in "omics" research and this will ensure the expansion of Alcorn's
research portfolio. The research and educational efforts will contribute to the
University's goal to increase the number of minority students receiving BS
degrees in STEM fields. This project will allow the PI to incorporate genomics
research in his future projects and students to obtain hands-on research and
training. The skills obtained from this research will not only help prepare
students for careers in cellulosic ethanol and biofuel research but will be
valuable for their graduate education and/or career. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of the proposed study is to characterize the transcriptome profile of S.
cerevisiae and use it as a proxy to decode the impact of major feedstocks on
overall ethanol production. Specifically, this project aims to conduct yeast
transcriptomic profiling from cellulosic fermentation of four major feedstocks
namely corn stover, switchgrass, Freedom Giant Miscanthus (FGM) and hybrid
poplar. Results from this study will provide a blue-print of S. cerevisiae
transcriptomic behavior during fermentation. This study has the potential to
make significant contributions to understanding cellulosic ethanol production
from the perspective of yeast genomics and provide baseline data for future
development or engineering of industrial yeast strains for optimal ethanol
production. The proposed RIA research will complement ongoing bioenergy
initiatives at Alcorn State University. This project will be conducted in
collaboration with Kansas State University.