* 1601222
* The Virtual Industrial Process Simulator Laboratory Project
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2020
* Robert Collins, Augusta Technical College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 06/30/2020
* USD 198,865.00

In the world of today, business and industry are increasingly using computer
applications and simulations to analyze industrial processes and components that
improve process efficiency and safety and reduce operating cost. This Virtual
Industrial Process Simulator Lab project at Augusta Technical College in Georgia
is designed to enhance the education and instruction of engineering technology
students utilizing 3D Virtual Simulation so that graduates of the programs can
perform technical functions and assume greater responsibilities immediately upon
hire. Utilizing this emerging technology to model industrial processes in a
virtual instructional environment is unique to technical education. Students
will thus have the technical knowledge and skills to be highly qualified and
better prepared engineering technicians for industry and manufacturing as the
computer based virtual simulation technology helps students to learn to adapt
quickly to industrial process and equipment changes that meet the needs of
industry. The inclusion of virtual simulation instruction in the engineering
technology programs at Augusta Technical College will attract new students into
technical programs and will be utilized in local outreach efforts with high
school science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) programs to
increase enrollment. The college has a long history of increasing diversity in
engineering technology programs and will continue and expand that impact in this
project. A comprehensive evaluation is being developed to research and evaluate
the success of the project and its deliverables, as well as the sharing of best
practices. Project results will be disseminated widely so that other engineering
technology programs around the country can build on these efforts to graduate
technicians with the skills required in the jobs of today and
tomorrow.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The four objectives of the project are: (1)
increasing and deepening the technical knowledge and skill level of engineering
technology students through 3D Virtual Simulation instructional methods; (2)
developing curriculum to utilize 3D simulations effectively; (3) providing
professional development for engineering technology faculty so that they can
incorporate Virtual Simulation into their courses; and (4) increasing the number
of graduates who are better prepared for technical responsibilities and
functioning as engineering technicians in industry. The project will be
incorporated into the Mechanical Engineering Technology and Electrical and
Computer Engineering Technology programs at the college that are accredited by
the Engineering Technology Accreditation Commission of ABET. Through
collaborative efforts with industry partners, the engineering technology
programs have obtained simulation software, 3D modeling, and technical computer
support which has allowed the institution to implement a Virtual Simulation
Pilot Lab (VSPL). Although many suppliers have developed 3D virtual simulation
equipment models of industrial equipment, no single supplier has synchronized
these models into a single Computer Aided Design (CAD) program formatted to
replicate industrial processes and their components; so graduates must be
familiar with a range of CAD technologies to allow them to function quickly and
adapt as needed. The project will also provide comprehensive faculty
professional development to prepare faculty to use instructional methods not
found in other associate degree curriculums. Collaborative efforts with local
industries and software suppliers will result in long term technical support,
faculty training, and the provision for the latest technical advancements in
software to facilitate the means to bring 3D modeling and simulation to the
classroom. The college is one of only four colleges in Georgia to be a part of
the NSF Science Technology Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) Equity Pipeline
Project to increase diversity in the STEM workforce and has also been supported
through Predominately Black Institutions (PBI) Program at the Department of
Education to improve the educational outcomes of African American male students.
This project builds on those initiatives to increase advanced STEM opportunities
for a diverse group of graduates for technical positions.