* 1601780
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   Harnessing genomics to test the mechanisms causing adaptive phenotypic divergence along elevational gradients in a poison frog.
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2018
* W. Chris Funk, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 05/31/2018
* USD 19,618.00

This project investigates how environmental conditions along mountainsides leads
to genetic change and divergence among different frog populations. Identifying
the mechanisms by which populations genetically diverge, and eventually become
separate species, is important for understanding the origins of biological
diversity. Ecological differences along environmental gradients can drive
divergence among populations. This project will identify the genes responsible
for genetic divergence of trait values among populations of Anthony?s poison
arrow frog, Epipedobates anthonyi, which occurs along multiple mountainsides and
elevation gradients in Ecuador. The researchers will test for natural selection
on genes and relate that selection to environmental factors so as to determine
which are responsible for the observed divergence. The results will contribute
to our understanding of why tropical systems are so diverse and help predict
evolutionary responses to climate change. In addition, the project includes the
training of undergraduates, educational workshops, and K-12 outreach activities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project takes advantage of a unique study system to
investigate the drivers and mechanisms that promote population divergence in the
absence of geographic isolation. Populations of Epipedobates anthonyi show
phenotypic divergence along elevation gradients in putatively adaptive traits
including size, coloration, male advertisement calls, and thermal tolerance.
Despite this phenotypic divergence, analyses of neutral genetic variation
indicate that these populations are not isolated. Using genomic approaches, the
researchers will examine signatures of divergent selection across the genome,
correlate environmental variation with the observed divergence, and detect
genetic changes likely responsible for observed phenotypic variation across
elevation gradients. Tissue samples have been collected from 35 populations that
encompass the distribution of this species across four replicated elevational
gradients. This highly integrative project will provide an in-depth analysis of
the relative roles of adaptive genetic differentiation and phenotypic plasticity
on observed patterns of phenotypic divergence in natural populations.