* 1601628
* Collaborative Research:  A Global View of Topographically Bound Low Level Jets
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2021
* Scott Fulton, Clarkson University
* Standard Grant
* Varavut Limpasuvan
* 04/30/2021
* USD 326,601.00

Topographically bound low-level jets are strong, persistent winds in the lower
atmosphere associated with elevated terrain features such as mountain ranges and
plateaus. Examples include the persistent northerly and southerly flows on
opposite sides of the Rocky Mountains in North America and the Andes Mountains
in South America, and the easterly flow that surrounds Antarctica. The goal of
this project is to understand what causes these jets and to study their impacts
on climate. Previous work developed a two-dimensional theory which explains such
jets as a balanced dynamical response of the atmosphere in response to forcing
by solar heating and infrared radiative cooling of the elevated terrain.
Computed results using simplified terrain profiles showed qualitative agreement
with observed winds in two-dimensional cross sections through the Andes and
Antarctica. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will extend the theory to three
dimensions, taking into account the effects of the earth's spherical shape and
the full shape of the elevated terrain. Solutions of the resulting equations
will be computed using a novel numerical method which refines the grid where
needed to obtain accurate solutions with minimal computational work. Solutions
will be computed for jets associated with several regions of complex terrain
around the globe, such as Antarctica, the Tibetan Plateau, Greenland, and the
Rockies and Andes, and validated by comparison with observational
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Beyond developing our fundamental understanding of
atmospheric dynamics, this work has societal relevance due to the importance of
low-level jets for regional climate. For example, the Great Plains low-level jet
is responsible for a substantial portion of the moisture transport into the
eastern half United States which sustains agriculture, and the low-level jet off
the eastern coast of Africa is a major component of the Indian monsoon which
greatly affects many aspects of life in the Indian subcontinent. This project
will also contribute to developing the future scientific workforce by supporting
and training two graduate students in research, and training one undergraduate
student in computational mathematics and modern scientific programming. Finally,
the methods developed in this project will be made available to researchers in
atmospheric dynamics through software codes, so that they can be applied to a
wide array of scientific problems.