* 1601061
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   Hypoxia-induced trade-offs on zooplankton vertical distribution and community structure in freshwaters
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2018
* Cayelan Carey, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 05/31/2018
* USD 20,880.00

The overarching goal of this research project is to determine how altered
dissolved oxygen (DO) concentrations in the bottom waters of lakes and
reservoirs affect zooplankton behavior, abundances, and species composition, and
how these changes may have consequences for water quality and food webs.
Zooplankton play a critical role in freshwater ecosystems; they feed on
phytoplankton, the base of the food web, and are in turn consumed by fish.
Consequently, changes in zooplankton populations have the potential to
drastically alter water quality and food webs. Zooplankton in freshwater
ecosystems around the world exhibit diel vertical migration, in which they
migrate to the bottom waters of a lake or reservoir during the day to escape
visual predation by fish and damaging ultraviolet (UV) radiation. At night, many
zooplankton migrate to the water's surface to feed on phytoplankton when the
risk of predation and UV exposure is lower. However, human activities are
resulting in decreased DO concentrations in the bottom waters of waterbodies
globally. As a result of decreased DO, zooplankton may remain in the surface
waters during the day and no longer vertically migrate, resulting in decreased
abundance and changes in the species composition. This research will be
conducted in partnership with a local water utility, and all data and results
will be shared with managers to inform their water quality decisions. The
project will involve training of at least two undergraduate researchers in
freshwater science laboratory and field methods in an interdisciplinary setting.
In addition, results from this research will provide the basis for creating
interactive and hands-on educational activities for school children at a nature
center.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will integrate a unique whole-
ecosystem manipulation of bottom water (hypolimnetic) DO concentrations, a
cross-ecosystem survey of reservoirs on a hypolimnetic DO gradient, high-
frequency sonar to observe the diel vertical distribution of zooplankton, and
experimental analyses of zooplankton functional traits to examine how changes in
DO concentrations alter zooplankton species composition, abundance, and
behavior. Biweekly summer field surveys will be conducted across five reservoirs
that exhibit a range of hypolimnetic DO concentrations. One of the reservoirs
has a hypolimnetic oxygenation system that will be experimentally turned on and
off (thereby controlling DO concentrations at the whole-ecosystem scale) to
directly assess the effects of DO on zooplankton populations. Multiple diel
sampling campaigns will also be conducted that use sonar acoustic technology to
observe the vertical distribution of zooplankton in the water column. Taken
together, these integrated research approaches will mechanistically determine
the effects of changing DO concentrations on zooplankton communities and
resulting implications for water quality in lakes and reservoirs.