* 1601485
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Linking genes to cues: How molecular mechanisms explain individual variation of adaptive plasticity to an environmental cue
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2016,04/30/2017
* Eric Riddell, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 04/30/2017
* USD 15,000.00

This research will investigate how salamanders respond to climate change by
acclimating to new environments. The capacity to adjust physiological traits may
be especially important for amphibians because they are one of the most
threatened groups of animals on the planet. Amphibians use both terrestrial and
aquatic environments and thus are particularly sensitive to environmental
degradation due to climate change. Unfortunately, despite increased interest in
response to climate change, we know very little about how salamander populations
will fare under changing conditions. The goal of this project is to identify
genes that may contribute to a salamander's ability to accommodate environmental
change. This study will help determine if salamander populations can evolve an
increased capacity to deal with variable environments. The study will also
provide underrepresented college students the opportunity to develop
independent, inquiry-based projects in amphibian biology.

In response to climate change, organisms must adapt, acclimate, migrate, or
potentially face extinction. Adaptation is a heritable evolutionary change of a
population over generations. Acclimation is change that happens within the
lifetime of an individual animal. If individuals vary in their capacity to
acclimate, increased acclimation ability might itself evolve due to natural
selection creating an adaptation of acclimation. The study will determine the
capacity of individual Southern grey-cheeked salamander (Plethodon metcalfi) to
adjust rates of water loss in response to temperature and humidity. Using a
time-course experimental design, the study will identify differences in gene
expression between individuals that acclimate and individuals that do not
acclimate and identify the genes that the salamanders use to reduce rates of
water loss as temperature changes. Upon identifying these genes, the study will
link the activity of those genes to specific physiological responses that alter
water loss. The result will be an increased understanding of the genetic basis
of acclimation and adaptation to environmental cues.