* 1601095
* Dissertation research:   Are functional traits adaptive? Dissecting the evolutionary dynamics of plant functional traits
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2018
* Kent Holsinger, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 05/31/2018
* USD 17,928.00

One way to measure how a plant's form influences how it works is to measure the
relationship between specific aspects of the plant's form and its performance.
Although consistent tradeoffs among plant traits and consistent relationships
between those traits and the environment are found among all plants, we do not
know the form of those trade-offs and relationships for smaller groups in
specific locations. This project will use the plant genus Protea to investigate
functional traits in an environmentally diverse region of the world. The project
will also determine the genetic bases for those trade-offs and relationships.
This project will connect regional relationships between traits and the
environment with experimental manipulations and advanced genetic techniques. It
will contribute to the fields of ecology, phylogenetics, and evolution, and
provide a new context and potentially new directions to the study of plant
functional traits. Additionally, the project includes the training of graduate
and undergraduate students, the mentoring of middle and high school students,
and the development of online educational materials.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although trait-based ecology is a huge field of study,
little attention has been paid to how these ecologically important traits have
evolved or to the genetic architecture underlying them. This research will
integrate genetic analyses with field and greenhouse observations to explore the
role of environmental adaptation in shaping plant functional traits. This
project will use advanced techniques to examine DNA differences among
individuals and to unravel the genetics of individual differences in a hybrid
zone between two different Protea species. A manipulative dry-down experiment
based on intensive, microgeographic field sampling and collection of seeds is
being performed to determine the scale of trait-environment patterns and to
identify mechanisms underlying niche filtering in the hybrid zone. Single
nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) data derived from restriction-site associated DNA
sequencing (RADseq) will be used for association mapping of ecologically
important traits. Maternal hybridity from offspring arrays will be estimated to
refine analyses of trait-environment relationships along the cline from which
the material is collected.