* 1601734
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   Neuromolecular Basis of Cooperative Behavior
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2017
* Johann 'Hans' Hofmann, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 07/31/2017
* USD 20,150.00

Cooperative behavior, where individuals act together for a shared benefit, is
common across the animal kingdom. Research on cooperation has provided
compelling explanations as to why and how cooperation evolved; for example, why
vampire bats regurgitate food to feed hungry roost-mates, or why marmots risk
survival to warn neighbors about predators. Despite this ultimate understanding
of cooperation, almost nothing is known about the physiological mechanisms
influencing cooperative behavior, such as which genes and brain regions are
involved. Furthermore, the extent to which the mechanisms underlying cooperation
are similar across species is unknown. This research will provide novel insights
into the mechanisms underlying cooperative behavior and how these mechanisms
evolve. Given that humans exhibit some of the most complex forms of cooperative
behavior of any species, insight into the causes and origins of cooperation will
offer insight into the human condition. Why and how animals cooperate is of
interest to a broad audience. As such, the results of the work will be
communicated through several public outreach programs, including an internship
program for high school students. In addition, the collaborative nature of this
research provides unique educational opportunities to students in the US and to
international students who otherwise would not be exposed to integrative and
genomic approaches in brain and behavior research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although cooperative behavior is widespread in animals,
and its function and evolution are well understood, the neuromolecular
underpinnings of cooperation have not been examined in any detail. Using brain
region specific transcriptomic analyses, the proposed research addresses two
fundamental questions: (1) the extent to which patterns of gene expression, or
gene modules, modulate individual variation in cooperative behavior, and (2) the
degree of molecular convergence for shared traits across species. The well-
studied cleaner-client mutualism in fishes, where 'cleaner' fish service
'client' fish by removing ectoparasites and dead tissue their mouths, will be
used to identify the neuromolecular correlates of cooperative behavior.
Specifically, to identify gene modules associated with cooperation, and its
evolution, the transcriptomes from two brain regions from wild-caught cleaner
wrasses (from species pairs of cleaners and non-cleaners, where cooperation has
evolved independently) will be analyzed: the amygdala for its role in emotional
processing and the hippocampus for its role in social cognition. The results of
this innovative study will provide for the first time insights into the
neuromolecular basis of cooperation. Furthermore, the proposed work will inform
our understanding of behavioral evolution by integrating both ultimate and
proximate mechanisms, and will provide insight into whether neuromolecular
mechanisms constrain or facilitate the evolution of behavioral phenotypes.