* 1601400
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The Role of Early Environment in the Development of a Lifelong Mate Choice Signal: Melanin- Based Color in Barn Swallows
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2018
* Rebecca Safran, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 04/30/2018
* USD 19,901.00

Early life is a critical stage during which the environment experienced can have
important life-long effects for an individual. Understanding how the interaction
between an individual's genes and the environment during early development
create the variation seen in nature is an important question in Biology. This
research will leverage a well-established study system for evolutionary and
behavioral research to determine how the developmental environment shapes the
expression of a trait that is critical to reproductive success later in life.
Specifically, this study will manipulate nest parasites, an important component
of the environment, during early development to determine how parasite
infections and the immune responses they generate interact with the genes that
underlie plumage color in birds. Plumage color, here a brownish-red melanin
coloration, is an important signal used in communication between the sexes and
it is impacted by early life conditions, and therefore the reproductive success
of an individual. Genes expressed in tissues where feathers are grown will be
measured to allow for the identification of specific genes whose expression is
influenced by environmental conditions. Results from this work will be broadly
informative as melanin is a common pigment underlying appearance and coloration
in various groups of animals. However, it is not well understood how the
environment interacts with genes to influence the development of melanin
coloration. Broader impacts include training undergraduates and middle-school
teachers in scientific research, and the creation of lesson plans that will be
implemented in public middle schools and shared broadly with teachers at
science-teaching workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Female preferences for male
coloration are thought to be adaptive because of the potential information
advertised by these male traits. Melanin-based color traits are traditionally
thought to be under strict genetic control. However, condition-dependence for
some melanin traits may occur during early development. If so, trait variation
may provide information about an individual's developmental history. Previous
work has shown that variation in melanin-based color in barn swallows is due
almost entirely (70%) to differences in early environment, and that plumage
color provides information about ectoparasite loads in a male's territory. Mites
affect nestling survival, growth, immunity, and melanin-based plumage color.
This project will identify gene expression differences associated with color
variation by cross-fostering eggs and manipulating mites to tease apart the
roles of genes and environmental quality. Developing feathers will be collected
and RNA expression will be quantified to understand how early environment
interacts with genes in the melanin pathway to influence the life-long
expression of a melanin-based signal. The research will have important
implications for understanding the gene by environment interactions during the
early developmental period for melanin-based ornamental traits, and thus,
information that females gain by using these traits. Results from this work will
provide a clearer picture of how melanin-based traits interact with the
environment during development at many levels: from the detailed gene
expression, to lifelong trait expression, to variation within a population and
how this relates to the parasite community, and finally to divergent
morphological traits across populations that are involved in reproductive
isolation.