* 1601487
* Comprehensive Integration of Advanced Manufacturing Competencies throughout an Associates Degree and a Stackable Certificate Curricula
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2020
* Eric Constans, Rowan College of Burlington County
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 08/31/2020
* USD 768,272.00

Rowan College at Burlington County, in partnership with Rowan University, is
conducting the project entitled "Comprehensive Integration of Advanced
Manufacturing Competencies throughout an Associates Degree and a Stackable
Certificate Curricula." The motivating rationale for this project stems from
direct observations and experiences supporting the fact that there is a
tremendous regional and national need for graduates to possess the skills and
competencies valued by industry. This project leverages past NSF-funded work as
well as new workforce development initiatives to emphasize the critical skills
and competencies needed to support advanced manufacturing curricula and
industry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this project are to strengthen and
expand an Engineering Technology program and to serve as a conduit for the
creation of programs and educational pathways that address unmet training needs
and the needs of emergent high growth industries, both in the region and
nationally. These goals will be accomplished by highlighting technical and non-
technical skills across the curriculum, by developing an applications library
that will serve as a curriculum resource to incorporate direct examples of
relevant principles, by creating and strengthening industrial advisory
committees, and by creating new advanced manufacturing educational pathways
including degree and certificate programs, and facilities. This project involves
the close collaboration between educational, industrial, and professional
partners to develop flexible educational pathways, a comprehensive and strategic
regional network, and a clearinghouse of accessible and effective resources, all
for the purpose of preparing students to meet the needs of advanced
manufacturing employers.