* 1601172
* CollaborATE
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2019
* Alan Zube, College of Lake County
* Standard Grant
* Heather Watson
* 09/30/2019
* USD 883,093.00

The goal of the CollaborATE project is to develop an Associate's Degree in
Mechatronics incorporating pathways from local high schools into the degree
offering at the College of Lake County, Florida State College at Jacksonville,
and Anne Arundel Community College. The project will design and develop low-cost
laboratory trainers and offer professional development opportunities for high
school faculty to adopt components of the curriculum at their respective high
schools. The curriculum will be aligned to specific skills needed in the
industry and shared and disseminated to high schools and colleges across the
nation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new Associate's degree is laddered from a one-
year Mechatronics certificate that was created from a Department of Labor
TAACCCT (Round I) grant project that included the partnering entities. The
curriculum will be based on constructivist learning theory incorporating
inductive, project based instruction. It will be modularized for flexible
delivery and focused on system level troubleshooting. In addition, low-cost,
hands-on, easily replicable and buildable mechatronics trainers will provide the
local high schools with an affordable tool to teach the courses. During the
faculty professional development aspect of the project, CollaborATE will focus
on the integration of the low-cost trainers with systems-level, inductive
teaching methodology. To prepare students for high-skilled, high-wage, entry
level positions in the mechatronics industry, the Florida Advanced Technological
Center will provide expertise to align the degree content with national and
international certifications such as those from Siemens Level 2, the Packaging
Machinery Manufacturers Institute, and the National Institute for Metalworking
Skills.