* 1601707
* Troubleshooting and Safety Simulator for Wind Turbine Technician Education
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2021
* Chenn Zhou, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 06/30/2021
* USD 869,180.00

This project will address two critical national issues in community college wind
energy technical education: 1) a lack of qualified entry-level technicians in
the growing wind energy industry; and 2) the limited ability of students to
transfer learned concepts from the classroom to actual applications. The U.S.
Department of Energy's Wind Vision report details a plan for 35% of the nation's
electrical capacity to come from wind by 2050, which will require over 3,000 new
wind technicians each year for the next 15 years. Moreover, many new wind
turbine technicians lack the skills of working safely and effective
troubleshooting due to ineffective, outdated, teaching materials. Through a
partnership of community colleges, universities and industry, teaching practices
in community college wind energy programs will be transformed using engaging,
dynamic content and realistic simulations. This project will have direct
positive impact on over 500 community college students. Broader impacts will
include: 1) providing a better-prepared skilled and diverse workforce to meet
the demand of the wind energy industry; 2) improving the effectiveness of
technology education; 3) providing a model for workforce development in other
fields, and 4) inspiring K-12 students in STEM education.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project team will develop a web-based interactive 3D
simulator incorporating numerous scenarios and education modules based on real
world situations. The simulator will be designed to meet specific learning
objectives with activities to facilitate learning. It will be used to teach
troubleshooting and safety strategies that enable students to solve problems in
a safe, cost-effective and timely context. These learning modules will include
open-ended questions for students to learn critical thinking and problem solving
skills. The simulator will be used in existing community college courses. The
effectiveness of the simulator and derivative formats for improving the learning
outcomes will be continuously assessed, and such formative assessment throughout
the project will enable cyclical improvements. The project will contribute to
the body of knowledge on the effectiveness, perceptions, and attitudes regarding
web-based interactive 3D simulators for technical education and also measure the
learning that comes from the different formats (web-based interactive 3D
simulator, videos, and text-based materials). An expected outcome of this
project is that computer-based simulators will be increasingly used in the
future for transferring learned concepts to practical applications. The
simulator will be taught and assessed in four community colleges. The project
outcomes can be used by community colleges all over the nation.