* 1601389
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Speciation, niche divergence, and character displacement at multiple scales in Lasiopogon robber flies (Diptera: Asilidae)
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2018
* Tristan McKnight, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 05/31/2018
* USD 20,040.00

How are distinct niches in communities filled when interactions among species
may constrain potential overlap? Robber flies in the genus Lasiopogon are a
widespread group of insect predators that hunt in many environments, such as
dunes, beaches, trails, streamsides, and sagebrush landscapes. Specializations
such as perching habits or seasonal emergence times provide a way for species
with overlapping ranges to reduce competition. The goal of this project is to
compare diversification patterns and similarities in geographic range, niche,
and morphology throughout the 60 species of North American Lasiopogon to uncover
not just when and where a given species split, but how regional communities
(i.e., who it evolved with) influenced this diversification. Understanding the
processes of adaptation at regional and local scales will help show how
environmental cues and interactions among species maintain and promote
biodiversity, providing lessons about potential responses of species to shifting
environments. This research will promote taxonomic expertise and training in a
diverse but understudied group of insects (robber flies). Furthermore, since
many Lasiopogon species have highly specialized habitat requirements, this work
will provide data for studying community changes precipitated by urban spread,
manmade irrigation, and climate change. An undergraduate student will be trained
in Asilidae taxonomic and biodiversity research, and distributional and
ecological information&amp;#8232;from this study will be shared on general and
taxon-specific websites. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Species niches are a
distillation of their interactions with other members of the community and their
phylogenetic history. This research will estimate evolutionary relationships
among North American Lasiopogon from sequencing multiple loci. Microniche
characteristics and ecological niche models will be estimated from museum
specimens and samples by the PIs. Phylogenetic comparative methods will then be
used to examine the effects of ecological specialization at different spatial
scales and morphological character displacement on diversification and community
assembly. This study design will reveal whether ecological and morphological
differences accumulated during or after species divergence, and which axes of
variation (coarse- or fine-scaled ecology, morphology, phenology) have been more
influential in fueling character displacement and competitive specialization.