* 1601641
* Dissertation Research: Ecological genomics of local adaptation in a perennial plant species
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2018
* Kenneth Olsen, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 05/31/2018
* USD 19,825.00

This research will contribute to a growing body of work concerned with the
genetic basis of adaptation. Adaptation to local environments is important for
persistence under a changing climate; however, remarkably little is known about
the genetic mechanisms by which it occurs. This work will examine the genetic
underpinnings of local adaptation in a perennial plant species with two well-
studied, putatively adaptive genes that are associated with chemical defense
against herbivores. The researchers focus on white clover, an important grazing
crop. The research promotes collaborations between three U.S. research
institutions and a New Zealand agricultural research institute. It also builds
upon the previously established Clover Project, which has provided instructional
materials to &gt; 70 teachers and 6000+ students nationwide. This project helps
train an underrepresented minority student and will provide independent,
complementary projects for 6+ undergraduate students. Because the focal plant
species is an important agricultural crop worldwide, the development of genetic
resources will be useful for breeders. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will
examine the genetic underpinnings of local adaptation in white clover (Trifolium
repens L.). For two years, reproductive output will be measured for cloned
plants grown in reciprocal common gardens across three climatically distinct
sites. QTL mapping of fitness measurements will characterize the genetic
architecture of local adaptation. Research will determine the distribution of
effect sizes of locally adaptive genes and the extent that adaptation is caused
by either conditionally neutral alleles or ones that show antagonistic
pleiotropy. Overall the work will provide a genome-wide assessment of the
importance of cyanogenesis.