* 1602560
* Collaborative Research: GEM--Global Propagation Characteristics of Electromagnetic Ion Cyclotron Waves
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Hyomin Kim, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Chia-Lin Huang
* 07/31/2022
* USD 63,163.00

The focus of project is to investigate the creation, propagation, and
dissipation electromagnetic ion cyclotron waves (EMIC) in the near-Earth space
environment. EMIC waves are created by the interaction of plasma with the
Earth's magnetic field. These waves play an important role in both the
energization and loss of particles in the Van Allen radiation belts. Since the
radiation belts overlap the region where satellites operate understanding the
factors that can change their intensity is an important aspect of predicting
space weather impacts. This project will use a combination of observations and
numerical modeling to address EMIC wave dynamics. Most previous modeling in this
area has used ray-tracing methods. This project takes the novel approach of
using a full wave model to simulate the wave dynamics. The project will support
the efforts of young female scientist who is serving as the PI. It will also
provide support to PhD graduate student. The investigators will also plan to
provide opportunities for undergraduates to participate in the research through
partnership with National Undergraduate Fellowship Program in Plasma Physics and
Fusion Energy Sciences program.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;More specifically this
project addresses the following questions; (a) How do equatorially generated
EMIC waves reach the ground?; (b) How is EMIC wave propagation affected by
geomagnetic activity?; and (c) What are the relative contributions of
magnetospheric/ionospheric parameters and wave normal angle to EMIC wave
propagation from the magnetosphere to the ionosphere? To achieve this goal, the
investigators plan to perform full-wave simulations employing recently developed
2D full-wave code with realistic plasma parameters. We will also analyze recent
observations of these waves by Van Allen Probes, THEMIS and GOES satellites and
compare them with observations from the ground magnetometer network.