* 1602119
* PFI:AIR - TT:  Optimal adaptive charging system
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2016,11/30/2017
* Steven Low, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 11/30/2017
* USD 212,000.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project develops software for adaptive
electric vehicle (EV) charging networks and transitions it to the marketplace.
We are at the cusp of a historic transformation of our energy system into a more
sustainable form in the coming decades. Electrification of our transportation
system will be an important component because, today, vehicles consume more than
a quarter of our energy and emit more than a quarter of our energy-related
carbon dioxide (CO2). Electrification will not only greatly reduce CO2 emission,
but EVs can also be critical resources to help integrate renewable sources, such
as wind and solar power, into our electric grid. One of the key enablers to mass
EV adoption is the availability of smart charging networks.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will design a set of novel and sophisticated
algorithms that optimize a network of EV chargers, implement them in software,
and pilot them in a Caltech garage where the researchers have already installed
a network of programmable EV chargers. It will serve as a prototype that
validates the technology and business potential of next-generation adaptive
charging network (ACN). Compared with state of the art in the EV charging
industry, ACN will enable massive deployment of smart chargers and provide the
same charging capacity at a fraction of required infrastructure
costs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the following technology gaps
as it translates from research discovery toward commercial application. At many
workplaces in top EV cities in the US, there is a severe shortage of chargers
relative to EVs, e.g., there is a charger for every 2-5 EVs. In the future, this
ratio should be closer to 1:1. The bottleneck to a large-scale charging facility
is, however, not the cost of electricity or chargers, but the limited capacity
of electricity distribution system, as well as, in city centers, the real
estate. The leading chargers in the current marketplace charge at their peak
rates whenever EVs are plugged in. They cannot be deployed at scale without a
prohibitively expensive upgrade of the electricity distribution system. The
technologies to be developed in this project will optimally schedule the
charging process of a network of adaptive chargers to satisfy energy
requirements of all EVs within their deadlines without exceeding the capacity of
the electricity distribution system whenever possible, and optimally and fairly
allocate the available capacity among competing EVs otherwise. The ACN therefore
maximally utilizes the most expensive resources in a charging ecosystem to
provide a target charging capacity at a much lower infrastructure cost, creating
a compelling value proposition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will apply
tools from optimization theory, control and dynamical systems, and algorithm
design. The focus is to develop optimization software that will be ready for
commercialization at the end of the project. The project will involve
undergraduate and graduate students. In addition to research and software
development, the project participants will be exposed to entrepreneurship and
technology transfer.