* 1602500
* Redefining Environmental Engineering and Science in the 21st Century
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2016,01/31/2018
* Amy Childress, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 01/31/2018
* USD 49,500.00

1602500&lt;br/&gt;Characklis&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The discipline of
Environmental Engineering and Science has deep roots, with sanitary engineering
programs proliferating throughout the first half of the 1900's and progressively
transitioning to present-day water, wastewater, solid waste and air programs in
the 1960's and 70's. Much of this progression resulted from the nation's first
set of comprehensive environmental regulatory initiatives, especially the Clean
Air Act (1970), Clean Water Act (1972), Safe Drinking Water Act (1974) and the
Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability ("Superfund")
Act (1980), as well as their subsequent amendments. These Acts funded both
research and infrastructure investments that transformed the treatment and
provision of water and wastewater, while also contributing to dramatic
improvements in the quality of the nation's air and water. There has been rapid
expansion in interest sustainability (among others) and a growing number of
faculty have modified their research and teaching interests to encompass these
topics, but thus far these efforts have largely been at the individual
level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To date, there have been few environmental
engineering and science community-wide initiatives to consider the implications
of this changing landscape on the discipline's research agenda, curricula
(undergraduate and graduate), and academic identity. Accompanying these changes
has been an explosion of student interest and activity in international (mostly
developing world) environmental challenges, but research support in this area
remains modest. As a result, community discussion is urgently needed to
proactively define the scope and direction of our discipline in this changing
landscape. This discussion should address future research and teaching agendas,
an increased alignment between research and current funding mechanisms, and
expansion into new funding areas. Each of these topics is important for
maintaining the future vitality of our discipline as we seek to build a strong
foundation that will allow us to train students, impact public policy and
provide innovative solutions to the world's most vexing environmental
challenges. The PIs propose to organize and host two workshops that will
facilitate a national conversation intended to better define the Environmental
Engineering and Science discipline for the 21st century. Currently we envision
workshops in the Los Angeles and Washington, DC areas, to be held in January and
May 2016. These workshops will include a group of invited speakers who will give
brief presentations designed to provoke discussion on issues related to frontier
areas of research, funding trends, adaptation of curricula, future workforce
needs, and current/future regulatory initiatives. The goal is to solicit input
from the broader community and then synthesize the discussions to develop
suggestions for how individuals, academic units (Departments, Schools) and our
professional organization, the Association of Environmental Engineering and
Science Professors (AEESP), can best implement change.