* 1602675
* Quantifying the Effects of Flyby Encounters on Galaxy Assembly and Developing the Computational Skillset of Incoming Graduate Students
* MPS,AST
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2019
* Julie Dumas, Dumas                   Julie
* Fellowship Award
* Harshal Gupta
* 09/30/2019
* USD 289,000.00

Julie Dumas is awarded an NSF Astronomy and Astrophysics Postdoctoral Fellowship
to carry out a program of research and education at Vanderbilt University. Dumas
will undertake computational simulations of "flyby encounters" between galaxies,
which are interactions that affect galaxies as they move past each other. Unlike
direct mergers in which two galaxies combine to form one galaxy, flyby
encounters are poorly understood, and are also calculated to be surprisingly
frequent. A more detailed understanding of flyby encounters is thus essential to
advancing our understanding of how galaxies are assembled. Dumas will also
develop a series of workshops for the participants of a program that serves
underrepresented minority students, which will help the students acquire and
strengthen the skills needed to undertake challenging computational research in
graduate school.

Dumas will construct a suite of collisionless and hydrodynamic simulations to
quantify the perturbation induced by flyby encounters as a function of mass
ratio, impact parameter, and relative velocity, which would allow her to track
bulk changes in galaxy structure, kinematics, and morphology over a broad flyby
interaction space. The proposed studies would allow Dumas to identify the flybys
that are the most important drivers of galaxy evolution. The educational
component of Dumas' work will consist of developing an intensive Computational
Bootcamp workshop series for incoming graduate students within the Fisk-
Vanderbilt Bridge program. The Bootcamp will cover a variety of topics on basic
programming, and will be geared toward strengthening the computational skillset
and understanding of the students to better prepare them for advanced
computational research.