* 1602862
* GEM: Assessing the Relative Importance of Convection and Induced Electric Fields for Particle Transport and Energization in the Inner Magnetosphere
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2022
* James Roeder, Aerospace Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Chia-Lin Huang
* 07/31/2022
* USD 342,000.00

This project investigates the importance of convection and induction electric
fields in the magnetosphere, and their relative roles in the dynamics of the
ring current and the plasmasphere. Convection electric fields are generated by
the interaction between the solar wind and the Earth's magnetosphere. They are
directed approximately from dawn to dusk across the magnetotail and drive plasma
sheet ions and electrons from the magnetotail towards the inner magnetosphere.
Along the way, convection electric fields play an important role in energizing
these plasma sheet particles to high energies and in delivering them to build
the storm-time ring current, a torus of high-energy ions and electrons
surrounding the Earth. Convection electric fields also play an important role in
the location of plasma boundaries, such as the plasmapause. The plasmapause is
the steep outer boundary of the plasmasphere, a dense torus formed by the
extension of cold ionospheric plasma into the inner magnetosphere. This torus
expands outward to occupy the region where the corotation electric field (a
radial electric field produced by the movement of magnetic field lines in
response to Earth's rotation) dominates over the convection electric field. In
disturbed times, the convection electric field strengthens with respect to the
essentially unchanging corotation field, diminishing the region where the
corotation field dominates. As a result, the outer regions of the plasmasphere
are stripped away and convected to the dayside magnetopause where the plasma is
lost. However, the electric field is more complicated than the superposition of
these two large-scale electric fields. Changing magnetic fields produce electric
fields through induction. During magnetic substorms, explosive reconfigurations
of the magnetotail fields produce significant "induction" electric fields that
introduce smaller scale temporal and spatial variability into the magnetospheric
electric field. The primary goal of this proposal is to quantify the relative
contributions to inner magnetosphere dynamics of convection and induction
electric fields. A more complete understanding of all components of the
magnetospheric electric field is important for developing improved space weather
forecast models of value to society. This project provides support for the
research career of a productive female scientist, and a research experience for
an undergraduate intern as well as yearly outreach activities aimed at K-12
students, thus contributing to the future scientific workforce and science
literacy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary tool for this investigation is a
magnetically and electrically self-consistent model of the inner magnetosphere,
the Rice Convection Model-Equilibrium (RCM-E). For storm events, measurements of
the electric fields in the inner magnetosphere and ionosphere will be compared
with the modeled RCM-E electric fields. Initially storms will be simulated with
no explicit substorm magnetic field changes. The RCM-E magnetic field, energetic
ion fluxes, electron densities, and precipitating electron fluxes will be
compared with in-situ measurements by magnetospheric and ionospheric satellites.
Finally, results of RCM-E geomagnetic storm simulations that incorporate the
effects of substorm reconfigurations of the magnetotail fields will be compared
with data to determine the role and importance of induced electric fields.