* 1602091
* Exploring Ionic Liquids in Sample Preparation and Multidimensional Chromatographic Separations
* MPS,CHE
* 10/01/2015,06/30/2018
* Jared Anderson, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 06/30/2018
* USD 289,660.00

Professor Jared L. Anderson of the University of Toledo is supported by the
Chemical Measurement and Imaging (CMI) Program in the Division of Chemistry to
explore the application of ionic liquids as separation media in chromatography
and microextractions. The project will provide new knowledge on how ionic
liquids effect the differential extraction of analytes and their separation and
analysis by various chromatographic techniques, and will expand the scope of
applicability of ionic liquids in the analysis of real chemical and biological
samples. A major impact across fields other than analytical chemistry is in the
development of techniques for the analysis of complex fluids such as oils and
fuels derived from biomass. Professor Anderson and his research team will
conduct three separate initiatives under the umbrella of ionic liquids in
separation science. Magnetic ionic liquids will be studied in the selective
extraction and long term storage of deoxyribonucleic acid; polymeric ionic
liquids, incorporating single-walled carbon nanotubes, will be developed and
used as sorbent coatings for solid-phase microextraction; and ionic liquids will
be developed and used as selective stationary phases for multidimensional gas
chromatography. In the course of conducting this research, graduate and
undergraduate students will acquire valuable skills in separation science and
chromatography, and Facebook-based social networking outreach programs will be
developed to present scientific concepts to young children and the general
public.