* 1602198
* SCH: EXP: Collaborative Research: Group-Specific Learning to Personalize Evidence-Based Medicine
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Pedro Caraballo, Mayo Clinic Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2021
* USD 217,665.00

Patient care is increasingly guided by evidence based practice guidelines, which
are defined as "systematically developed statements to assist practitioner and
patient decisions about appropriate health care for specific clinical
circumstances." These guidelines are viewed as the key to improving patient care
and reducing costs, but current guidelines tend to be specific to individual
diseases, and rarely consider all of the relevant details of a patient's
condition, such as age, gender, and ethnic background, as well as other diseases
from which patients suffer. By addressing the challenge of personalized evidence
based medicine, the research in this project will positively impact patients
suffering from multiple chronic conditions, which is becoming the norm in the
aging US population. To that end, this project will develop new clinical
modeling techniques that can use the data available in electronic health records
(EHRs) to improve the personalization of these guidelines. More specifically,
the ultimate goal of this project is to generate more personalized guidelines
that can be implemented in clinical decision support systems and used by
physicians and others for the comprehensive treatment of patients with multiple
chronic conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address the challenge of
personalized care guidelines to handle multiple chronic conditions, this project
develops a modeling framework, Group-Specific Learning (GSL), with the ability
to enhance clinical modeling by making models increasingly personalized without
rendering them excessively specific. In particular, the GSL modeling paradigm is
applied to enhance four modeling techniques commonly used in health sciences
research: survival analysis, causal analysis via propensity scoring, competing
risk models and multi-state models. This work focuses on type-II diabetes
mellitus (T2DM), its precursor, pre-diabetes, its comorbidities (hypertension,
obesity, hyperlipidemia), and its consequences (chronic kidney disease, renal
failure and the various cardiac and vascular complications). Diabetes has a
number of interrelated comorbidities and severe complications, but evidence-
based guidelines for the treatment of these conditions treat these conditions in
isolation. To address this limitation, this project develops a suite of
analytics techniques that can take the substantial heterogeneity that exists in
the diabetic population into account in order to measure the effect of existing
evidence-based guideline elements (interventions) in terms of risk of
progression to diabetic complications. These guideline elements can then be
compiled into guidelines, thus allowing for the systemic and comprehensive
treatment of the population with heterogeneity.