* 1602743
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Cultural Capital and Students' Experiences in College:  The Role of Parents in Facilitating Student Success
* SBE,SES
* 06/15/2016,11/30/2017
* Josipa Roksa, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Toby Parcel
* 11/30/2017
* USD 11,970.00

SES-1602743 Josipa Roksa Denise T Deutschlander University of Virginia

College is popularly considered a path to upward mobility. Often missing from
this discourse is the recognition that even when students from socioeconomically
disadvantaged families gain access to higher education they do not always
graduate, and they are much less likely to graduate than their more advantaged
peers. Prior research indicates that academic preparation and financial
supports, while important, do not fully explain the social class gap in college
completion. To understand social class inequality, sociologists have
increasingly turned attention to the knowledge and practices that facilitate
successful interaction with social institutions, such as schools. To date, most
of this research has focused on K-12 education or the transition into college.
Few studies examine students' experiences in college. Moreover, while parents
are central to research on social class inequality in K-12 education and college
entry, they are rarely considered after students enter college. The image of the
helicopter parent, common in the popular discourse, does not depict the
experience of less advantaged parents, who may struggle to support their
children during college. This project investigates how parents from
disadvantaged backgrounds can support their children on the path to college
success.

Through longitudinal, qualitative interviews, part one of this project explores
how students and parents develop expectations about college experiences and how
those change between high school and college. A goal of this portion of the
project is to understand how parents support their children through college and
whether and how their behaviors change over time. Part two implements and
evaluates (through a randomized controlled trial) an intervention to help
parents encourage their children to engage with faculty and other institutional
resources. Surveys administered to students in both treatment and control
conditions will illuminate the extent to which a lack of information and a lack
of entitlement in seeking support and resources contribute to the challenges
encountered by less advantaged students. The longitudinal interviews included in
part one will also help explore whether parents change their behavior in
response to the educational intervention. This research aims to illuminate
specific practices of low-income families and student experiences during college
that facilitate student success. Therefore, it may spur higher education
practitioners to change the methods they use to engage parents and develop
infrastructure that will more effectively support student success. Finally, the
theoretical insights gained through this project will contribute to broader
sociological understanding of how educational institutions may contribute to
inequality through implicit barriers. By drawing attention to these barriers,
this research can contribute to the broader societal goal, and expectation, that
education provides equal opportunities as well as serves as a mechanism for
upward mobility.