* 1602816
* GEM: Construction of a Storm-Time Plasma Sheet Model Including Effects of Bubble Injections
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Frank Toffoletto, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 08/31/2021
* USD 269,454.00

Plasma transport from the outer magnetosphere towards the Earth was thought to
be dominated by large-scale convective flows. However, satellite observations
have given a new view in which an estimated 60%-100% of the Earthward transport
of plasma mass and energy through the magnetosphere is in the form of flow
bursts (short-lived flows with velocities exceeding 400 km/s) and bursty bulk
flows (longer duration flows containing flow bursts). These bursty bulk flows
(BBFs) are associated with plasma-sheet bubbles (regions of closed magnetic flux
with lower entropy than their surroundings). The lower entropy makes it possible
for them to be more easily injected into the inner magnetosphere and thus, the
particles they contain may be important seed and source populations for the ring
current and radiation belts. This developing view of the plasma sheet with
bubble structures and bursts of Earthward flow is far different than the
relatively smooth plasma distributions and large-scale flows in plasma sheet
models that are in common usage. The goal of this project is to construct the
first empirical plasma-sheet model that explicitly includes the climatology of
bubble/BBF injections during geomagnetic storms. The new model will be made
freely available and thus serve as a valuable resource for other groups engaged
in magnetospheric research. Using this new model in a series of simulations, the
research team will address questions that are aimed at enhancing understanding
about the effects of the bubbles in providing a source population for the high-
energy radiation in the inner magnetosphere. The project will provide support
for the professional development of an early-career researcher, training for
graduate students, and a research experience for high school students, thus
contributing to building the future scientific workforce.

The proposers take an interesting approach to the construction of the plasma
sheet model. Instead of using observations to build an empirical model, the
research team will obtain the statistical features of the plasma and electric
field distributions in the near-Earth plasma sheet using systematic data-
constrained computer simulations. The simulations will be optimized to match
observed geomagnetic indices, statistical properties of bubbles/BBFs and the
background plasma distribution. The newly constructed model will contain the
full statistical information on both the background distribution and the meso-
scale intermittent bubble injections. The proposal team will use the model to
explore: (1) how bubble/BBF injections modulate the background distribution of
plasma and electric field in the near-Earth plasma sheet during different phases
of geomagnetic storms, and (2) how the seed and source populations for the
radiation belt electrons are transported to and distributed along geosynchronous
orbit through bubble/BBF injections.