* 1602593
* Characterizing the Evolutionary Behavior of Bacteria in the Presence of Iron Nanoparticles.
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Joseph Graves, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 08/31/2019
* USD 383,216.00

Graves&lt;br/&gt;1602593&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The spread of multidrug resistant
bacteria is now a crucial concern for modern society. For example in 2012,
methicillin resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) killed more people in the USA
than AIDS, hepatitis B, and tuberculosis combined. To address this concern there
is a need for novel antimicrobial treatments. One of the most promising of these
is the use of metallic/metallic oxide nanoparticles. However, many researchers
in this field have not considered the possibility that bacteria can evolve
resistance to metals and metallic oxides (silver, copper, iron) as quickly as
they did to traditional antibiotics. This research project will specifically
study the methodology, speed, and mechanism by which bacterium can evolve
resistance to iron/iron oxide nanoparticles. To examine how resistance to iron
toxicity may arise in bacteria, the PI proposes to utilize a series of
laboratory experiments with genomic resequencing. This knowledge will provide
science-based data for more appropriate use of these antimicrobials so that the
development of resistance is avoided or minimized. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
examine how bacteria may evolve resistance to iron/iron oxide nanoparticles the
PI will use laboratory experiments to produce iron resistant strains of E. coli
K-12 MG1655 via exposure to ?Ã—-Fe2O3 (maghemite) and Fe3O4 (magnetite)
nanoparticles. The PI will utilize different ancestral strains to derive into
the two different types of iron resistant populations. One of the ancestors will
have no prior metal resistance and the second ancestor will have a history of
silver resistance. The PI will use whole genome resequencing to examine the
genomes of the ancestors and the iron-resistant derived populations. This will
allow the PI to test whether previously existing heavy metal resistance
mechanisms provide an advantage in the development of resistance to magnetic
iron oxide. These experiments will also allow the PI to test whether the genomic
adaptations to ferrous iron (Fe2+) are different from those adaptations
engendered by ferric iron (Fe3+) toxicity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will provide crucial genomic-based information concerning the mechanisms by
which bacteria evolve resistance to metal/metallic oxide nanoparticles. The
resulting data will be useful for researchers developing nano-based
interventions to control multi-drug resistant bacteria. The ability to control
the development of resistance will improve the sustainability of potential
medical uses of metallic/metallic oxide nanoparticles. This research could
benefit both the scientific community in general by elucidating mechanisms of
bacteria resistance and the general public by the reduction in infectious
disease. This research will be conducted at the Joint School of Nanosciences and
Nanoengineering through a partnership between North Carolina A &amp;T State
University (HBCU) and the University of North Carolina (UNC) Greensboro (a
minority-serving institution). This project will also involve encouraging and
mentoring underrepresented and first-generation college students in science and
engineering disciplines