* 1602781
* Collaborative Research: Responses of atmospheric oxidants and CO2 to dramatic changes in Arctic sea ice
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2019
* Donald Perovich, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 07/31/2019
* USD 99,962.00

The Arctic region has unique atmospheric chemistry leading to both positive and
negative human health impacts, such as the depletion of ground-level ozone and
the deposition of mercury. Atmospheric carbon dioxide uptake into sea water,
moderated by the time-varying amount of sea ice cover, causes acidification of
Arctic Ocean waters with potentially important impacts on the marine ecosystem.
One expects that the atmosphere and its chemistry will respond in a complex
manner to sea ice change and Arctic warming, but the science community lacks the
ability to make predictions with confidence given only basic mechanistic
understanding of the relevant processes. The O-Buoy Chemical Network project was
funded under an Arctic Observing Network grant to observe atmospheric chemicals,
meteorology, and sea-ice properties that can improve our understanding of the
relevant processes and thus improve predictability of scenarios of future
climate. That project has deployed fifteen autonomous buoys measuring three
sentinel atmospheric chemical species, each for roughly a year?s time, spread
across the Arctic Ocean, providing detailed, high-time-resolution data relevant
to understanding the Arctic atmosphere?s chemistry in relation to sea ice. In
this project, the science team will synthesize, interpret, and generate
fundamental understanding from the O-Buoy network data. In addition, GEOS-Chem
modeling combined with the O-Buoy measurements will be used to develop a region
wide understanding of the relationship between the Arctic atmosphere and sea
ice.

This project will contribute to STEM manpower development in a number of ways.
It will provide support for an early career scientist during the formative years
of his career. It will support the training of three Ph.D. students and engage
multiple undergraduate students. Efforts will be made to draw these latter
students from groups under-represented in the STEM fields by leveraging the
resources of the Dartmouth College Women in Science Program (WISP) and the
Alaska Native Science and Engineering Program (ANSEP) at the University of
Alaska. Outreach to the K - gray community will be enabled through leveraging of
existing programs such as the NSF-funded Next Generation WeatherBlur Project,
the US Army Corps of Engineers' Cold Regions Research and Engineering
Laboratory's summer science camp for New Hampshire middle school students, the
University of Alaska's annual Spring Science Potpourri open house, the weekly
Café Scientifique in Boothbay Harbor, Maine: a summer lecture series that
promotes public engagement with cutting-edge scientific research, and the
extensive web presence of the Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences.

The Arctic Ocean's overlying atmosphere is characterized by production of
reactive halogen oxidizers from sea salts that lead to depletion of ground-level
ozone and deposition of mercury. This production is believed to be modulated by
the state of the sea ice cover. This project will answer three specific science
questions relevant to the overarching question "How do changes in the Arctic
Ocean environment, especially sea ice, affect the atmosphere?" via statistical
analysis and modeling approaches. Statistical methods will test and improve
process understanding while modeling approaches will be used to improve
quantification of gas exchange fluxes with the Arctic Ocean through the
fractured, drifting, sea ice and to predict fluxes of reactive halogen oxidizers
and their precursors from sea ice. These modeling exercises make full use of the
data from the O-Buoys covering the Arctic Ocean region from 2009-2016+, a period
which has had a great deal of sea ice variability and reduced sea ice compared
to historical averages. The three specific questions constituting the foci for
this project are: Q1: Under what conditions are carbon dioxide air-ice-ocean
fluxes important causes of atmospheric carbon dioxide variability over the
Arctic Ocean and, conversely, when is long-range transport important? Q2: How do
Arctic Ocean sea ice, snow, and vertical mixing conditions affect major
atmospheric oxidants (ozone and reactive halogens)? Q3: How do interannual
variability and long-term declines in sea ice affect atmospheric contaminants in
the Arctic?