* 1602738
* GEM:   Quantifying the Effects of Inductive Electric Fields in the Terrestrial Magnetosphere
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Raluca Ilie, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 07/31/2020
* USD 256,003.00

One of the major questions in magnetospheric physics is the issue of how the
typical energy of solar wind and ionospheric particles becomes accelerated from
energies in the range of a few eVs to energies of hundreds of keVs that are
typically observed in the near Earth space. The need for this acceleration to
occur implies the production within the magnetosphere of a potential that is
applied to the particles moving along the geomagnetic flux tube. The challenging
task in modeling this potential lies in producing an estimate of the inductive
effects arising from the presence of a time-dependent magnetic field as compared
with the potential that is a part of the plasma convection process across the
geotail. The extent of this partition remains an unresolved question in geospace
research. This award would model the physics of this acceleration mechanism to
determine the magnitude of the inductive electric field caused by the temporal
variation of the magnetic field as compared with the magnitude of the potential
electric field source. The award will have the consequence that the relative
contributions of potential and inductive electric field driven convection
resulting in the development of the storm time ring current will for certain
cases become quantified. A young woman scientist just beginning her faculty
appointment as an assistant professor will be supported with this
award.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI would use a theoretical model to calculate
the inductive component of the electric field. Knowledge of the electromagnetic
fields is required to model accurately the acceleration processes and the
transport of plasma within the inner magnetosphere. This approach would be
applied to several preselected real event case studies as well as simplified and
idealized input simulations. The former path would allow detailed data-model
comparisons to determine which physical process dominates the dynamics of the
magnetosphere. The latter path would provide insight into the systematic
influences of various solar wind parameters. Knowledge of the relative
contribution of potential versus inductive electric fields at intensifying the
hot ion population would be used to study the connection between the macro-scale
dynamics and micro-scale processes that govern this region and solidify
comprehension of the physical processes controlling magnetosphere dynamics.