* 1602845
* Collaborative Research: P2C2--Derivation of Ensemble and Joint-Variable Climate Field Reconstructions of the Common Era Using New Random Field Methods
* GEO,AGS
* 11/01/2016,10/31/2020
* Bo Li, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 10/31/2020
* USD 290,044.00

The project generally aims to explore climate field reconstructions (CFRs) to
target spatial patterns of climate variability that may aid in more artful
characterizations of climate dynamics than the more widely available
reconstructions of single indices (e.g. Northern Hemisphere means). An
increasing number of CFRs are emerging that span the last several millennia over
regional and global spatial scales. This situation allows for an extensive
evaluation of different CFRs and new cutting-edge studies to improve CFR
methods. The research involves novel statistical research in an area of climate
science that presents important statistical challenges, thereby fostering
potential intellectual advancement across the fields of math and physical
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific goal of this project is to provide a
rigorous and comprehensive statistical assessment of CFRs by pursuing a
nonparametric approach to jointly evaluate the first and second moments of two
dependent spatio-temporal random fields based on functional data analysis.
Bayesian hierarchical models that incorporate the skill assessment of each
climate field reconstruction (CFR) are expected to integrate the strengths of
individual CFRs and climate models into a single coherent
reconstruction.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;These developments will significantly
benefit the understanding of the spatio-temporal characteristics of different
CFRs and the advancement of new and powerful CFR methodologies. Formal
statistical tests will specifically be developed to determine the difference
between two CFRs in terms of their first and second moments jointly, or of their
eigenvalues and eigenfunctions jointly. The tests will yield a systematic
assessment of the discrepancies across widely employed CFRs, which will be in
turn used to integrate different CFRs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Multivariate
spatial copula models will also be developed that could account for non-
stationary teleconnections to reconstruct the spatially varying bivariate
distribution of temperatures and precipitation given proxy data. No large-scale
CFR methodology has attempted to account for both teleconnection non-
stationarity and the multivariate nature of climate and proxies, making the
inclusion of these features into a reconstruction methodology a potential major
advance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will foster fundamental
collaborations between statisticians and climate scientists thereby laying the
foundation for more interdisciplinary research. The project will engage
undergraduate students in many aspect of the scientific research.