* 1602594
* Conference: A Strategic Planning Workshop to Explore Quantitative Biology as a Vehicle for Broadening Participation to be held at Spelman College on March 11 and 12, 2016
* BIO,MCB
* 12/15/2015,11/30/2016
* Hong Qin, Spelman College
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 11/30/2016
* USD 40,939.00

The principle investigator is from Spelman College and is an expert in Systems
Biology. Systems Biology is a field of biology that argues that the whole is
greater than the sum of its parts, and that true understanding of complex and
dynamic biological systems requires the incorporation and integration of
fundamental principles derived from mathematics, physics, engineering and
computer science. This understanding is thought to be necessary for harnessing
the full potential of biology to sustain life on earth. The project will involve
academics and administrators from regional Atlanta institutions and Spellman
alumni who hold faculty positions at prominent research institutions. The
workshop will explore and develop a strategy for implementing a novel
educational framework that would prepare diverse student populations for
collaborative research at the intersection of disciplines. The workshop is
motivated also by the realization that underrepresented groups might gravitate
more naturally toward the computational areas. As such, this workshop offers
significant broader impacts through inclusion of several minority-serving
institutions and regional research one institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is based on a novel way of thinking about training a future workforce in
times where the convergence and integration of disciplines becomes the new
standard. This direction is characterized by the recognition that emergent
properties of biological systems are unlikely to be realized through
reductionist approaches that generally reveal details about individual
components, but contribute little toward an understanding of how these
components interact to sustain live under ever-changing conditions. This
workshop also represents a new model for how to advance education and research
training at the intersections of disciplines, with a strong emphasis on a
broader involvement of underrepresented groups in the "new biology" academic
setting.