* 1602697
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Residential Segregation and Policing Styles
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2016,03/31/2018
* Daanika Gordon, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Toby Parcel
* 03/31/2018
* USD 10,025.00

Residential Segregation and Policing Styles

This project explores the processes by which different places, and thus people,
come to experience fundamentally different styles of policing. It uses the case
of a police department's project of redrawing its district boundaries in the
context of a highly segregated Rust Belt city. In contrast to many redistricting
efforts that aim to more evenly distribute urban service provision across a
jurisdiction, this redistricting intended to concentrate distinct policing
problems within the new districts. In so doing, it created more racially
homogenous districts and opened the door for divergence in policing practices.
This study examines the motivations for and consequences of this reform. It aims
to expand our understanding of the varied roles that the police play in projects
of social control and service provision by identifying the relational and
socially constructed nature of policing priorities across the city. The research
has the potential to inform policing and to improve relationships between police
and the policed.

The researcher describes the motivations for and consequences of the
redistricting through a multi-method design that links the structural context of
racial residential segregation to institutional priorities that in turn shape
on-the-ground policing. First, the researcher will interview 80 stakeholders
involved in or affected by the redistricting in order to identify the networks
and interests that structured the redistricting process. Next, the researcher
explores the current social organization of police work at the district-level
through a year of ethnographic observation of two of the most affected
districts. Finally, the researcher describes the intended and unintended
consequences of the change through longitudinal analysis of calls for service
data, arrest and citation data, crime data, and demographic data. In examining
the relationship between residential segregation and policing styles, the
researcher identifies the dynamics of policing that not only re-inscribe and
maintain segregation boundaries, but reconstitute the nature of segregation by
actively creating different kinds of spaces in the city. Thus, this research
both contributes to sociology of crime, criminology and community studies but it
also contributes to strengthening the relationship between police and the
policed. It contributes to understanding how to change the processes that lead
to the material and symbolic racial disparities that characterizes these
relationships and attends to broader historical and institutional processes as
well as mandates at the institutional level.