* 1602045
* PFI:AIR-TT:  Self-adaptive growing rod for the treatment of pediatric scoliosis
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2018
* Ibrahim Karaman, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 05/31/2018
* USD 199,098.00

This PFI:AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating a novel
titanium alloy to address the need for improving the outcome and reducing
implant-related complications during growing rod treatment of adolescent
scoliosis. The adaptive growing rod is important because of its potential to
reduce the high incidence of implant loosening and failure, which are the
primary sources of complications in the treatment of severe early-onset
scoliosis in children and often necessitate costly and painful revision
surgeries. The project will result in a working prototype of an adaptive growing
rod and demonstrate its feasibility in a standardized biomechanics model. This
device has the unique features of simultaneous high strength and ultra-low
stiffness matching that of human bone, and the ability to vary its stiffness
depending on location. When compared to the leading competing growing rods based
on the Harrington rods system in this market, these features reduce the number
of revision procedures required by reducing a leading source of complications,
facilitating healthy development of the spine from better load sharing, and
improving the overall efficacy for treatment of severe scoliosis in children.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the following technology gaps as it
translates from research discovery toward commercial application: there is a
current lack of quantitative understanding of how stress at the bone-screw
interface is affected by implant stiffness in growing rod constructs. This is
important because high stress at the bone-screw interface is believed to be
responsible for implant loosening and pull-outs. Furthermore, it is not known
how location-dependent implant stiffness modifies such stress. The project seeks
to bridge these gaps by quantitatively monitoring how stress at the bone-screw
interface is affected by variations in the implant stiffness introduced by
microstructural engineering and thermo-mechanical training in a Ti-Nb alloy.
Experiments are performed using a modified ASTM standard model that accounts for
the changing stiffness of the growing spine. In addition, personnel involved in
this project, including a Ph.D. level graduate student and undergraduate
researchers, will receive entrepreneurship and technology translation
experiences through direct involvement in the customer development process.
Students will participate in all conversations with surgeons, hospital
officials, regulatory personnel, and medical devices manufacturers. Students
will be asked to make customer contacts independently, and receive training of
the lean-startup strategy central to the NSF I-Corps program.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project engages pediatric orthopedic surgeons and a
medical devices manufacturer to ensure a clear and current understanding of
clinical needs and challenges, as well as regulatory and reimbursement hurdles
of this technology translation effort from research discovery toward commercial
reality.