* 1602962
* Collaborative Research: Assessing climate-biosphere linkages using Late Holocene records of climate variability and vegetation dynamics from the Brazilian Amazon and Savanna
* GEO,AGS
* 06/15/2016,02/28/2019
* Corinne Wong, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 02/28/2019
* USD 383,822.00

This collaborative project aims to investigate the role of changes in the South
American Summer Monsoon (SASM) intensity on forest-savanna biome shifts that
occurred during the Late Holocene. Development of paleoclimate records from in
and near the core of the monsoon region enables an assessment of the strength of
the paleo-monsoon signal across the region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers
look to generate independent, yet co-located, records of past climate
(speleothems) and vegetation (soil profiles) dynamics from the Brazilian Amazon
and Cerrado (savanna), for which existing records are absent. Paleoclimate and
ecological interpretations will be validated using cave monitoring and proxy
system modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers intend to evaluate the
following questions: i) Do speleothem delta 18-Oxygen values reflect variations
in SASM intensity, ii) Do variations in SASM intensity drive corresponding
variation in local moisture conditions, iii) What was the nature and driver of
Late Holocene variability in SASM intensity and local moisture conditions, and
iv) how sensitive were biomes in vegetative transition zones to variability in
SASM intensity and local moisture conditions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
involves the monitoring of modern cave environments to evaluate speleothem delta
18-Oxygen values as a proxy of SASM intensity and speleothem trace element
concentrations and Strontium isotope compositions as a proxy of local moisture
conditions. The research will extend existing speleothem delta 18-Oxygen records
of the last millennium from the Amazon and Cerrado further back in time and
develop corresponding records of speleothem trace element and 87- Strontium
/86-Strontium and soil organic matter delta 13-Carbon to assess the co-
variability between regional monsoon intensity, local moisture conditions, and
biome shifts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project helps promote greater
understanding of the SASM and strong collaboration with Brazilian scientists.
The SASM is the most important source of rainfall to the region with great
socio-economic and environmental relevance, including defining current ecosystem
distribution and stability, hydroelectric production, and agriculture.