* 1602379
* SCH: EXP: Continuous Patient Monitoring in the Emergency Department: A Wearable Device Technology Enabled Dynamic Decision Support Model
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2021
* David Claudio, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2021
* USD 331,370.00

The objective of the proposed exploratory project is to develop a dynamic
mathematical decision support (DS) model for patient prioritization in the
Emergency Department (ED). This model will integrate the use of wearable devices
that collect patients' vital signs in real time and decision theory to account
for patients' changes while they wait. The research will focus on the design and
application of integrated systems for decision making by merging the
mathematical models with the Emergency Severity (ESI) Index and wearable
devices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the proposed exploratory project
is to develop a dynamic mathematical decision support (DS) model for patient
prioritization in the Emergency Department (ED). The coupling of technology and
decision theory can help reduce the level of uncertainty that is inherent to the
decision making process of triage nurses. The mathematical models will combine
Multi-attribute Utility Theory (MAUT) with fuzzy logic and decision trees to
predict patients' criticality and priority using the Emergency Severity Index
(ESI) as baseline. In addition, the MAUT model will be enhanced to incorporate
attribute changes over time. Wearable devices will be used to collect patients'
vital signs in real time; this information will be integrated into mathematical
decision models to assist nurses in data gathering, analysis, sorting and
presentation. Nurses will be presented with organized information regarding the
status of the patients in a meaningful manner that would allow them to notice
and respond to any significant changes in patients' status. This research will
aid the triage process, especially in extremely busy emergency rooms where re-
assessment is difficult if not impossible, putting patients at risk for
undetected deterioration. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project
Webpage:&lt;br/&gt;http://www.montana.edu/dclaudio/SCHEXP.html