* 1602006
* PFI:AIR - TT:  Novel Low-power III-Nitride Heater Cantilever Based Selective VOC Sensor
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2016,10/31/2021
* Goutam Koley, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 10/31/2021
* USD 297,997.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating the
discovery of novel microcantilever heaters to fill the need for highly sensitive
and selective volatile organic compound (VOC) sensors with an ultra-low power
requirement. These VOC sensors are important because of their strong impact on
environmental protection and indoor air quality monitoring which has direct
influence on human health and well-being. The project will result in the
development of a commercially viable prototype of a novel VOC sensor packaged in
the form of a miniaturized handheld device. This VOC sensor has unique features
of high sensitivity and selective detection of VOCs individually and in
mixtures, and operation at low heater temperature without catalyst coating.
These features provide the advantages of faster and unique detection of VOCs in
a complex environment, much lower power consumption, and higher reliability and
operational lifetime, when compared to the leading competing pellistor and
photo-ionization based sensors currently available in this market space.

This project addresses the following technology gap(s) as it translates from
research discovery toward commercial application. The VOC sensor to be developed
will address: (i) the inability of the current technologies to perform selective
detection of analytes, (ii) higher operational power requirement due to high
heater temperature, and low operational lifetime due to usage of a laser or
catalyst coating. A combination of unique features of the proposed VOC sensor,
including low heater temperature, lack of catalyst coating, and selective VOC
detection utilizing their physical properties, enables it to address the
aforementioned limitations of the current technology. In addition, the personnel
involved in this project, at both graduate and undergraduate levels, will
receive entrepreneurship and technology translation experiences through
participation in the project activities directly related to commercialization
and mentorship from the industrial partner.

The project engages Tangidyne Inc. to guide the commercialization aspects of the
sensor developed, and provide unique business mentorship to the graduate and
undergraduate students involved in this technology translation effort from
research discovery toward commercial reality.