* 1602886
* Bottom-up design of earth-abundant catalysts for reversible hydrogen oxidation and reduction in alkaline electrolytes
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2016,02/28/2021
* Maureen Tang, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 02/28/2021
* USD 455,321.00

Hydrogen is a critical feedstock for industrial chemistry and a potential low-
cost medium for renewable energy storage. Both the hydrogen oxidation (HOR) and
evolution (HER) reactions are extremely fast on platinum and other catalysts in
acidic electrolytes, but sluggish in alkaline electrolytes. The research aims to
identify the reasons for the adverse effects of alkaline pH on hydrogen
electrocatalysis and use the resulting insight to design active HER/HOR
electrocatalysts from earth-abundant materials, thereby enabling broader
utilization of low-cost fuel cell and electrolyzer technologies. The work will
support graduate and undergraduate education, and outreach to high school
students, all directed toward broader understanding and appreciation of
opportunities for electrochemistry to contribute to sustainable methods for the
production of energy and chemicals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Study of the hydrogen
electrode has long played a key role in the development of core concepts in
electrochemistry and electrocatalysis. Hydrogen binding energy (HBE) is usually
assumed to control reactivity, and the role of water in defining reaction
kinetics and pathways is often overlooked. This study applies a unique suite of
experimental techniques and theoretical analyses to isolate the effects of
individual phenomena in alkaline hydrogen electrochemistry. Controllably
strained, homogeneous surfaces will be used to investigate the effect of pH on
HBE. Electrochemical quartz crystal microbalance and CO displacement
measurements will be used to observe surface-adsorbed hydroxide, and the
resulting information will be combined with conventional electrochemical
experiments and microkinetic models to identify the role of hydroxide in the
alkaline hydrogen reactions conducted on surface-doped catalysts. In addition,
catalyst supports will be varied to determine the impact of water orientation.
The fundamental insight gained will be used to synthesize active, stable
electrocatalysts based on earth-abundant elements. Understanding the effects of
pH on adsorption energy and activation barrier heights will provide important
insight, not only for fuel cells and renewable energy storage, but for other
economically and environmentally important electrochemical processes such as
corrosion, carbon dioxide reduction, direct oxidation of fuels, flow batteries,
ammonia synthesis and biological redox systems. The project will provide two PhD
students and several undergraduate students with a broad and interdisciplinary
research experience with training in electrochemical methods, surface science,
and materials synthesis and characterization. In conjunction with the work, the
PIs will develop electrochemistry-centered educational modules for Drexel
University's Freshman Design course, including collaboration with a local high
school's chapter of the Girls Who Code club.