* 1602118
* I-Corps: Virtual 3D reconstruction of hollow organs from white light endoscopy
* TIP,TI
* 11/01/2015,04/30/2016
* Audrey Bowden, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 04/30/2016
* USD 50,000.00

White light endoscope (WLE) is a medical device that allows physicians to
conduct real-time video explorations of the interior of organs to detect disease
or guide surgery. Unfortunately, the WLE video data are too cumbersome in their
native form to review post-treatment; hence, the information is often reduced to
handwritten notes or a few still-image frames for inclusion in medical records.
The loss of this visually rich information limits the ability of WLE to inform
clinical decisions about treatment and surgery. In particular, diseases like
bladder cancer, which holds the unfortunate distinction as the 4th most common
cancer in men and the highest treatment cost per patient-lifetime of all
cancers, would benefit from novel ways to review WLE video data to facilitate
early detection of tumors and to better track changes in the bladder wall of
patients likely to experience recurrence (&gt; 50%). The goal of this project is
to develop new technology to produce 3D visualizations of the interior of hollow
organs such as the bladder from WLE videos. The availability of such technology
will provide physicians with new tools to make better informed decisions about
treatment and surgery, as well as provide researchers with new technology to
enable novel studies on disease progression, ultimately leading to better health
outcomes and lower treatment costs for diseases like
cancer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed novel algorithm applies state-of-the-
art techniques in computer vision to the problem of 3D reconstruction of the
shape and surface appearance of hollow organs. A key innovation in the proposed
approach is that the algorithm is suitable to reconstruct a full, 3D model of an
organ from endoscopic video captured with standard clinical hardware and
requires only minor modifications to the standard clinical workflow. The ability
to create these reconstructions from standard equipment and workflows arises
from careful design decisions regarding (1) the protocol for endoscopic video
collection, (2) necessary image pre-processing steps and (3) the particular
combination of state-of-the-art techniques developed in the computer vision
community into an end-to-end pipeline unique for our application. In brief, the
overall algorithm involves the following steps: down-sample raw image data,
process selected frames, determine camera poses, extrapolate the organ surface
as a mesh and apply image-based texture to the finalized mesh. The team's
initial application is for reconstructing urinary bladder using standard rigid
cystoscopy data; to date the team has validated the ability to perform 3D
reconstructions using standard clinical cystoscopy videos of &gt; 30 human
patients. As the proposed method can powerfully augment the visual medical
record of internal organ appearance, it is broadly applicable to endoscopy and
represents a significant advance in monitoring the appearance of a patient's
organ over time, as may be well suited for applications such as cancer
surveillance.