* 1602655
* GEM: Onset and Consequences of Reconnection in the Magnetotail
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2021
* Joachim Birn, SPACE SCIENCE INSTITUTE
* Continuing Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 08/31/2021
* USD 508,611.00

This project addresses compelling questions that have been the subject of
continuing debate and controversy regarding the triggers of severe space weather
activity. The team will follow the evolution of the Earth's magnetotail from a
stable configuration to the onset of explosive magnetic reconnection using a
state-of-the-art 3D kinetic particle-in-cell (PIC) model that has been modified
to run efficiently on petascale computers. Magnetic reconnection is, in effect,
the breaking and reconnecting of magnetic field lines, which is accompanied by
an explosive release of energy, and is critical to the development of "severe
weather" in space. An important additional feature of the project is that the
simulations will be continued in time to follow the evolution of the magnetotail
after the explosive energy release. This enables investigation of a number of
observed phenomena connected to the space storm development - some only recently
appreciated. This project has a high potential for delivering transformative new
knowledge. Gaining knowledge about the interactions between processes that occur
on disparate spatial and temporal scales is a major challenge in understanding
the development of extreme events ranging from severe space weather to tornadoes
to volcanic eruptions to earthquakes. The objectives and methodology in this
project are closely aligned with the focus of the NSF Prediction of and
Resilience against Extreme Events (PREEVENTS) program, which is co-funding the
work described above. The project will support the training of a postdoctoral
student, contributing to the future scientific workforce. The results of this
work will be of interest to a range of discipline areas in the broader
scientific community because magnetic reconnection occurs in space,
astrophysical, and laboratory plasmas. In the longer term, new knowledge about
the triggers of explosive energy release during space storms will improve space
weather prediction.

Progress in understanding the explosive onset of magnetic reconnection and its
causes is enabled through the restructuring of PIC models to take advantage of
petascale computers. PIC models follow the paths of charged particles as they
move through self-consistent electromagnetic fields computed at points within a
fixed mesh. To reduce the extremely large number of particles that the computer
must follow and make the calculation tractable, the simulation uses
computational superparticles, each of which may represent millions of charged
particles. The VPIC model used in this project is a state-of-the-art, high
performance, 3D fully kinetic particle-in-cell model. It is one of the fastest,
most optimized, and most capable PIC models in the world. Simulations using this
code have exceeded 3 trillion particles and 15 billion cells on petascale
computers. An important aspect is that the model is able to simulate the
instabilities and dynamics in the micro-scale diffusion region where
reconnection occurs, while at the same time viewing the coupling between the
diffusion region and the magnetotail at the larger scales important in the
global storm development.