* 1602162
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Human Subsistance Practices And Environmental Change - A Botanical Analysis
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2016,02/28/2019
* Abigail Buffington, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/28/2019
* USD 18,021.00

Researchers at The Ohio State University, will investigate how incorporating
animal domesticates into a foraging base impacts the development of vegetation
communities in arid regions. This research project will build on what is
understood of agricultural origins by expanding knowledge of food production's
implementation in marginal zones beyond sedentary villages. The project data
will contribute to a broader effort to understand how ancient human groups
created the conditions in which agriculture became the dominant, and eventually
exclusive, economic practice across many regions of the world. By setting this
particular research in this broader context of human niche construction, the
place of pastoralists in the world, both contemporary and past, is reframed.
Instead of overexploitation narratives (which characterize much contemporary
development literature), pastoralist landscape development and management are
viewed as potential innovations and adaptations to new environs which were
previously unsuitable to significant population levels. To understand the
relationship between food production and local climate on a global scale,
pastoralists and their evolutionary landscapes require careful
consideration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Co-PI Abigail Buffington will examine the
relationship between the anthropogenic activities of landscape management and
the ecology of the broader region of Wadi Sana in the Hadramawt state of
southeastern Yemen. This region is today effectively closed to new research
projects due to political instability but likely was a significant conduit
between regions in prehistory. Domestics from the Levant, South Asia and East
Africa eventually became foundational foods in the later agricultural economies
of the region. The earliest animal domesticates in Southern Arabia have been
recovered from these contexts, as well as evidence of a locally, emergent
pastoral economy and very early experiments in vegetation burning and water
management. The climatic history of the region provided a beneficial
preservation of the sediments in which dating of these discrete phases can be
determined. Phytolith assemblages - the microscopic silica deposits that
accumulate when plants decay - extracted from these sediments, will be used as
signatures of the local plant ecology associated with these niche constructing
activities. While this project aims to understand these phytolith groupings as
entire entities, there is a possibility that the initial evidence of plant
domesticates may be recovered in the course of this study.