* 1602273
* Collaborative Research: EAGER: Interaction of carbon-metal nanohybrids at environmental interfaces
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2016,04/30/2018
* Navid Saleh, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 04/30/2018
* USD 80,135.00

Engineered nanomaterials (NMs) represent a diverse class of extremely small
particles (&lt; 100nm) that are being widely used in industrial sectors such as
energy, electronics, and sensing. As these applications demanded higher
performance, the field of materials research has shifted its focus from using
singular NMs (carbon only, metal only) to those comprised of several distinct
types of NMs linked together, termed nanohybrids (NHs). Linking single NMs in
this capacity is likely to create new properties and behavior in environmental
and biological settings that have not yet been predicted or studied. As the
scale of NH use rapidly increases there is likely to be significant opportunity
for their presence in the aquatic environment. Therefore, the goal of this
proposed work is to proactively identify novel and unanticipated properties and
associated behavior of carbon-metal NHs that have current relevance to the fuel
cell industry. These studies would be the first to investigate whether combining
singular NMs to form NHs alters the way they behave in the environment and
interact with aquatic organisms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Extracting novel
properties by developing ensembles of two or more nano-scale materials is an
emerging trend in several industries. However, most of our knowledge regarding
nano-environmental behavior is limited to passive nanostructures with singular
composition (e.g. carbon, metal). We hypothesize that NHs will display novel
unforeseen properties that are highly important in driving their behavior in
environmental matrices and organisms. To address this notion we propose to carry
out the following aims: (1) synthesize a set of metal-carbon nanotube NHs with
high degree of control with the objective of tuning band architecture and
material stiffness; (2) characterize physical morphology, mechanical stiffness,
band gap, distribution of metal/metal oxides on nanotubes; (3) examine NH
interaction with the environmental interfaces by studying particle-particle and
particle-collector interaction as well as determining particle dissolution in a
wide range of environmental conditions; (4) assess behavior and interaction of
NHs at biological interfaces using a well-established aquatic model coupled with
high-throughput contemporary measurements of mitochondrial dysfunction and
oxidative stress. This work is innovative in that it is the first to execute
controlled synthesis and characterization of a suite of NHs and component
materials that will be investigated in aquatic environments and model organisms
(fish). This work is timely in that it will lay the foundation for further
research in understanding NHs in complex but relevant environments and reveal
novel properties and mechanisms of action in biological systems that have not
been studied. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work will generate critical and
fundamental knowledge to better understand the environmental interaction of a
set of complex hierarchical nanomaterials, metal-carbonaceous NHs. These NHs are
highly relevant to the expanding fuel cell industry; therefore, results of this
work would directly influence materials science and nano communities and help
inform the general public about nano-environmental research. In outreach and
education aspects the PIs will recruit undergraduate researchers, including
underrepresented students, through several well established programs at UT and
UF such as Graduates Linked with Undergraduates in Engineering (GLUE) program,
Texas Research Experience (TREX) program, Florida-Georgia Alliance for Minority
Participation (FGAMP-SEAGEP) and Howard Hughes Medical Institute (HHMI) Science
for Life programs to recruit minority students.