* 1602905
* Collaborative Research: P2C2: Re-assessing Pliocene and Miocene warm climates and identifying the 'missing physics' to explain them
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2020
* Matthew Huber, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah K. Smith
* 08/31/2020
* USD 243,674.00

Many of the long-term trends and transitions in climate over the past 65 million
years are correlated with major changes in atmospheric carbon dioxide
concentrations. But not all. Periods lasting hundreds of thousands or millions
of years, for example during the Miocene and Pliocene, are loosely correlated
with CO2 changes that are too small-- at least according to climate models-- to
generate the large climate changes evidenced in proxy records. The purpose of
this study is to investigate Miocene and Pliocene climate, with an emphasis on
understanding the mechanisms responsible for widespread warmth, reduced
temperature gradients, and apparently high climate sensitivity. Climate models
have been unable previously to reproduce these features, raising concerns
regarding their ability to correctly predict future warming. This study is novel
and significant because a multi-disciplinary team combining expertise in
paleoclimate data, models, and theory will generate geographically widespread,
multiproxy past climate records. This data will be compared with new and
advanced modeling approaches. A benefit of this approach is that climate models
will be improved by this comparison with past data and the lessons learned will
lead eventually to improved predictions of future climate change.

Specifically, although significant progress has been achieved in understanding
of Miocene and Pliocene climates, explanations are lacking for some their basic
elements, such as: weakened meridional temperature gradients, weakened zonal
temperature gradients across the Pacific, and preferential warming in polar
regions, in upwelling regions, and in continental interiors. This study's goals
are to better quantify these enigmatic features by developing new geochemical
records and compare this data with state-of-the art climate modeling that will
enable better prediction of the Earth system to greenhouse gas and non-
greenhouse gas forcing. To accomplish this, the project will: (1) Enhance
understanding of the signal being recorded by various paleoclimate proxies for
sea surface temperature (SST) and generate a suite of new TEX86 and Uk37 paleo-
SST records, complemented by existing records, to provide a comprehensive view
of evolving surface ocean conditions from the mid Miocene through the Pliocene.
(2) Conduct simulations of mid-Miocene and mid-Pliocene climate using the
Community Earth System Model (CESM), with a new atmospheric component, CAM5,
that includes more sophisticated treatment of cloud-aerosol interactions than
previous models. Sensitivity studies to cloud microphysical properties and
parameterization, including mixed-phase cloud properties and aerosol (sulfate
and dust) emissions will be conducted to constrain previously unexplored
interactions between cloud microphysics, aerosols and past climates. (3)
Simulate Miocene and Pliocene climates using the "Super-parameterized" (SP)
version of the CESM. SP-CESM incorporates a cloud-resolving model in each grid
cell to represent convection and clouds more explicitly rather than parameterize
them, allowing a more accurate representation of convection and cloud effects on
the large-scale atmospheric circulation. In addition to the research objectives,
the project has education and engagement components. It will fund two graduate
students and a female early career research scientist in STEM disciplines. Three
public engagement efforts will be conducted, including public lectures, a
website for a broad audience, and an afterschool program for high school
students.