* 1602895
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  New Therapies and the Multiplication of Disease Diagnoses
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2016,03/31/2018
* Gil Eyal, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 03/31/2018
* USD 6,754.00

SES-1602895 Gil Eyal Moran Levy Columbia University

Between 1950 and 1990 cancer research underwent a radical transformation. Drug
screening programs in the 1950s tested single compounds on multiple cancers in
heterogeneous patient samples. Yet in the decades that followed the first
chemotherapy trials, researchers turned to studies of narrow subcategories of
cancer (e.g. metastatic breast cancer in postmenopausal women) to test complex
therapies involving surgery, radiotherapy and drug combinations. The shift
between these research designs, that are practically mirror images of one
another, poses puzzling questions: How has cancer research shifted its structure
and orientation? How and when did 'cancer' stop being a meaningful clinical
unit? How did multiple cancer diagnoses emerge and come to replace it?

This project examines the structuring of cancer research to explain the
multiplication of cancer diagnoses. The researchers hypothesize that the effort
to improve anticancer drugs through clinical trials was a mechanism for creating
new diagnoses. The introduction of statistical expertise pressured cancer
scientists to homogenize patient samples so that they could compare treatment
and control groups that were as similar as possible. This compelled researchers
to narrow down trials' recruitment criteria and to transform diagnostic schemes.
The study examines whether prognostic variables used in clinical trials to
predict patients' responses to treatment turned into refined recruitment
criteria in subsequent trials and were eventually translated into new diagnoses.
The increasing specification of diagnosis limited patient pools and slowed down
the recruitment of patients that met inclusion criteria. The researchers thus
also hypothesize that diagnosis specification increased the collaboration
between institutions that could recruit patients, reinforced the need for
standardization and sophisticated statistical tools, allowing researchers to
conduct multicenter trials and to work with small patient samples, and
reinforced specialization in oncology. The researchers conduct comprehensive
archival research and analyze materials from all major institutions involved in
cancer research: The National Cancer Institute, The Food and Drug
Administration, Medicare, Cooperative Research Groups from across the U.S, The
U.S. National Library of Medicine and The Mary Lasker Paper Collection.

This project offers an important contribution both to sociology of diagnosis and
to sociology of standardization and evidence-based-medicine. Sociology of
diagnosis asks how are new diagnoses created. The researchers suggest a novel
mechanism that drives the creation of diagnoses. That is, medical drugs create
opportunities and incentives to develop new diagnoses not only through
pharmaceutical marketing and through medicalization of previously non-medical
conditions, but also that drugs function to extract data that serve to split up
patient populations and existing diagnoses. Sociology of evidence-based-medicine
asks how clinical trials became the 'gold standard' of biomedicine. This project
suggests that the endogenous effects of clinical trials acted to reinforce
trials' golden status by fragmenting diagnosis clinical trials restructured
cancer research and reinforced the need for standardization and statistical
expertise. This study also offers a critical contribution to the understanding
of how scientific procedures (homogenization) interact with exclusion and with
disparities in the production of medical knowledge about different population
groups.