* 1602542
* 3He in Confinement
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2017,07/31/2019
* William Halperin, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Germano Iannacchione
* 07/31/2019
* USD 462,500.00

Nontechnical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;At very low temperatures all matter enters a
regime described only by quantum mechanics where the states of matter are called
quantum states. Some of these states allow electron currents to flow that are
completely frictionless and in helium liquids the atoms can flow without
generating any heat, and are called superfluids. In this project new classes of
the superfluid of the light isotope of helium, helium-three, are engineered in
anisotropic confinement using extremely small-scale porous glass prepared in the
project laboratory. The topology of these states allows storage of quantum
information which is an essential component of the quantum calculations that
promise a revolution in computer technology. Both the low temperatures and the
topology of the quantum states are essential. Graduate students and
undergraduates, as well as some high school students, learn the specialized
techniques that are required to make the porous glass materials and characterize
them using scanning electron microscopy, cryogenics, and optical methods to
achieve the project goals: creating and identifying new topological quantum
states of liquid helium. High quality samples are also provided for
collaborations with other laboratories in the USA, France, Japan, and the United
Kingdom for a range of research applications on quantum fluids. Furthermore, an
active software based tool on our website is developed and maintained by
graduate students, to make accessible the physical properties of the superfluids
we study. The PI continues advocacy for public awareness of helium as a precious
natural resource serving on the recently convened APS, ACS, and MRS sponsored
Helium Economics Committee, and appearances before congress, on national
television, for science magazines, and at invited talks at international
conferences and workshops. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This project for graduate student research includes the
search for new quantum states with engineered symmetry among the manifold of
possible fermionic p-wave 3He superfluids. Nano-structured environments from
dense arrays of small pores in alumina membranes are used to define specific
anisotropic environments and cooled to ultra-low temperatures for investigation
using ultra-sound and high resolution NMR. A second part of the project is to
use high porosity silica aerogel that is fabricated with controlled anisotropy.
With this approach the recent predictions for such new states of matter are
tested, particularly the interplay of states with chiral and non-chiral
symmetry. The topology of such superfluids support Majorana excitations that
have been proposed as a key component of quantum information processing and has
a direct connection to topological superconductors. A central aspect of the
theory is that anisotropic environments can stabilize anisotropic superfluid
states. There is already an indication of this in superfluid 3He that parallels
the behavior of the topological superconductor UPt3. In the project's research
control of the surface conditions are performed using single atom layers of the
bosonic superfluid 4He. Additionally, acoustic resonant cavities are produced
using nanofabrication facilities. The project supports continuing funding for
graduate education and undergraduate research in experimental physics.