* 1602680
* Collaborative Research: AON: The Arctic Great Rivers Observatory (Arctic-GRO)
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* James McClelland, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Roberto Delgado
* 08/31/2020
* USD 171,037.00

Just like changes in blood chemistry can be used to diagnose an individual?s
health, so too can changes in river water chemistry be used to evaluate the
condition of a river?s watershed. In the Arctic, six massive rivers capture
freshwater runoff from two-thirds of the land area that drains to the Arctic
Ocean. The chemistry of this runoff reflects watershed characteristics (e.g.
soil composition), and carries essential nutrients to the marine environment.
The overarching scientific objective of the Arctic Great Rivers Observatory
(Arctic-GRO) is to make sustained observations of the chemistry of these six
large rivers, which is vital for assessing changes on land that subsequently
impact physical, chemical, and biological properties of the Arctic Ocean. The
project involves partnerships with the Yukon River Intertribal Watershed
Council, The Pilot Station Traditional Council, the Gwichya Gwich?in Renewable
Resource Council, and with the University of Alaska at Kuskowkwin community
college that serves the largely Yup?ik residents of the Yukon-Kuskowkwim Delta.
. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The six rivers included in the Arctic Great Rivers
Observatory are the Yukon and Mackenzie in North American and the Ob?, Yenisey,
Lena, and Kolyma in Eurasia. The rivers will be sampled near their mouths, every
two months for three years, using identical sample collection and preservation
protocols. Approximately 40 parameters will be measured on all samples including
dissolved and particulate organic carbon concentrations and isotopic
compositions, concentrations of dissolved nutrients, major ions, and trace
elements, and optical properties of dissolved organic matter, including UV
absorbance and fluorescence excitation-emission matrices. For QA/QC purposes,
every analysis will be conducted at a single laboratory. The resulting data,
along with complementary data on river discharge, will be made available without
restriction at the Arctic-GRO website (arcticgreatrivers.org) and through the
NSF Arctic Data Center. Arctic-GRO data, which build on observatory records that
extend back to 2003, provide valuable end-members for the oceanographic research
community as well as for analyses of terrestrial landscape change.