* 1602491
* Residual stress in nitride thin films: integrated experiments and development of a predictive model
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2021
* Eric Chason, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 06/30/2021
* USD 587,122.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Nitride thin films are used in a wide variety of
applications. An example is the hard coating that is put on a tool bit to extend
its lifetime. Such coatings are made by depositing atoms on the tool's surface
from a vapor, referred to as physical vapor deposition. The resulting films
often have large stress because the process of deposition does not allow the
atoms time to get into their ideal positions. Consequently, this stress can lead
to failure of the film either by cracking or delaminating. The goal of this
research is to reduce the stress through understanding how the stress is related
to the underlying physical processes. Through the use of a mathematical model of
the processes affecting stress, it is possible to predict it for different
processing conditions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: The focus of
this work is to understand and control the stress in transition metal nitride
thin films. Stress can be strongly affected by the processing conditions such as
the energy of the deposited species or rate of film growth, but there is not a
fundamental understanding of how stress reduction occurs. In this project,
measurements of the stress are made during the nitride deposition using a real-
time technique (based on the curvature induced in the wafer substrate). These
measurements enable the stress to be quantitatively related to the processing
parameters such as the growth rate and gas pressure. After growth, the film's
microstructure is characterized by making a cross-section with a focused ion
beam and measuring the grain structure with electron microscopy. This
characterization enables the dependence of the stress on the film's grain size
and microstructural evolution to be determined. The experimental results are
used to refine and validate a model that relates the stress to the underlying
processes in the film. This new model incorporates the kinetics of the deposited
atoms and the defects that have not been included in previous models. This
approach enables a deeper understanding of the origins of stress that can be
used by thin film growers to predict the stress under various conditions for
different materials systems. The model is made available to interested users on
the researcher's website. A short course for industrial and academic
professionals describes the mechanisms that control stress evolution. Students
(at both the undergraduate and graduate level) participate in this research to
develop skills in state-of-the-art experimental and modeling techniques.
Students from underrepresented groups are recruited to participate in this
research and promote their ability to develop careers in science and
engineering.