* 1602748
* GEM: The Role of O+ on Onset and Energy Release in the Earth's Magnetotail
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2020
* Lynn Kistler, University of New Hampshire
* Continuing Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 08/31/2020
* USD 429,569.00

This project addresses compelling questions about the effects of oxygen ions on
magnetic reconnection and on the dynamics of Earth's near space environment.
Magnetic reconnection is, in effect, the breaking and reconnecting of magnetic
field lines with an accompanying explosive release of energy. This energy powers
space weather disturbances and contributes in essential ways to the dynamics of
the space environment surrounding Earth. The methodology is to combine satellite
observations with linked models that in combination are capable of examining the
effects of oxygen ions on reconnection in micro scale regions while representing
the larger-scale behavior of the Earth's magnetosphere that results. The project
has significant broader impacts. In addition to training a graduate student and
helping to build the scientific workforce, the investigators plan on
participating in a program at the University of New Hampshire that provides
research experiences to high school students. The investigation contributes to
knowledge of reconnection, which is a universal process and of interest to other
scientific fields, such as astrophysics and laboratory plasma physics.
Understanding of how mass coupling between the ionosphere and magnetosphere
affects reconnection and global system dynamics is essential to building an
understanding and predictive capability for space weather, a national
priority.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Knowledge of the effects of ion composition on
the near-Earth space environment is a critical component of models that simulate
the response of the magnetosphere to explosive events on the Sun. These oxygen
ions originate in the Earth's upper atmosphere. They gain energy during the
solar wind interaction with the magnetosphere and flow outward to populate near-
Earth space. Their presence alters the mass density of magnetospheric plasma,
the environment for the generation of plasma waves, the convection speed of
magnetic field lines, the plasma pressure and the thresholds for plasma
instabilities. Evidence suggests that the presence of oxygen ions, through their
effects on magnetic reconnection and related dynamical processes, can modulate
the interaction between the solar wind and magnetosphere as well as the release
of energy in the magnetotail, both major factors in the development of space
weather disturbances.