* 1602301
* Collaborative Research: P2C2--Paleoclimate Reanalysis: A New View of Past Climates
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Jessica Tierney, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 06/30/2020
* USD 345,605.00

This collaborative project aims to produce a Paleoclimate Reanalysis - a
statistically robust gridded reconstruction of climate spanning the last 25,000
years - using a data assimilation technique widely used in the meteorological
community in order to combine information from climate models and proxies to
reconstruct gridded climate fields. The Reanalysis will be used to test
hypotheses regarding the response of the tropical Walker circulation and the
major monsoon systems to changing climate background states and the origin of
low-frequency (centennial to millennial-scale) variability in the Earth's
climate system. The specific goal is to test hypotheses regarding the behavior
of the tropical climate system under cold and warm climates and to document and
identify the dynamical origin of centennial-to millennial-scale climate
variability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Paleoclimate Reanalysis will be available
to the wider science community and could provide a community benchmark to
benefit research across multiple disciplines. This project will support a
graduate student and postdoctoral candidate as well as involve substantial
undergraduate participation in the form of data collection and analysis. This
project also support a new partnership with the Girl Power program to develop
science education and outreach opportunities for middle school girls in a Tucson
public school.