* 1602020
* PFI:AIR - TT:  Enhancing the Balance and Control of Crutch Walking Using a Novel Crutch Tip
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2016,10/31/2018
* Seok Hun Kim, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 10/31/2018
* USD 209,858.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on enhancing the efficiency
of using crutches to walk. Walking with crutches requires significantly more
energy than walking without a crutch, yet most of the recent advances have only
focused on making crutches more comfortable. Enhanced crutch walking efficiency
is important because it can increase independence, improve stability, and reduce
fatigue in the approximately six million individuals that rely on crutches for
daily mobility. This project will result in a feasible design for a kinetic
crutch tip that makes crutch walking more efficient without requiring any
external power. It can also help users maintain control when walking down a
slope by reducing their speed. The kinetic crutch tip is expected to help
existing crutch users gain additional mobility and allow more people to use
crutches instead of wheelchairs and other more sedentary assistive devices that
do not encourage the same level of daily activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project addresses several technology gaps as it translates from research
discovery toward commercial application. Conventional crutch tips have a
standard point or constant radius tip that cannot assist the user during
walking; all forward progression forces must be generated by the user pushing
themselves forward over the crutch. In contrast, the kinetic crutch tip uses a
special shape to predictably redirect the user's downward force into a
propulsive force that assists the individual in forward ambulation. This
assistance is provided passively, so no motors or power supplies are required.
The assistance force helps the individual use less energy while moving forward
over level ground and when walking uphill. The crutch tip shape can be rotated
to reverse the assistance force and provide a more controlled descent down a
hill by reducing the user's momentum. The scientific challenge of this project
lies in determining precisely what roll-over crutch tip shape should be used for
each of the four commonly used crutch gait patterns and how the tip affects the
gait dynamics and energy used during each crutch gait. The focus will be on the
unstable and fast-moving swing-through crutch gait predominately used by short-
term crutch users and on the more stable and slow-moving 2- 3- and 4-point
crutch gait patterns typically used by long-term disabled individuals. The
combination of engineering, physical therapy, and business start-up expertise on
this project enables the development of this new method to assist individuals
that rely on crutches to walk. In addition, undergraduate and graduate students
involved in this project will receive experiences in innovation and
entrepreneurship.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project engages two partners to
advance this technology translation effort from research discovery toward
commercial reality. Tao Life Sciences will guide the commercialization aspects
by identifying the market segment(s) to focus on and will help in redesigning
the research prototypes that have shown success in the lab for larger-scale
testing focused on the identified customer segment. The engineering and design
related to this project will be presented to the general public through a
collaboration with the Museum of Science and Industry (Tampa, FL) where an
exhibit will highlight research into assistive and rehabilitation technologies.
Visitors will be able try out the different types of crutches and learn about
the difficulties that individuals with impairments have in performing simple
daily tasks.