* 1602190
* RAPID: A Panel Study of Presidentialism and, Democratic Collapse and the Rise of a One-Party State: Turkey at the Crossroads
* SBE,SES
* 12/15/2015,11/30/2017
* Vineeta Yadav, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 11/30/2017
* USD 56,758.00

General Summary

This study assesses core questions about the role of political parties and
political party members in the constitutional change of a parliamentary
government system to a presidential governmental system in the aftermath of two
strategic elections. The PI proposes to re-survey parliamentary candidates in
the aftermath of parliamentary elections in which the majority party could not
achieve a coalition to form a government. The new elections created a unique
opportunity to assess and reassess the incentives that influence individual
party members to support or oppose a transformation from a parliamentary system
to a presidential system. Existing theories hypothesize that elite preference
for presidential systems stems from the political insecurity of ruling party
elites and, ideological and policy radicalization among all political elites.
The PI examines how the characteristics of political parties influence how
political-party elites account for the preferences of their party, their voters
and special interest groups in reaching their decisions. Using Turkey as the
case of interest, the PI re-interviews 300 MP candidates to create a novel panel
dataset.

Technical Summary

In this project, the PI collects elite-level survey data that allow her to test
existing and new theories about strategic decision making concerning
constitutional and regime change. Extant research in the literatures on
political institutions and democratic collapse identify the insecurity of ruling
party elites regarding their grip on political powers, ideological and policy
radicalization among elites and structural factors such as poverty and ethnic
polarization as key determinants influencing elites to choose a presidential
over parliamentary system and, to support a transition to a non-democratic
regime. However, recent empirical trends towards legislating constitutional
changes to facilitate transitions to presidentialism and to non-democratic
regimes suggest that existing explanations under-theorize the role of political
parties in these phenomena. Compiling a novel elite panel dataset, the PI
collects otherwise unavailable elite-level data through a re-survey of
parliamentary candidates in Turkey. Through this elite-survey project the PI
seeks to understand the incentive structure for both majority-party and
opposition-party MP candidates in the parliamentary/presidential transition
question. This research addresses literature on parliamentarism versus
presidentialism, extension of presidential term of office, and creeping
authoritarianism.