* 1602012
* PFI:AIR - TT:  Integrated Bidirectional Power Electronic Charger/Converter for Plug-in Electric Vehicles
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Patrick McCluskey, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 06/30/2020
* USD 322,060.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating an
integrated bidirectional onboard charger and dc/dc converter technology to fill
the need for compact and efficient power converters for plug-in electric
vehicles. The proposed technology is important because it reduces the weight,
volume and cost of onboard converters, while enhancing their efficiencies, and
enabling bidirectional operation. The successful completion of this project will
facilitate widespread adoption of electric vehicles, and lead to the creation of
jobs through the small business partner once the technology matures toward
commercialization. The project will result in a prototype of an integrated
charger/converter for electric vehicles. This converter has the following unique
features over current options: bidirectional operation, higher efficiency over
entire charging period, less number of components, and an air-cooled thermal
management system. These features provide the advantages of enhanced efficacy,
greater power density, and considerable cost savings, in comparison to the
competing conventional method of utilizing an individual charger and an
individual auxiliary load converter in the current market space.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the following technology gaps as it
translates from research discovery toward commercial application: (1)
theoretical advancements in the design and development of ultra-compact,
integrated vehicle-to-grid (V2G) and grid-to-vehicle (G2V) chargers and
converters; (2) innovative thermal management methods for wide band-gap Silicon
Carbide (SiC) based power electronic converters; (3) demonstration of a
functional prototype integrated charger/converter for plug-in electric vehicles,
(4) evaluation and prototyping a commercially valuable solution of proposed
converter against conventional technologies, and (5) developing a strategy for
commercialization beyond this project. In addition, personnel involved in this
project, PIs, undergraduates and graduates will receive innovation and
technology translation experiences through technical and commercialization
tasks. This will be achieved through design and packaging activities from the
feasibility to prototyping stage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project engages
researchers from University of Maryland and Genovation Cars Inc. to design,
develop, and validate a prototype of this technology translation effort from
research discovery toward commercial reality.