* 1602755
* Coherent Electron Control
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2020
* Herman Batelaan, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 07/31/2020
* USD 398,442.00

The theory of Quantum Mechanics tells us how electrons, atoms, and all particles
that make up matter, behave at a microscopic scale. The theory of Classical
Mechanics tells us how bridges, cars, and all parts that make up the objects in
our everyday world, behave at a macroscopic scale. Unifying the two in a smooth
way, to arrive at a consistent theory of both the microscopic and macroscopic
scales is an unsolved problem (the "Quantum Measurement Problem") that has
perplexed scientists for about one century. To solve this problem, objects at an
intermediate scale, in between the microscopic and macroscopic, need to be
studied. This is what the project: "Coherent Electron Control" is aiming to do.
Electrons are placed close to a controllable amount of material in a wall, so
that the description of how the two interact is neither easily described by
Quantum Mechanics, nor Classical Mechanics. The best provisional description
available, which is called decoherence theory, can be tested to its limits in
this way. On the practical side, the interaction between electrons and walls has
stopped the development of sensitive devices based on electrons, called electron
interferometers. The walls destroy the useful quantum mechanical properties of
the electrons. If this "decoherence" can be overcome, electron devices can be
constructed that measure small changes in magnetic fields, and may thus assist,
for example, in the detection of submerged submarines that distort the Earth's
magnetic field.

Nanofabricated gratings are used as devices that split electron beams into two
parts. These two parts are recombined and show quantum mechanical interference.
Walls of doped silicon, gold, and other materials such as graphene and
superconductive materials will be placed close to the electron beams used to
decohere the electron beams, which causes the quantum mechanical interference to
disappear. Four different existing microscopic theories can be tested by the
experimental data that will be collected; decoherence theory is an integral part
of all four. The knowledge gained will be used to control and reduce the
decoherence and be applied to enlarge the size of existing electron
interferometers. In this way it will be attempted to construct the largest and
most sensitive electron interferometer in the world. This research project
provides experience to graduate students, undergraduate students and high school
students in the new research area of free electron quantum optics.