* 1602799
* Flagellar Membrane Signaling Protein Transport Mechanisms:   A Single-Molecule Study
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2015,02/28/2018
* Yan Mei Wang, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 02/28/2018
* USD 377,494.00

There is a growing recognition of the importance of cilia/flagella (hair-like
projections on cell surfaces) in sensing extracellular information in multiple
organisms. In order to understand the role cilia/flagella play in cellular
signal transduction processes, the transport mechanisms of flagellar membrane
signaling proteins and their intraflagellar transport (IFT) machinery will be
examined at three parts of the intraflagellar transport cycle: (i) flagellar
entry, (ii) intraflagellar motion, and (iii) flagellar tip remodeling in the
model organism Chlamydomonas. For each part of the transport cycle, this project
will use quantitative single-molecule fluorescence imaging methods to test
competing models: (i) In the flagellar entry region, it will be determined
whether flagellar membrane signaling proteins synthesized in the cytoplasm enter
the flagella by diffusion or if they are carried into the flagella by IFT
machinery. (ii) Inside the flagella, the project aims to elucidate the IFT
carrier and quantitate the trafficking kinetics for selected flagellar membrane
signaling proteins. (iii) At the flagellar tip, it will be resolved whether the
IFT machinery components dissociate from microtubules and each other and
reassemble for the retrograde trip, or whether the reassembly occurs without
dissociation of the IFT transport
machinery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS&lt;br/&gt;This
project is a multidisciplinary joint effort between laboratories with expertise
in single-molecule imaging method, and Chlamydomonas (algal) IFT genetics. This
merger of genetics and imaging biophysics will benefit both the flagellar and
single molecule imaging fields. It will allow for the application of advanced
imaging tools to questions addressing fundamental aspects of cellular signal
transduction, while offering students exciting opportunities to carry out
interdisciplinary training in physics and biology. In particular, the project
will aim to support the training of female graduate and undergraduate students,
including students recruited from regional primarily undergraduate colleges. The
success of the proposed investigation will strengthen collaborations among
members of the Imaging Sciences Pathway, a biological imaging program that
includes faculty from the Schools of Arts &amp; Sciences, Engineering, and
Medicine at Washington University. In addition, for the broader local community,
the project's hands-on outreach activities to high school students in the St.
Louis region are designed to entice young minds to choose science as a career.