* 1602588
* GEM:  A Statistical Study of the Substorm Sequence and Phenomena Associated with Expansion Onset
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/2017,12/31/2022
* Robert McPherron, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Chia-Lin Huang
* 12/31/2022
* USD 539,003.00

This project is focused on understanding the nature of substorms, a critical
problem in geospace science that so far has hindered efforts to develop a
predictive capability for space weather disturbances. In the auroral ionosphere,
a substorm is identified as a sudden brightening and poleward expansion of the
aurora. It is the observational manifestation of an explosive energy release
high above the Earth in the stretched tail of the magnetosphere that ultimately
shunts strong currents through the high-latitude ionosphere and produces
precipitation of high-energy charged particles. These inputs alter the chemistry
and electrical conductivity there and heat the coupled ionosphere-upper
atmosphere. Substorm disturbances produce a variety of environmental effects
that can increase satellite drag, disrupt communications and navigation systems
and induce currents in the solid Earth that are capable of damaging electric
power grids. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A standard technique that the PI has used in
the past is to perform a statistical analysis of the key indicators of substorms
and their sequencing in time and space and compare this against various theories
about substorm dynamics. The recent development of a new substorm theory
provides the motivation to incorporate both new and updated data sets into an
expanded statistical study that uses newly-developed pattern recognition
techniques to remove bias in the identification of observational signatures, and
sophisticated correlation tools (for example, Statistics of Point Processes) to
establish relative timing of physical processes as a function of substorm
phases. This study will make comprehensive lists available of time-tagged
substorm signatures (i.e., auroral zone negative bay, midlatitude positive bay,
Pi2 pulsations, geosynchronous magnetic field dipolarization, auroral kilometric
radiation, magnetotail flows, etc.) and add to these the set of signatures
implied by the new substorm theory (i.e., bursty bulk flows in the magnetotail,
poleward boundary intensifications and auroral streamers in the auroral region,
etc.). The relative timing of features in the lists of observational signatures
will be used to evaluate the evidence in support of the new and previous
substorm theories.