* 1602087
* PFI:AIR - TT:  Passive membrane photobioreactor for cultivation and harvesting of algal biomass and sustainable nutrient management
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2020
* Daniel Yeh, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 04/30/2020
* USD 239,999.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating a passive
floating membrane photobioreactor technology to fill the need for sustainable
microalgae cultivation for biomass/biofuel while simultaneously removing
nutrients from impaired waters such as wastewater. The ICARUS process (which
stands for Isolated Cultivation of Algal Resources Utilizing Selectivity) is
important because allows the simultaneous production of low-cost and sustainable
algal-derived biofuel and bioproducts, while reducing environmental pollution
from excess nutrient runoff and the associated costs of wastewater treatment.
The project will result in a prototype system of ICARUS pods which are capable
of cultivating and harvesting high-quality microalgae at a wastewater treatment
facility. ICARUS has the following unique features: passivity, modularity, crop
isolation and protection, and compatibility with existing infrastructure. These
features provide the following advantages when compared to the leading competing
algae cultivation and harvesting technologies in this market space: 1) ability
to cultivate algae monocultures in a "dirty" environment like wastewater, while
utilizing freely-available carbon, nutrients and water; 2) ability to grow
multiple algal species separately but within the same feedstock tank; 3)
enabling multiple simultaneous use of existing infrastructure at a wastewater
treatment facility, thereby accelerating process intensification; 4) production
of dense cultures which passively dewater, thereby greatly reducing the costs of
harvesting and downstream processing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
addresses the following technology gap(s) as it translates from research
discovery toward commercial application: 1) geometric considerations for scaling
up reactor volume; 2) strategy for linking multiple pods into an interconnected
ICARUS system; 3) process control for a linked system; 4) large-volume algal
growth kinetics and productivity; 5) long-term membrane performance. In
addition, personnel involved in this project, including a post-doc, a PhD
student, and two undergraduate students, will receive training on
entrepreneurship, intellectual property and commercialization, digital 3D
design, process scaling, algal biology, wastewater process design and modeling,
and membrane science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project engages Florida
wastewater utilities and algae companies to develop a sustainable commercial
product (algae biomass for bioproducts/biofuel), while simultaneously reducing
the costs of wastewater treatment and helping utilities meet their regulatory
goals.