* 1602720
* Collaborative Research: Understanding the role of Arctic cyclones - A system approach
* GEO,OPP
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2021
* John Walsh, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Anderson
* 06/30/2021
* USD 186,911.00

Arctic cyclones are an important contributor to sea ice deformation and oceanic
mixing. Changes&amp;#8232;in storm activity, and associated atmospheric
feedbacks, have been linked to increased seasonality of the high north in the
last decade, and with sea ice depletion during summer months. Cyclones are also
likely to respond to changes in Arctic ice cover and ocean state indicating
that&amp;#8232;the atmosphere-ocean-ice system is tightly coupled through
processes related to cyclones. Previous Arctic modeling studies typically used
regional model simulations without full coupling&amp;#8232;of the atmosphere-
ocean-ice system, or fully coupled global climate models that do not permit
year-on-year comparison with the observational record. This study will avoid
such limitations by using&amp;#8232;the Regional Arctic System Model (RASM), for
which output corresponds directly with month-on-month observational records.
This&amp;#8232;will allow assessment of the ice-ocean-atmosphere coupling
processes on multiple temporal&amp;#8232;and spatial scales, and to relate them
to limited Arctic Ocean measurements to build a more complete understanding of
how increased cyclone activity may be helping to shift the surface climate of
the Arctic to a new, warmer state with seasonal sea ice cover, and of how
cyclones&amp;#8232;will respond to this new Arctic Ocean state.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The impact of cyclones on Arctic stakeholder sectors in
northern and western Alaska, including coastal communities and marine transport,
will be assessed through a partnership with the Alaska Center for Climate
Assessment and Policy and the project's inventory of Arctic cyclones and
associated ocean and sea ice conditions will be archived at the National Snow
and Ice Data Center. Historical time series of annual and seasonal Arctic
cyclone activity, maps of tracks and intensities of Arctic cyclones, and case
studies of intense or impactful cyclones will be made available on a project web
page. The project will engage graduate students and a post-doctoral
fellow,&amp;#8232;and results will be used in atmospheric and oceanic science
undergraduate and graduate level courses at the project institutions. Outcomes
from this work will be address priorities in the US National Strategy for the
Arctic Region and will address key uncertainties in understanding extreme events
and their role in the Arctic climate system. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The recent
loss of Arctic sea ice has increased the potential for ocean-atmosphere
coupling&amp;#8232;in the Arctic, especially in areas of low ice concentration
or where the ice edge has receded. An important aspect of increased ocean-
atmosphere Arctic coupling is the&amp;#8232; potential increase&amp;#8232;of the
ocean's response to storms. Where once mitigated by thick ice, wind-induced ice
deformation and oceanic mixing are increasing as the ice pack thins. The
decreasing Arctic ice cover and associated warming of the Arctic Ocean may also
impact cyclone intensity and frequency. This grant will support investigation of
changes in atmosphere-ice-ocean coupling in the presence of cyclones in the
Arctic. It will advance our understanding of coupled atmosphere-ocean-ice
processes with a focus on the role and response of cyclones in altering the
state of the Arctic system. A cyclone tracking scheme will be applied to
reanalyses, yielding an inventory of Arctic cyclone locations, tracks, and
intensities that will provide a framework for analysis of ice and upper-ocean
responses to storms. The responses of ice concentration, ocean temperature and
salinity, and associated ice mass balance before, during, and after cyclones at
a variety of intensities will be documented. The same analysis will be
applied&amp;#8232;to output from the high-resolution Regional Arctic System
Model (RASM) and to output from&amp;#8232;a suite of global climate models
(GCMs). Using a novel set of metrics computed from the output of RASM, peak
temporal and spatial scales of oceanic mixing, sea ice deformation, and
turbulent fluxes associated with the passage of storms in the Arctic will be
determined, in order to assess coupled cyclone-ocean-sea ice processes. Changes
in the cyclone climatology between pairs of coupled RASM simulations, that
differ only in sea ice and ocean state, and in current and end of the 21st
century CMIP5 simulations will allow for assessment of cyclone response to
changing ocean and ice state. This award is made by the Arctic Section of NSF
Polar Programs and co-funded by the NSF GEO effort PREEVENTS.