* 1602813
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Exposure to Environmental Hazards: Analyzing the Location and Distribution of Landfills in the Contiguous United States
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2018
* Kevin Gotham, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 04/30/2018
* USD 11,999.00

SES-1602813 Kevin Gotham Clare Cannon Tulane University

This research examines who is impacted in the contiguous United States by
environmental hazards in the form of landfills (all types?construction and
demolition, industrial, and municipal) and in what ways are people exposed to
such socio-environmental inequalities. Much research has shown that people,
based on their social location, differentially experience exposure to
environmental hazards. This research seeks to add to our understanding of who is
affected, to what extent, and why some people may experience greater exposure to
environmental harms than others. Furthermore, this research implements an
intersectionality approach in the investigation of who is affected by
environmental harms.

To answer these questions, this research will test for and identify the
socioeconomic, ethnic/racial, and gender-based determinants of the spatial
location and distribution of landfills in the United States. For this research
project, the co-PI will create a novel dataset of all types of landfills (e.g.,
construction and demolition (C&D), industrial, municipal, disaster-generated) at
the county level across the contiguous United States in conjunction with data
from the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) and the Census Bureau to
answer research questions. These data will be used to test several hypotheses
concerning whether the socioeconomic status, racial/ethnic status, or gender
status of a community is a major predictor in the level of exposure to
landfills. The data will be analyzed using GIS mapping, OLS regression, and
structural equation modeling to obtain a predictive model for the spatial
location and distribution of landfills. Theoretically derived hypotheses will be
tested by combining quantitative data and statistical analyses on the location
of landfills with qualitative interviews of andomly selected households (N =
30-40 respondents) living near five randomly selected landfills. Interview data
will provide novel insights on how residents living near landfills assess
environmental risk, how they view landfills as hazards, and the decision-making
processes underlying their views of environmental degradation and inequality.
Empirically, we seek to identify the factors that predict landfill location and
distribution across the U.S., an important issue given that landfill
distribution may reflect and reinforce differential access to privileges,
resources, risks, and vulnerabilities. Theoretically, we aim to understand
whether and how environmental inequality and risk are influenced by racial
minority status, poverty and socioeconomic status, or gender status.