* 1602128
* PFI:AIR - TT:  Proof-of-concept fiber-based miniature multiphoton microscope using adaptable optics
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2016,11/30/2018
* Diego Restrepo, University of Colorado at Denver-Downtown Campus
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 11/30/2018
* USD 222,000.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on combining miniature
adaptable optics with multiphoton laser scanning microscopy to fill the need for
a versatile, implantable, three-dimensional imaging system for studying brain
activity in awake behaving animals. The fiber-coupled miniature multiphoton
microscope is important because it allows neuroscientists an unprecedented
ability to study dynamics of complex neuronal circuits while animals are
undergoing different behavior tasks. The project will result in a proof-of-
concept demonstration of our product operating in freely moving animals. The
fiber-coupled miniature multiphoton microscope will allow full three-dimensional
scanning through active focusing with no mechanically moving parts in a compact,
light weight design. The product can be readily connected to a commercial-laser
scanning microscope. These features allow for reduced cost, flexibility in
configuration of the wavelength or imaging modality to be performed, and can
provide imaging over larger brain volumes when compared to the leading head-
mounted microscope systems in this market space.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project addresses the following technology gaps as it translates from research
discovery toward commercial application. Although light microscopy has rapidly
advanced for studies of biological systems, one major gap is the ability to use
these advanced imaging tools for dynamic studies in the brain in freely moving
animals. We propose to combine the advantages of two-photon excitation with
depth scanning using adaptive optics in a compact fiber-coupled design. Current
commercially available miniature microscopes only allow for single imaging
planes, do not enable active focusing during imaging and do not allow both
targeted imaging and optogenetic stimulation. The miniature multiphoton fiber-
coupled microscope will use a fiber-bundle to translate the laser-scanned signal
to the distal microscope head and miniature adaptable optical elements to
provide fast active focusing. This will accomplish high versatility for
applications such as fast region-of-interest imaging, optogenetic stimulation,
and depth imaging with multiphoton techniques. Personnel involved in this
project including undergraduate and graduate students, will receive experience
in technology translation through meetings with business partners, attending
technology conferences, and participating in outreach
events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project engages 3i (Intelligent Imaging
Innovations), an international company that specializes in delivering advanced
optical microscope systems. This collaboration will allow implementation of this
fiber-coupled microscope into commercial systems and speed delivery to a global
commercial market.