* 1602054
* Branched Galois Covers of Curves: Lifting and Reduction
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2016,01/31/2019
* Andrew Obus, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 01/31/2019
* USD 128,500.00

This research project concerns algebraic geometry, the study of systems of
polynomial equations in many variables. The project focuses on equations
formulated in characteristic p for some prime number p. The "characteristic p
world" is one where, every time you take p steps forward, you wind up back where
you start. Far from being esoteric, such mathematical systems describe the
procession of the days of the week (p = 7), the fundamentals of computer
architecture (p = 2), and also the setting for important cryptosystems.
Algebraic geometry in characteristic p is the study of geometric objects
("varieties") given by solutions to polynomial equations in this setting. This
project investigates the relationship between varieties in characteristic p and
in characteristic zero ("standard" algebraic geometry), with the goal of
shedding light on both worlds. Graduate students will take a major part in the
research project. The research will be complemented by educational activities
involving the undergraduate math club.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first part of
this research project is devoted to understanding when branched Galois covers of
curves lift from characteristic p to characteristic zero, and to obtaining
information about the geometry and arithmetic of the lifts. In particular, the
project aims to obtain a classification of the so-called "local Oort groups" and
"weak local Oort groups". The second part of the project involves analyzing
integral models of Galois covers of curves over p-adic fields. New tools
involving deformation data shed light on stable models of Galois covers of
curves with complicated Galois groups. These tools will be exploited further in
order to understand stable models of Galois covers as explicitly as possible.