* 1602100
* Student Support RECOMB 2016
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2016,01/31/2017
* Mona Singh, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 01/31/2017
* USD 15,000.00

RECOMB is an international scientific conference bridging the computational,
mathematical, and biological sciences. The RECOMB conference series was founded
in 1997 to provide a scientific forum for theoretical advances in computational
biology and their applications in molecular biology and medicine. Recomb 2016
will be the 20th Annual Meeting. RECOMB features keynote talks by preeminent
scientists, together with presentations of refereed research papers in
computational biology, special sessions and poster sessions. This proposal
requests travel support for US conference participants, with priority going to
graduate students who will be presenting paper or
posters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact goal of this proposal is to
increase the participation of students at the RECOMB conference by giving travel
funding to students. Women, minorities and persons with disabilities will be
given the highest priority for travel funding, in order to increase their access
to scientific meetings and to broaden participation at RECOMB. All individuals
presenting posters or papers will be sent email making them aware of the student
support possibilities.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;RECOMB is one of the top
computational biology conferences. The many events at RECOMB provide an
excellent way for students to be exposed to new and exciting research areas, and
learn of cutting-edge advances. Further, student participation is vital for the
growth and continuation of the field.