* 1602890
* Flow-Induced Disentanglement in Shear and Elongational Flows of Entangled Polymers: A Hi-Fidelity Molecular Simulation Study
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Brian Edwards, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 08/31/2020
* USD 299,999.00

PI: Edwards, Brian Proposal Number: 1602890

The goal of the proposed research is to understand the behavior of
macromolecules (like polymers or proteins) and the way that these macromolecules
get entangled and disentangled when the fluid velocity is high. While this is a
fundamental problem that can be answered by observations at the molecular scale,
it can have significant macroscopic effects that are important during the
processing of fluids common in the petrochemical and the food industry, e.g.,
polymers, surfactants, and liquid crystals.

Many theories have been proposed to explain the microstructural responses of
these complex liquids under flow, but each invariably diverged from experiment
at high strain rates. Recent evidence suggests that part of the reason for these
divergences is that most flow models track bulk-average properties that have
effectively discarded the short-timescale dynamical phenomena of the individual
molecules. It has recently been observed via nonequilibrium molecular dynamics
(NEMD) simulations of moderately-entangled polyethylene liquids that a
remarkable dynamical response occurs at high strain rates in both shear and
elongational flows: the polymeric liquid experiences a dramatic decrease in the
number of chain entanglements, which leads to a network of highly-stretched
chains that form effective tube-like structures through which neighboring chains
experience anisotropic diffusion. In shear dominated flows, this ultimately
leads to chain rotation and retraction cycles, which give rise to characteristic
timescales that are much shorter than the reptation time of the liquid. This
project will study this behavior using an unprecedented suite of NEMD and
Dissipative Particle Dynamics (DPD) simulations of polyethylene liquids with up
to 50 entanglements per chain. In addition, the knowledge gained will be
harvested to develop a mesoscopic anisotropic diffusion model that can be
applied to high strain-rate flows. Results of the proposed work could contribute
to more efficient modeling of existing processes and to the design of new fluid
materials, or the processes to manufacture them. Data resulting from this work
will become available to the research community through the PolyHub storage
site. There are also outreach and education activities planned that involve the
development of educational modules.