* 1602568
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  The Effect of the Loss of Stable Career-Paths on the Professional Middle Class
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2019
* Lindsay Depalma, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Toby Parcel
* 04/30/2019
* USD 11,998.00

SES-1602568&lt;br/&gt;John Evans&lt;br/&gt;Lindsay J.
Depalma&lt;br/&gt;University of California, San Diego&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over
the last few decades, major structural changes have resulted in the replacement
of stable career-paths with part-time or contractual labor and the general
fragmentation of professional career paths. This market economy demands flexible
workers and creates work that is uncertain and unpredictable. These changes,
characterized by the relationship between employer and employee transitioning
from relational to transactional, is generating an unprecedented form of
precarious work in the professional middle class. This project analyzes how
professionals negotiate contradictions between cultural narratives about lovable
work, success, and agency, and unprecedented levels of precarious work.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research conceptualizes two broad experiences of
professional work, one in the market economy and one in the organizations
economy. Work within the market economy is characterized by instability, risk,
flexibility, and precariousness, while work within the organizations economy is
characterized by stability, low risk, rigidity, and security. This project
compares professionals who experience work as precarious to those who do not,
holding occupation constant by analyzing three occupations that have positions
in both the market and the organizations economy? engineers, designers, and
nurses. In total, the investigators will interview 72 professionals. These data
are needed in order to understand the new problems professional workers face,
and to develop cultural and institutional solutions. This research will
contribute insights that will help to build a new social contract that grants
employers the flexibility that the market demands and employees the securities
and cultural coherence that they need to thrive in a market economy.