* 1602176
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:   Understanding the Mechanisms of Peer Influence in Adopting Health Products
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2018
* Anna Lunn, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Toby Parcel
* 06/30/2018
* USD 11,753.00

SES-1602176&lt;br/&gt;Tomas Jimenez&lt;br/&gt;Anna Lunn&lt;br/&gt;Stanford
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project examines how social ties and
interactions shape households' financial resource allocations and investments. A
vast literature on diffusion and social influence has found that a variety of
individual and household outcomes are shared among people and households that
have social connections. However, evidence for why these decisions and outcomes
are clustered among social contacts is largely absent. The goal of this research
is to identify the mechanisms through which social actors influence household
consumption decisions using concepts of peer pressure, reference groups, and
aspirations. Analyzing interviewees' descriptions of their social interactions
and how these interactions shaped their households' decisions will provide
insight into the mechanisms behind social influence, which has also been missing
from studies of diffusion and contagion. Since the rate and trajectory of
diffusion varies by the mechanisms of social influence, identifying the types of
interactions that facilitate the spread of this large household investment will
inform diffusion models of similar decisions and practices. This study will also
contribute to scholars? knowledge of the factors that both contribute to and
prevent individuals' and households' adoption of other health products and
technologies in resource-constrained settings, especially products that require
large financial investments. The research focuses on the role of sanitation
infrastructure in health in India, particularly child health, and how social
influence contributes to the household adoption of health
infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is to identify the
mechanisms through which other social actors influence household consumption
decisions. The research uses a mixed methods research design to investigate the
ways in which social actors influence others' consumption preferences and
decisions. The researcher initially conducted a quantitative analysis of survey
data to identify which social, economic and village characteristics are
associated with household latrine ownership. The co-PI will complete field work
that builds on a pilot study of household sanitation conducted in January 2015
with funding from the Stanford Center for International Development. Pilot
interviews suggested that opinions and preferences of extended family members
were quite influential in households' financial decisions. The collection of
additional interview data will allow the co-PI to gather and analyze extended
accounts of household members' relationships, relative social status, and
aspirations in conjunction with their own descriptions of their decision to
invest in sanitation infrastructure. The findings of this study will have
implications for models of diffusion and understanding the consumption choices
of poor households in developing countries.