* 1602654
* Collaborative Research: Natural and Anthropogenic Controls on the Inorganic Carbon Dynamics in the Chukchi Sea
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Scott Doney, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Marc Stieglitz
* 07/31/2020
* USD 364,486.00

As a result of increasing atmospheric carbon dioxide concentrations, the cold
waters of the Arctic Ocean and its peripheral seas absorb more and more carbon
dioxide from the atmosphere. This process, called ocean acidification, decreases
the pH and consumes carbonate ions. Ocean acidification is further enhanced as
the Arctic Ocean?s sea ice cover is reduced over longer periods of time each
year. The fast chemical changes of the waters are detrimental to many marine
organisms. In particular, it makes it more difficult for calcifying organisms to
build their calcium carbonate shells or skeletons. Since many of the calcifying
organisms exist at the base of the food chain, there are potentially important,
but poorly understood, consequences for the marine ecosystem. This project will
utilize and improve a numerical model of the physical circulation and
biogeochemistry of the Chukchi Sea, a shallow sea peripheral to the Arctic
Ocean, to study carbon dynamics and ocean acidification throughout the annual
cycle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will contribute to STEM workforce
development through the provision of support to two early-career scientists
during their formative years. It will also provide support for the training of a
graduate student. Outreach to a local K-12 Aleut community will be enabled by
participation in classroom activities during the annual "Bering Sea Days" on St.
Paul Island. The resulting model results will be a resource for related studies
of the marine carbon cycle in the Arctic, such as the international Distributed
Biological Observatory (DBO) program and the Arctic Marine Biodiversity
Observing Network (AMBON).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Little is known about the carbon
dynamics of the Chukchi Sea in fall, winter and spring due to limited spatial
and temporal data coverage in this remote and often inaccessible area. This
project will utilize moderately high-resolution three-dimensional ocean and ice
circulation regional physical-biogeochemical numerical model (ROMS + COBALT)
integrations to study Chukchi Sea carbon dynamics and ocean acidification
throughout the year. Hindcasts (1979-present) will be forced by meteorological
reanalysis products and will account for lateral transport from the Bering Sea
and central Arctic as well as input of organic and inorganic carbon from rivers
and sea-ice melt water. Specific project tasks will include: data-based
evaluation of the simulated ocean biogeochemistry system fields;
characterization of the patterns of carbon dioxide system variability for the
Chukchi Sea across time-scales; partition of the underlying physical and
biological mechanisms; quantification of the downstream transport of organic and
inorganic carbon using dye tracers and Lagrangian floats; and analysis of the
sensitivity of ecosystem processes to ocean acidification.