* 1602023
* PFI:AIR - TT:  Rapid, quantitative, molecular diagnostics for virulent Vibrio pathogens in water and shellfish
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2016,12/31/2021
* Rachel Noble, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 12/31/2021
* USD 349,747.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating ecological
research that has been previously conducted on a set of bacterial pathogens,
Vibrios, found in estuaries and coastal systems. Vibrio cholerae is a well-known
freshwater pathogen that is of concern in developing countries. Two lesser
known, but important human pathogens in the USA are from the same bacterial
group: Vibrio vulnificus and Vibrio parahaemolyticus. These are bacteria that
are naturally found in estuarine systems, but they can also present a risk to
human health when consumed in raw shellfish, or in rare cases, contacted in
beach waters. This project will translate knowledge gained through prior
ecological research into technology that permits the design of user-friendly,
rapid, molecular testing kits. The existing ways to test for Vibrio species in
water and shellfish samples are decades old, and they require 24-96 hours for
results. Even new molecular approaches for testing of pathogenic forms of V.
vulnificus and V. parahaemolyticus are compromised by a lack of specificity
and/or a need for an enrichment step to improve sensitivity, making them require
almost a day for completion. This project will permit generation of new, rapid
molecular diagnostics for virulent forms of V. vulnificus and V.
parahaemolyticus using a new approach for determining useful targets for the
kits. It is envisioned that these kits could be used to 1) certify that
shellfish is safe for raw consumption, 2) protect the health of at risk
populations for water contact, 3) determine the patterns associated with
dangerous forms of the bacteria for improved warning systems. The funded project
will result in the design of commercially available molecular testing kits that
will be easy to use, and will provide results in 2-3 hours. These features will
permit accurate public notification and protection of public
health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses a specific knowledge gap in
the transition from research to commercial application. Vibrio sp. are complex
bacterial organisms, that are naturally found in estuarine and coastal waters,
but only a small subset of them are capable of causing disease. The assembled
team has valuable expertise in next generation sequence and sequence data
approaches, Vibrio sp. ecology, and Vibrio sp. pathogenicity. The combination of
knowledge permits known virulent (pathogenic) Vibrio samples to be analyzed for
specific sets of "DNA motifs" that are related to the capability of the bacteria
to cause disease. From a repetitive process of analyzing known virulent and
avirulent cells, the project team can identify the DNA motifs, or signatures
that can be used to design a DNA test kit. Subsequently, through support from
this project the molecular test kits will be developed, optimized, validated,
and commercialized.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to the technical
activities, undergraduates, senior graduate students, and post doctoral research
associates as well as research assistant professors will be supported on this
project. The will be exposed to a wide range of research and technology transfer
activities, including market assessment, field based sampling and study,
laboratory sample preparation, culture and molecular based analyses of samples,
next generation sequence data annotation and analyses, and kit design and
optimization. The project will be synergistic and contribute directly to the
Molecular Training Facility run by PI Noble, where water quality professionals
come to learn appropriate use of qPCR approaches and interpretation of qPCR data
for water quality management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The project also engages the
Marine Biotechnologies-Center of Innovation, a group dedicated to advancing the
translation of marine science research to commercial application. In addition,
Orion Integrated Biosciences is a project partner. Orion Integrated Biosciences
is a company dedicated to the advancement of unique and disruptive computational
approaches to survey "big data" for sequence and molecular application. This
project will directly impact the advancement of marine metagenomics due to the
fact that the project team is utilizing a holistic approach to target complex
organisms. The project is novel in that the approach moves away from the "single
gene target" qPCR design approach, permitting the generation of diagnostic kits
that are rapid, and cost-effective that shellfish harvesting, and water quality
managers can use to manage precious resources and protect public health.