* 1602280
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:   CONSTRAINING THE TIMING AND RATE OF SOUTHEASTERN LAURENTIDE ICE SHEET THINNING DURING THE LAST DEGLACIATION WITH COSMOGENIC NUCLIDE DIPSTICKS
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2022
* Paul Bierman, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 07/31/2022
* USD 112,738.00

Global sea level is rising and this rise is accelerating, with implications for
global economics, geopolitics, and security. The largest, but also most
uncertain, control on the pace and magnitude of future sea level rise is how the
Greenland and Antarctic Ice Sheets will respond to continued warming. The end of
the last Ice Age provides an outstanding opportunity to probe this question
since it featured the collapse of major ice sheets and abrupt mult-meter jumps
in sea level that remain to be fully explained. This project will focus on
reconstructing the three-dimensional collapse of the New England sector of the
Laurentide Ice Sheet, the largest of the Ice Age ice masses.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will first constrain the timing and rate of
ice sheet thinning in New England by measuring surface exposure ages of glacial
boulders down the sides of a dozen large mountains -- revealing when the ice
sheet surface lowered below various elevations, much like rings in a bathtub.
These vertical datapoints will then be combined with the well-constrained
horizontal ice margin retreat history in the region to produce three-dimensional
reconstructions of the ice sheet collapse through time. These reconstructions
will enable an assessment of this region's contribution to deglacial sea level
rise, freshwater input to the ocean and possible impacts on its circulation, and
how the ice sheet responded to the abrupt climate changes of the last
deglaciation -- all critical for testing computer models used to predict the
future.