* 1602061
* PFI:AIR-TT:  Microscale Gas Sensor for Process Monitoring and Control in Bio/Pharmaceutical Lyophilization
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2016,10/31/2018
* Alina Alexeenko, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 10/31/2018
* USD 206,000.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating a gas sensor
that is capable of simultaneously measuring pressure and moisture content in the
low-pressure vacuum conditions of the freeze-drying process used in
manufacturing of food, biologic and pharmaceutical products. This is important
because it will allow shortened production times, improved energy efficiency and
a decrease in the cost of manufacturing of these freeze-dried products. The
project is expected to result in a prototype Microscale In-plane Knudsen
Radiometric Actuator (MIKRA) gas sensor that is based on Knudsen thermal force
actuation. This gas sensor has the following unique features: simultaneous heat
transfer and pressure measurement in a single device, dynamic tunability
allowing the sensor to be calibrated in-situ and compatibility with standard
microfabrication. These features provide the advantages of compactness, ease of
installation and cost savings when compared to the leading competing process
instrumentation technologies in this market space. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project addresses the following technology gaps as it translates from research
discovery toward commercial application. The sensor design will be optimized by
application of rarefied flow and heat transfer simulations for conditions of
lyophilization/freeze-drying in terms of operating pressures, temperatures and
gas composition. A prototype sensor will be developed that integrates the sensor
device with commercial-off-the-shelf signal conditioning and a wireless
communication interface. The prototype will be tested in laboratory-scale
freeze-dryer at conditions typical for lyophilized bio/pharmaceutical
manufacturing. In addition, personnel involved in this project, including the
graduate student researcher, will receive entrepreneurship and technology
translation experiences through the Purdue Foundry program for students
interested in technology commercialization. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
engages Baxter BioPharma in Bloomington, IN and IMA Life in Tonawanda, NY to
test the prototype sensor at conditions typical for commercial lyophilized
products and manufacturing equipment in this technology translation effort from
research discovery toward commercial reality.