* 1602284
* Signing Glossaries for Science Exhibits
* EHR,DRL
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2019
* Judy Vesel, TERC Inc
* Standard Grant
* Julie Johnson
* 08/31/2019
* USD 299,974.00

As part of its overall strategy to enhance learning in informal environments,
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program funds innovative resources
for use in a variety of settings. Using hand-held mobile devices this project
would test specialized Signing Glossaries for Science Exhibits (SGSE). The
glossaries are developed from 5000 unique signing terms specific to the science
in 6 partner institutions and designed to reach families with at least one
member, ages 5-12+, who is deaf or hard of hearing and uses American Sign
Language (ASL) for communication. The project would demonstrate the potential
effectiveness of the venue-specific signing glossaries to enhance access to STEM
learning during visits to informal STEM learning environments such as aquariums,
botanical gardens, natural history museums, nature centers, science museums, and
zoos.

While utilizing existing domain specific signing terms, the project will adapt
and improve on their use in content specific informal science venues to increase
the opportunity for the target audience to both enjoy and benefit from the wide
array of informal science learning opportunities available to this group. The
research should reveal how this approach might benefit those with other types of
disabilities. The research questions are designed to understand both how family
members might interact with a hearing disabled family member as well as how the
disabled individual might learn more about a variety of STEM content in a
setting that is not domain specific but uses the influence of science exhibits
to inform, engage and interest members of the public generally.

Domain specific signing dictionaries have been developed, many by this PI, to
address access to content specific topics in STEM. This proposal extends this
concept to informal learning environments that are content specific to increase
the opportunity for those with hearing disabilities to increase their capability
to both enjoy informal science learning venues and to understand more of what
these venues provide in terms of science learning.