* 1602867
* Loop Quantum Gravity with Cosmological Constant
* MPS,PHY
* 05/15/2016,04/30/2020
* Muxin Han, Florida Atlantic University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 04/30/2020
* USD 131,339.00

It is known that Einstein's General Relativity (GR) is theory to describe the
gravitational physics. The theory of GR has helped us to make many tremendous
progresses in understanding the fundamental aspect of space and time. The theory
has been successful in describing the physics of universe, as well as making
predictions for various astrophysical phenomena. However it is also well-known
that the theory of GR is incomplete. It loses its capability of making
predictions in the extremely strong gravitational field, e.g. inside a black
hole, or at the very early stage of universe near the big bang. One of the most
fundamental open questions in physics is how to complete GR in order to predict
physics in an extremely strong gravitational field. The complete theory of
gravity that we are searching for is called "Quantum Gravity". The theory of
Quantum Gravity should play a crucial role in describing the physics inside
black hole, and helping us to understand the early universe near the big bang.
Eventually Quantum Gravity will lead us to a revolutionary understanding of
space and time. The PI's group will also train students in STEM areas of
research.

This award support the development of a the theory of known as "Loop Quantum
Gravity" (LQG). LQG is an approach toward Quantum Gravity featured with the
background independence and non-perturbative quantization of spacetime
structure. In developing the theory of LQG, the PI presented a promising new
formulation of LQG with a cosmological constant. The new formulation defines
finite spinfoam amplitudes of LQG. It also relates LQG to many other branches of
physics and mathematics, in particular, it points out a concrete relation
between LQG and String/M-Theory. The new formulation of LQG with a cosmological
constant is going to be fully explored in this project, hopefully making
progress towards some open issues in cosmology. The proposed work aims at (1)
completing both the non-perturbative and perturbative formulation of the new
model; (2) obtaining new insights and tools for LQG by exploring the relation to
String/M-Theory and AdS/CFT; (3) extracting phenomenological predictions on the
physics of cosmological constant. This project is expected to be an important
step toward a complete formulation of LQG that could be empirically tested.