* 1602495
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:   Cultural Contestations and Genetically Modified Crops In a Non-Western Context
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2018
* Jill Harrison, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 04/30/2018
* USD 9,481.00

SES- 1602495&lt;br/&gt;Jill Harrison&lt;br/&gt;Jessie K.
Luna&lt;br/&gt;University of Colorado at Boulder&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
dissertation research will add to our understanding of the polarized debates
over the role of genetically engineered crops in development. This project seeks
to understand the social and cultural dimensions of peoples' practices and
understandings of genetically engineered crops. In doing so, it will shed light
on the reasons why some actors have embraced or benefited from biotech crops,
whereas others have not, and why there are differences in how things play out
"on the ground" as opposed to "in theory." The study examines the role of social
and cultural practices in the adoption (and sometimes rejection) of genetically
engineered cotton in the West African country of Burkina Faso, one of the only
African countries currently growing genetically engineered crop. Research
findings will help contribute to regional policy regarding agricultural
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research builds on academic literatures
that studies the privatization of nature - including seeds. It asks how the
logics associated with genetically modified seeds intersect with non-Western and
non-neoliberal logics. Using tools from Science and Technology Studies, the
research will ask how the logics of neoliberal nature "travel" and encounter
cultural friction and transformation. The co-PI will collect qualitative data
from interviews and participant observation with researchers, civil society
actors, cotton extension agents, cotton farmers of different class positions,
and rural women. The research will use iterative and comparative analysis to
identify zones of transformation, conflict, or resistance. The researcher will
examine cultural narratives and identity claims, as well as peoples' changing
interactions with ecological landscapes. These findings will ultimately shed
light on how processes of capitalist expansion both shape and are shaped by non-
economic and non-Western logics.