* 1602057
* PFI:AIR-TT:  Preclinical evaluation of bioactive tailored amorphous multiporous (TAMP) powder for the treatment of dentin hypersensitivity
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2016,10/31/2018
* Himanshu Jain, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 10/31/2018
* USD 212,000.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating recently
developed technology for the regeneration of damaged dentin and pulp tissue,
which is needed for the cure of dentin hypersensitivity (DH). DH is a dental
condition that inflicts severe pain in majority of people sometime during their
lifetime. The currently available products attempt only to treat the symptoms
temporarily, and there is no lasting cure of the problem. This project focuses
on nano-macro porous glass fabrication technology and applying a new class of
bioactive materials to the regeneration of dental tissue. The resulting glasses,
which have tailored amorphous multiporous (TAMP) structure, promote the growth
of bone as well as soft tissue. The project will result in new TAMP compositions
and establish their potential for the regeneration of damaged dentin and pulp
tissue to cure DH. The selected TAMP powders that comprise of interconnected
nano-macro porosity, which can be tailored to desired surface area, have the
unique potential to cure the problem at its source. Consequently, when placed
inside the body, a TAMP powder of appropriate composition can supply therapeutic
ions in a controlled manner, providing a microenvironment that is expected to
occlude dentin tubules to stop the painful symptoms more effectively than
currently available products. More importantly, the new TAMP powders are also
expected to stimulate tissue regeneration by the cells for a lasting cure. In
contrast, the present products in this market space, available over the counter
or by prescription, make no attempt to regenerate damaged tissue.

The project addresses the following technology gap(s) as it translates from
research discovery toward commercial application. A simple TAMP powder based on
calcium silicate has shown proliferation of bone forming cells in laboratory
tests and also regeneration of bone and soft tissue regeneration under in vivo
tests in animals. However, a demonstration of its ability to regenerate dental
tissue (dentin and pulp) has been lacking. The project attempts to obtain
evidence for the therapeutic capabilities of TAMP powder for dental tissue
regeneration, and thereafter prepare it for clinical trials. It is also
developing new compositions that combine the benefits of different treatments in
one product. For example, novel TAMP powders with fluoride, zinc and potassium
ions embedded within the molecular structure of silicate glass are being
fabricated, to provide a lasting supply of fluoride ions at the site of DH, zinc
ions that promote regeneration, and potassium ions that desensitize pain-sensing
nerves. Further, tests are being performed to assess in vitro differentiation of
dental pulp stem cells, and in vivo formation of pulp-dentin complex on TAMP
silicates implanted in a mouse model. With this knowledge compositions are
optimized for more adherent and faster developing occlusion layer as well as
pulp-dentin tissue regeneration.

This technology translation from research discovery toward commercial reality is
a team effort led by a glass scientist who developed the TAMP fabrication
technology portfolio under prior NSF supported research, together with an
endodontist with expertise in dental tissue regeneration, a cell biologist with
expertise in cell response to TAMP materials, and a healthcare industry expert
with experience in the early stage commercialization of biomedical products.
During its course the project is directly training three graduate students in
use-inspired research and practical problem-solving through a cross-disciplinary
approach that combines materials engineering, cell biology and dental science.
The combination of innovative TAMP technology and its potential societal impact
has drawn much general student interest, which will be further expanded through
more definitive results of this project.