* 1602629
* Collaborative Research: P2C2--Calibrating South East Asian Proxies: Speleothems and Tree-Rings
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Brendan Buckley, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 08/31/2020
* USD 267,428.00

This project involves a cross-calibration of speleothems and tree rings at two
locations in northern and southern Lao PDR at locations uniquely situated to
address fundamental questions in tropical paleoclimatology. Such fundamental
questions include: What are the relative roles of, and inter-relationships
between, the El Nino-Southern Oscillation (ENSO) and the Intertropical
Convergence Zone (ITCZ) in influencing Southeast Asian climate variability?
Currently, there is no coherent understanding of how the archives from these
phenomena reflect climate, specifically how the physical or eco-physiological
controls of each influence the stable isotope records extracted from them.

The research team aims to better understand the processes that control the
transfer of atmospheric and land surface climate signals to climate proxies by
addressing the following questions: 1) How are temperature, precipitation, and
stable isotopic variations recorded in the physical, chemical, and biologic
signatures of each archive? 2) Are local and regional climate signals
synchronous between speleothems and tree rings? and 3) Do the inherent climate
signals exhibit inter-proxy variability with seasonal bias or low vs. high
frequency variability, and if so, why?

The specific objectives of the research include: i) exploring the dominant
controls on and interrelationships between tropical speleothems and tree-rings
through a paired cave and tree modern calibration study at two sites in Laos;
ii) examining the dominant controls on speleothem and tree-ring stable isotope
records for the instrumental period through proxy system modeling and comparison
of new and existing records with instrumental climate data and modeled
precipitation delta 18 Oxygen; and iii) extending the paleoclimate record back
through the last millennium utilizing new and previously collected speleothems
and tree cores from North and South Laos.

The potential broader impacts cover three specific areas: research, mentorship,
outreach.

On the research side, the project aims to tackle aspects of evolving areas of
controversy integrating climate proxies across climate archives and climatic
events.

In terms of mentoring, the project supports graduate students during the
academic year and undergraduate students in summer research in the Manhattan
Center for Science and Mathematics. Students will assist with fieldwork, data
processing and analysis, co-authorship of papers, and presentations of results.
One of the collaborative institutions, William Patterson University, a Hispanic
Serving Institution, is largely a teaching university with a diverse student
body that includes many underrepresented minorities that are first generation to
college.

Outreach is conducted by all the Collaborators. One of the Principal
Investigators is a female Native American scientist and organizes the American
Indian Summer Institute in Earth System Science, a two-week residential program
for high school students. Another Principal Investigator organizes an annual
international Ecological Field School in Vietnam.