* 1602956
* P2C2: Extratropical Mechanisms, Land-Surface Properties, and Seasonal Precipitation Processes on Saharan Rainfall and Simulation of the African Humid Period
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2021
* Christopher Poulsen, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 06/30/2021
* USD 330,950.00

This project generally aims to develop an understanding of seasonal non-monsoon
processes in order to quantify their contribution to climate change in northern
Africa. Specifically, the research aims to provide insights into the relative
contributions of the West African Monsoon (WAM), extratropical cyclones,
Mediterranean cold air surges, and tropical plumes to African Humid Period (AHP)
rainfall (~14,800 - 5,000 years Before Present. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At
millennial timescales, northern Africa experienced dramatic climate and
environmental change. During the early to mid-Holocene AHP, the world's largest
present-day hot desert, the Sahara, received abundant rainfall and supported
widespread lakes, wetlands, and vegetation. Given the critical role of the
present-day Sahara in Earth's radiation budget and its influence on Sahel
rainfall, global mineral dust concentrations, biogeochemical cycles, and
tropical cyclogenesis, climate variability in the Sahara, such as that observed
during the Holocene, has profound impacts on the global climate system. By
evaluating the contribution of these processes to AHP rainfall, the research
will assist in interpreting the sources of moisture recorded in proxy records
from the Sahara-Arabian desert belt which are currently ambiguous because they
lie near the border of the tropical monsoon and mid-latitude rainfall regimes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An assessment of the impact of the new dynamic soil albedo
scheme within the Community Earth System Model (CESM) will offer tangible
insights for climate model development and improved simulation of the AHP. The
development of an objective algorithm for the detection of tropical plumes
within general circulation models will be made publicly available and could be
used to study the processes that influence tropical plume events across the
globe in past, present, and future climates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Broader
Impacts involve the potential for increasing the pipeline of underrepresented
minority (URM) students into the earth sciences through our participation in the
University of Michigan (U-M) Earth Camp. Earth Camp is a residential camp for
early-career, high-school students from the Detroit-area that educates them
about the earth sciences and careers in the earth sciences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The U-M Earth Camp has consisted of a single summer
experience, but is expanding to a multi-summer camp in order to increase the
odds that students will study earth sciences in college. As part of our
participation in Earth Camp, the participants in this project will develop and
instruct a one-day atmospheric science and climate component to the first summer
experience in Ann Arbor, MI and create a four-day component for the second
summer experience at the U-M field station in Wyoming. In addition to broadening
URM participation in the earth sciences, this project will also support the
training and career-development of a young scientist and at least one
undergraduate student.