* 1602536
* Theoretical Studies in Gravitation and Astrophysics
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Stuart Shapiro, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 08/31/2018
* USD 150,000.00

The LIGO-VIRGO Scientific Collaboration recently reported the first two direct
detections of gravitational wave (GW) signals and demonstrated that these events
(GW150914 and GW151226) were produced by the inspiral and coalescence of binary
black holes. This breakthrough marks the beginning of the era of GW astronomy.
The planned research bridges the fields of general relativity and astrophysics,
by studying the generation of gravitational waves, relativistic hydrodynamics,
and relativistic magnetohydrodynamics. A common thread uniting the different
theoretical topics is the crucial role of gravitation, especially relativistic
gravitation. This award provides major funding for research in general
relativity at UIUC and a significant component of the total support in
theoretical astrophysics to that institution. An appreciable portion of the
funding is devoted to the education, training and support of undergraduate,
graduate, and postdoctoral students. These students collaborate with the PI on
the majority of research topics funded by the project. The grant supports the
activities of the PI's Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) team at
UIUC in computational astrophysics and general relativity theory. The training
that each of the PI's undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral students
receives in large-scale computations and scientific visualization, as well as in
several different areas of theoretical physics and astrophysics, prepares them
to pursue professional careers in a broad range of scientific and technical
fields. The computer algorithms and numerical codes that are developed are
useful to other groups working in computational physics and astrophysics.
Through the research and outreach activities of the PI and his group, the grant
helps promote the use of computers and visualization tools at all levels of
education, as well as the public awareness of some the latest and most exciting
developments in gravitation physics and astrophysics.

Compact objects provide the principal forum of the studies, and the dynamics of
matter in a strong gravitational field is a major theme. Some of the topics for
investigation include the inspiral and coalescence of compact binaries (binary
black holes, binary neutron stars and binary black hole--neutron stars), the
generation of gravitational waves from binaries and other promising
astrophysical sources and the accompanying electromagnetic signals,
gravitational collapse, the stability of rotating, relativistic stars and the
evolution and final fate of unstable stars, gamma-ray burst sources,
circumbinary disks around merging supermassive black holes in the cores of
galaxies and quasars, and the profile and observable consequences of dark matter
around supermassive black holes in galaxy cores, including the Milky Way. Most
of these topics represent long-standing, fundamental problems in theoretical
physics requiring large-scale computation for solution. Hence the approach
involves to a significant degree large-scale computations on parallel machines,
as well as analytical modeling. They comprise both initial value and evolution
computations and treat vacuum spacetimes containing black holes as well as
spacetimes containing realistic matter sources, magnetic fields and both
electromagnetic and neutrino radiation ("multimessenger astronomy"). The results
have important implications for astronomical observations, including those
planned for gravitational wave interferometers, such as the Advanced LIGO/VIRGO
network, GEO, KAGRA, the PTAs and eLISA.