* 1602106
* Tapping outstanding new lake records of annual- to millennial-scale Holocene climate variability in the north Pacific region
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2021
* Darrell Kaufman, Northern Arizona University
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 06/30/2021
* USD 517,032.00

Understanding climate variability over a wide range of timescales is a primary
objective of climate science research because it is likely to improve our
ability to foresee future climate. The investigators will document past
(Holocene = 12,000 years) climate changes on time scales ranging from annual to
millennial using evidence from sediments stored in lakes around Anchorage,
Alaska, where climate closely tracks the broader North Pacific region. In
addition, the sedimentary records contain information about: (1) ash-fall
hazards from Cook Inlet volcanoes, (2) the magnitude and frequency of major
earthquakes, (3) changes in glacier meltwater input to Eklutna Lake, a major
source of electricity and freshwater for Anchorage, and (4) long-term
environmental variability, which serves as a baseline reference for recent
ecosystem changes. The project will support early-career scientists and will
train graduate and undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will
take advantage of the best annually laminated (varved) sediment -- among the
most valuable sources of proxy climate data -- ever recovered from Alaska.
Fluctuations in varve thickness and grain size of sediments recovered from the
glacier-fed study lakes reflect major hydroclimate changes. In addition, new
sediment cores from non-glacial lakes will provide a multi-proxy approach to
understanding how shifts in the mean state of climate during the Holocene were
associated with changes in north Pacific climate variability.