* 1602194
* RAPID - High precision radiometric dating of Axial Seamount 2015 eruption products with 210Po-210Pb
* GEO,OCE
* 11/15/2015,10/31/2017
* Kenna Rubin, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 10/31/2017
* USD 49,841.00

Our knowledge of the inner workings of volcanoes, magma ascent rates, and the
sequence of events leading up to a volcanic eruption is still rudimentary for
undersea volcanoes. In the Spring of 2015, just after installation of Ocean
Observatory Initiative (OOI), a new; NSF-funded; cabled undersea observatory, a
major eruptive event happened at Axial Volcano, an edifice just off the coast of
the Northwestern US on the Juan de Fuca mid-ocean ridge spreading center.
Samples of the associated lavas, collected just shortly after the eruption hold
the potential to dramatically improve our understanding of undersea volcanic
processes. This research takes advantage of this unique opportunity to carry out
analyses of Po210, a very short lived radioactive isotope, which allows high
resolution dating that can tell over what period of time the lavas were erupted.
Additional Uranium series isotope analyses allow estimates to also be made about
magma ascent rates, better helping us understand the eruption process and
mechanisms of the Axial eruption. These data, along with independently collected
major and trace element geochemical data and geophysical data that will be
combined to answer questions about the Axial magmatic system and magma migration
pathways leading to eruption. Broader impacts of the work include public release
of data, support of an early career researcher, public outreach via social
media, and support of an institution in an EPSCoR state.