* 1602973
* Reconstruction of climate at the Norse Settlements of Greenland over the last two millennia using organic biomarkers in lake sediments
* GEO,OPP
* 05/01/2016,12/31/2020
* Raymond Bradley, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Colene Haffke
* 12/31/2020
* USD 378,524.00

The climate in southern Greenland is a key area for reconstructions of the North
Atlantic Oscillation, a major pattern of northern hemisphere climate, and is
also linked to Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation changes, an important
oceanic process controlling north Atlantic climate, which recent studies suggest
has been weaker over recent decades than at any time in the last 1000 years.
This is also the region where Norse settlements were abandoned by the early-15th
century; many questions still remain about the causative factors. Although
climate change is often cited as the reason for settlement failure, this
explanation rests on a very poorly constrained scientific foundation and other
explanations have also been proposed. Inferences about climatic conditions in
the region often have been derived from far distant sources, generally at high
elevations on the Greenland Ice Sheet, where climatic conditions are completely
different. This project will produce records with multidecadal (15-25 year)
resolution from the study region, spanning the last 1500-2000 years. This will
be accomplished using new organic geochemical techniques and will contribute to
the calibration and understanding of these methodologies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will partially support a productive young
scientist during the formative years of her career. It will also provide support
for the training of a graduate student. The principal investigators (PIs) will
contribute to a University of Massachusetts summer program designed to engage 12
to 18 year old girls, most from under-represented or low income groups, in STEM
fields. The PIs and the supported graduate student will participate in
university-sponsored middle and high school teacher training programs. Finally,
undergraduate honors students often participate in the activities of co-PI's
lab. She expects that a number of honors theses and senior projects will result
from the research associated with this project. All of this contributes to
development of the nation's STEM workforce. The project will continue an
established international collaboration with French scientists. The
disappearance of the Norse communities in Greenland and its potential linkage to
climate change have significant human interest upon which the PIs propose to
capitalize. Their proposed outreach activities include composing articles for
popular science magazines and development of a project web site. It is also
anticipated that the PI will continue his productive interactions with the local
media, both print and electronic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
generate new high resolution, quantitative records of temperature and hydrology
for the past 2,000 years from lakes in coastal regions of southern and
southwestern Greenland, an area that has important links to the broader climate
dynamics of the North Atlantic. It also will shed light on climatic fluctuations
during the period of Norse settlement in the region. Novel organic geochemical
techniques will be used for past temperature reconstruction (branched glycerol
dialkyl glycerol tetraethers) and for estimates of changes in evaporation (leaf
wax deuterium isotopes) over time.