* 1602537
* Programmable 2- and 3-Dimensional Protein Assemblies
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2021
* Faik Tezcan, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Steve Smith
* 08/31/2021
* USD 420,000.00

Nontechnical: Under this award from the Biomaterials Program in the Division of
Materials Research to University of California-San Diego, the researcher will
develop new chemical approaches for the design and engineering of novel protein
assemblies. This award is co-funded by the following programs: 1) BioMaPS
program in the Division of Materials Research; and 2) Biotechnology and
Biochemical Engineering program in the Division of Chemical and Bioengineering,
Environmental, and Transport Systems (ENG). Proteins are nature's premier
building blocks in constructing complex biological systems such as the
photosynthetic machinery or for building sophisticated materials with advanced
physical and chemical properties such as the human skin and bone. However,
proteins are remarkably complex molecules with non-uniform surfaces and
structures, and the ability to control the self-assembly of proteins or to use
them as synthetic building blocks has been limited. In this project, the
assembly of supramolecular protein architectures will be studied by using new
approaches of chemical bonding and self-assembly strategies that are expected to
give rise to new classes of synthetic protein assemblies. Such an ability to
construct complex biological structures in a bottom-up fashion from multiple
components will not only provide fundamental insights into biological self-
assembly processes, but will also lend access to novel protein-based
functionalities and materials with potential applications in bio/nanotechnology
and biomedical applications such as drug/gene transport and tissue regeneration.
As part of the teaching and training, this project will provide training for
postdoctoral, graduate, undergraduate, and high school researchers in
supramolecular chemistry, molecular biology, protein biochemistry,
crystallography, biophysical techniques, and computational protein design. The
PI's outreach efforts will be expanded on several different fronts, including
active recruitment of members of underrepresented minority groups for research.
High school students will be recruited through various self-initiated and
campus-supported programs, and with involvement in science fairs at local
elementary schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: This multidisciplinary
project is based on the application of supramolecular chemistry principles,
protein engineering and molecular biology to the study and control of protein
self-assembly. Protein building blocks with appropriately chosen
structures/symmetries will be designed to assemble into prescribed
supramolecular assemblies through disulfide bonding, electrostatic and designed
surface interactions. The main goal of this project is to expand the capability
to construct supramolecular protein architectures by utilizing non-inorganic
modalities of chemical bonding and self-assembly strategies that circumvent the
need for designing extensive interfaces. This goal will be accomplished through
three objectives: 1) in developing molecular design strategies for the
disulfide-directed assembly of homomeric, 2 and 3-D protein arrays and
architectures; 2) in implementing auxiliary interactions and surface-templating
strategies for improved control of disulfide-directed protein assembly; and 3)
in constructing DNA-directed 2- and 3-D crystalline protein arrays. Physical,
biochemical and structural properties of these assemblies will be characterized
by a large suite of techniques including electron microscopy and diffraction,
atomic force microscopy, protein crystallography, and solution biophysical
methods. The resulting protein architectures and hybrid materials could be
utilized for materials applications such as templating of inorganic
nanoparticles and encapsulation of various types of molecular cargos. The
proposed activities would expand the current understanding for designing highly
ordered 2 and 3D protein nanostructures from the bottom up, and would likely aid
a broad range of researchers in building protein-based nanomaterial structures.
The researcher has an impressive track record in recruiting and mentoring
underrepresented minority students in research activities, and plans are
provided to expand these activities.