* 1602248
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Public Beliefs and Responses to Industrial Sites
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2016,02/28/2018
* Michael Macy, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Toby Parcel
* 02/28/2018
* USD 11,062.00

Public responses to industrial projects shape the distribution of health and
environmental risks within society. They also influence the social acceptance,
government regulation, and economic viability of new technologies and
industries. This dissertation uses the context of the unfolding boom in gas and
oil production enabled by hydraulic fracturing technology to investigate how
alternative conceptions of the risks and benefits of industrial projects
structure the mobilization of public opposition and support. First, the research
distinguishes between NIMBY ("Not in my backyard") opponents who mobilize on the
basis of perceived local impacts, and ideological opponents who react to the
industry from a larger set of political beliefs and values. Second, the
researchers examine support for industrial siting that has received little
attention in existing scholarship. The project introduces public comments as a
new source of data for measuring public opinion. The project has potentially
important implications for understanding political dynamics behind decisions to
site and expand a rapidly-growing industry. The methods used for this study
should be broadly applicable to other areas of study that can benefit from "big
data."

Current energy development in the United States brings renewed social science to
explain public reactions to industrial siting. This research tests "NIMBY" (not
in my backyard) against a complementary explanation of public response to
industrial siting based on residents' ideological commitments to help to
reconcile inconsistent empirical findings about the relationship between
proximity and opposition. The project will examine 91,000 public comments
submitted during the regulatory reviews of hydraulic fracturing in two states,
Illinois and New York. First, researchers will generate a comprehensive mapping
of the relationship between geographic proximity and mobilization for and
against proposed hydraulic fracturing projects. Second, the researchers will
combine the comments with measures of community context and with individual-
level measures of ideology to evaluate competing explanations of mobilization
for, and against, industrial siting in a series of statistical analyses.
Finally, as a direct test of the proposed theoretical mechanism, the researchers
will use natural language processing techniques to code the body of comments for
the different ways that commenters talk about hydraulic fracturing. For research
on industrial siting, public comments data offer three specific advantages: (1)
they offer a behavioral measure of opposition and support of an industry (2)
they are geocoded, allowing for precise measurement of a commenter?s proximity
to proposed industrial sites, and (3) the text of public comments gives
unprecedented insight into the different conceptions that people develop of
industry impacts. The results of the analysis, especially the relative effects
of proximity and political ideology, may have implications for understanding the
dynamics of other policy debates. Finally, the proposed project will demonstrate
innovative approaches based on natural language techniques and machine learning
concepts to studying these dynamics using existing public records, as well as
the use of rigorous multiple methods.