* 1602183
* Integrated multi-scale, multi-tool, modeling of transport in polymer-colloid assemblies
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Ronald Larson, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 08/31/2019
* USD 346,337.00

PI: Larson, Ronald&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1602183&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of the proposed research is to develop predictive methods for coating
material properties and to even prescribe these properties by designing
materials from the molecular level up. The results of this research would find
many applications in engineering and in the industry, since the utility of
coating materials in everyday life is unequivocal. Most of the objects around us
are coated with a material that either enhances their usefulness or their life
time (computer and tablet screens, furniture, metallic objects and tools, walls
etc.). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While there has been great interest and
effort in the area of multi-scale modeling, there have been few, if any,
successful predictions of colloidal scale transport properties based on multi-
scale modeling starting with atomistic inputs for materials of large-scale
commercial interest. Here, it is proposed to integrate a set of methods
developed in recent years to allow prediction of the impact of surfactant,
polymer, and colloidal composition on the rheological properties of latex
coatings. Latex coatings contain surfactant molecules, polymer molecules with
hydrophobic "sticker" end groups, and colloidal particles that are bridged by
the polymer molecules to form a transient network. The simulation tools to be
implemented and integrated are molecular dynamics simulations at the atomistic,
coarse-grained (CG) and implicit-solvent CG levels, Brownian dynamics
simulations using coarse-grained polymer chains using finitely extensible (FENE)
spring models, population balance methods for tracking numbers of bridging
polymer chains between pairs of colloidal particles, and Stokesian dynamics
methods for computing the hydrodynamic interactions of colloidal particles
undergoing shear flow. Also to be exploited are methods of computing free
energies of microscopic transitions, such as free energy of transition of a
bridging to a looping chain, and free energy of compression of polymer chains
bound to colloidal particles. While all of these tools have been developed or
exploited in the Larson group over the past decade, and integration of many of
the methods has been carried out at the level of thermodynamics, the proposed
new research is to map the transport properties of these methods onto each
other, so that transport rates determined at the finest levels allow input
parameters and time-scales of coarser-grained methods to be specified. The
mapping will also be validated and improved upon, through comparison with
experimental data. Accomplishment of this project will lead to a set of inter-
locking modeling tools that will not only allow prediction of the rheological
properties of latex coatings, but will establish a paradigm to be followed for
modeling many other complex materials and multi-scale transport processes.
Broader impacts include interactions with industry. An outreach to minority
students will be undertaken and a Ph.D. student will be recruited and trained
both through the work at Michigan and through summer internships at Dow Chemical
Company. An open source software package for prediction of the rheological
properties of polymer/colloid materials will be developed and international
collaborations with Edinburgh University and Durham University at the UK will be
established.