* 1602672
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Mass Shootings and the Gun Control and Gun Rights Movements
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2016,02/28/2017
* Eulalie Laschever, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* marie cornwall
* 02/28/2017
* USD 11,447.00

Mass Shootings and the Gun Control and Gun Rights Movements&lt;br/&gt;PI: David
S. Meyer&lt;br/&gt;Co-PI: Eulalie Laschever&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study
examines how the gun control and gun rights movements responded to the shooting
at Sandy Hook Elementary School on December 14, 2012, and the policy impact of
their efforts. The research will also attempt to explain why 29 states relaxed
firearms restrictions, while 16 states tightened restrictions in the two years
that followed the shooting. This study employs two methods of analysis. First,
to determine how the gun control and gun rights movements responded to the
event, the Co-PI compares two different cases to assess how and if two major
national gun control organizations and two major national gun rights
organizations changed their policy agendas, targets,tactics, and organizational
structures between 2011 and 2014. Second, the co-PI uses qualitative comparative
analysis to show why some states strengthened firearms restrictions while others
relaxed restrictions during the 2011-2012 and the 2013-2014 legislative
sessions. The findings of this study will be useful to scholars who study social
movements, public health, state-level policy change, and professional political
organizations. In addition, this study will contribute to public knowledge and
discourse about social movements in America.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
dissertation contributes to the academic literatures on social movement strategy
and on policy outcomes by explaining how movement organizations respond to
critical events and why laws sometimes change during the political debate that
follows them. There is agreement in the literature that critical events are
important for social movements. Little is known, however, about how opposing
movement organizations change in response to such events, or how these responses
are mediated by other features of the political context and by each
organization?s own internal constraints. Similarly, scholars have established
that critical events can shake up the political agenda and facilitate policy
change. But we still know little about the conditions that facilitate policy
change after such events, or whether these conditions are distinct from those
that fostered similar policy changes before the event occurred. The Co-PI will
conduct intensive case studies of two important gun control organizations and
two important gun rights organizations about their organizational structures,
targets, tactics, and political agendas between 2011 and 2014. To answer the
second question, she will conduct fuzzy-set qualitative comparative analysis
(fsQCA) to determine what factors led to changes in state-level firearms
restrictions in the legislative sessions before and after the shooting. The
researcher will compare the conditions that led to four different state-level
policy outcomes. This dissertation has two objectives: 1) to detail how
political organizations respond to critical events; and 2) to determine the
conditions under which state laws change after such events. The findings of this
study will be useful to scholars who study social movements, public health,
state-level policy change, and professional political organizations. This study
will also contribute to public knowledge and discourse in America.