* 1602670
* Collaborative Research:   P2C2--A 5-million-year Record of Western Mediterranean Sea Level Variability
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2020
* Bogdan Onac, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 04/30/2020
* USD 297,491.00

This collaborative award generally aims to establish a new stable sea level site
in Mallorca, Spain, through the study of phreatic overgrowths on speleothems
(POS) from littoral caves. Specifically, the researchers aim to establish age
control by precisely measuring overgrowths by Uranuium/Lead U/Pb dating to
determine the timing, position, and duration of sea-level high stands in the
western Mediterranean basin over the past 5 million years using cave deposits
that grow exactly at sea level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Implications of sea-level
reconstructions centered on the POS from this island's littoral caves are
fundamental for understanding the glacial isostatic adjustment (GIA) in the
western Mediterranean basin. The data generated by this research will better
constrain estimates of Pliocene and early Pleistocene sea-level, without being
plagued by the large uncertainties associated with proxies available for this
time period.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New data could be used to improve GIA
corrections. This is important because current published sea level highstands
during past interglacial climate are significantly above modern sea level and
vary widely over time. The precision of such results are still controversial and
accurate data to realistically evaluate potential sea level by the century's end
is critical. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project involves training for several
graduate and undergraduate students, outreach efforts in Mallorca and in
Florida, production of a documentary film on the caves, and strong and
meaningful international scientific collaborations.