* 1602481
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Rural migrant workers and periods of structural change.
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2017
* Jeffrey Lucas, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 04/30/2017
* USD 11,946.00

Doctoral Dissertation Research: Rural migrant workers and periods of structural
change&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sociology is interested in the distinction between
individual free-will and socially-patterned ways of thinking; what is referred
to as the structure-agency issue. This dissertation studies the relationship
between social structure and individuals' consciousness contrasting two social
theorists' (Bourdieu and Elias) theories about this society-individual
relationship. This dissertation proposes that both theories have explanatory
power but under different circumstances. The research site will allow the
researcher to investigate how rural workers who move to urban settings start to
think about things differently. This setting will allow the researcher to
compare the two theories- one, Bourdieu, that sees individuals' thinking being
determined by their social position; second, Elias' views of consciousness as
formed in processes of people's interconnection and interactions. To investigate
the competing theories, the researcher will conduct a fieldwork study of rural
migrant workers in China and, through participant observation and interviews
learn how their thinking changes in very different environments. This research
contributes to integrating two sociological theories as well as addressing
theoretical debates about structure and agency. It also contributes to
broadening the contribution of sociology to other fields such as
history.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two questions thus lead this dissertation project:
1) How does Bourdieu's and Elias's mechanisms respectively operate in different
social situations? 2) How do the two mechanisms co-function to shape people's
consciousness of social reality? Answer these questions allows investigation of
the fundamental structure-agency relationship that is a core sociological
concern. These theoretical inquiries are pursued through a fieldwork study of
rural migrant workers in China who are appropriate cases for two reasons. First,
they experience multiple dominations as a disadvantaged group in China making it
fruitful to study their consciousness of their social situations. Second, as
they undergo dramatic changes when migrating to become city workers, their
complicated experiences offers a rich opportunity to empirically apply both
Bourdieu's and Elias's models. The researcher will conduct one year of fieldwork
in two factories in east China, including both participant observation and in-
depth interviews to collect data on the migrant workers' consciousness formation
in their daily work and life settings and to discuss how they are thinking about
their structural situations, linking the responses more tightly to the
theoretical models. The proposed research has the potential to advance
scientific knowledge in at least three ways. First, it engages two important
sociological theories in an effort to integrate them. Second, the research can
make important contributions to the efforts at articulating the society-agency
relationships that lie at the heart of sociology. Third, the work has the
capacity to speak to literatures in disciplines outside of sociology (e.g.,
history) that are also concerned with relationships between structure and
agency.