* 1602337
* SCH: EXP: Monitoring Motor Symptoms in Parkinson's Disease with Wearable Devices
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Jessica Hodgins, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2020
* USD 678,850.00

Parkinson's Disease (PD) poses a serious threat to the elderly population,
affecting as many as one million Americans. There is no cure, and medications
can only provide symptomatic relief. In addition, costs associated with PD,
including treatment, social security payments, and lost income from inability to
work, is estimated to be nearly $25 billion per year in the United States alone.
The current state-of-the-art in PD management suffers from several shortcomings:
(1) frequent clinic visits are a major contributor to the high cost of PD
treatment and are inconvenient for the patient, especially in a population for
which traveling is difficult; (2) inaccurate patient self-reports and 15-20
minute clinic visits are not enough information for doctors to accurately assess
their patients, leading to difficulties in monitoring patient symptoms and
medication response; and (3) motor function assessments are subjective, making
it difficult to monitor disease progression. Furthermore, because they must be
performed by a trained clinician, it is infeasible to do frequent motor function
assessments. This project aims to promote a paradigm shift in PD management
through in-home monitoring using wearable accelerometers and machine learning.
Novel algorithms and experimental protocols are developed to allow for robust
detection and assessment of PD motor symptoms during daily living environments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this project develops algorithms for weakly-
supervised learning, time series analysis, and personalization of classifiers.
In previous studies, data was collected in controlled environments for a short
amount of time (1-4 hours) and manually labeled for fully-supervised learning.
In contrast, this project collects long-term (several weeks), in-home data where
the participants' actions are natural and unscripted. Participants use a cell
phone app to label their own data, marking segments of time as containing or not
containing the occurrence of a PD motor symptom. Since the exact time of the
symptom is unknown, this constitutes weakly-labeled data. This project extends
multiple-instance learning algorithms for learning from weakly-labeled data in
time series. Additional major technical challenges include detection of subtle
motor symptoms and local minima during optimization. To further increase
robustness and generalization, this project explores the use of personalization
algorithms to learn person-specific models of motor symptoms from unsupervised
data. The proposed techniques for weakly-supervised learning and personalization
are general, and they can be applied to other human sensing problems.