* 1602581
* P2C2: Reconstruction and Dynamics of Interhemispheric Hydroclimate Variability between the Americas
* GEO,AGS
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2020
* Edward Cook, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 05/31/2020
* USD 626,108.00

The general goal of this project is to develop a pan-Pacific drought atlas using
tree-ring records. This research specifically aims to explore: 1) drought
occurrences and dynamics across the Americas; 2) inter-hemispheric regimes of
decadal-to-centennial hydroclimate variability; 3) large-scale footprints and
temporal properties of extreme events (including responses to volcanism, solar
forcing and internal variability); and 4) past hydroclimatic drought events in
reference to their underlying dynamics thereby offering insight into some of the
most disruptive climatic events of the last millennium.

Hydroclimate patterns will be analyzed for their associated dynamics and
diagnosed for their connection to large-scale modes of variability and/or forced
patterns of change. Multidecadal hydroclimate anomalies (e.g. megadroughts or
pluvials) will be evaluated to determine if they arise from inter-hemispheric-
scale climate regimes with coherence across continents or as more local
continental-scale phenomena. Similarly, extremes in individual years will be
assessed for their dynamic origins and probability of occurrence.

Why this research? Characterizing and understanding large-scale hydroclimate
variability during the last millennium is a critical means of evaluating and
improving projections of future hydroclimate change.

Why this research now? Two recent developments make the time ripe for
significant advances in this area of research. First, fully pan-Pacific
reconstructions of last-millennium hydroclimate variability are now within
reach. Second, the large and growing ensemble of last-millennium simulations
with fully-coupled climate models make dynamic investigations of past
hydroclimate change possible thereby providing potentially improved assessments
of projected future risks and impacts.

The project will help improve the understanding of extreme climatic events
climate and includes a substantive leveraging of international collaboration
with South American colleagues in Argentina and Chile, creation of a user-
friendly drought atlas, and public outreach on science and education.