* 1602127
* PFI:AIR - TT:  Cost Effective Solutions for Storage and Access of Massive Imagery
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2016,10/31/2017
* Valerio Pascucci, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 10/31/2017
* USD 199,412.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on the potential to
revolutionize how microscopy and medical devices are used and the science
questions that they can answer. When image data size is no longer a restricting
factor, new domains of study become possible relating the micro-scale to macro-
scale, such as understanding the neural connectomics of the visual cortex. By
removing the barrier of time, effort, and expertise to use large imagery,
VisStore will enable scientists to scale their existing workflows. Such
capability would open new investigations into fundamental biological processes,
the origin and progression of diseases, and ultimately the drugs and procedures
for curing them. Although initially tailored to life sciences applications,
VisStore can be integrated in microscopy for new devices and emerging
disciplines, such as precision medicine, material sciences and semiconductors.
Furthermore, VisStore has the potential to ease the transition from current
workflows to fully online cloud-based ones. Furthermore, VisStore and the
hierarchical streaming infrastructure have the potential to become the de-facto
standard for large volumetric images.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This Accelerating
Innovation Technology Translation project will support R&amp;D to build a
prototype of VisStore, a plug-and-play device for easy storing, archiving,
accessing, distributing, and processing massive volumetric images coming from
microscopy or medical devices. It translates research discovery toward
commercial applications in the microscopy market which continues to grow,
topping $4.1 billion in 2014 with an anticipated CAGR growth of 7.1%, while the
addressed cyber-infrastructures to reliably store, easily access, and
efficiently process such data have not kept pace. This has led to a discrepancy
between the quality of data that could be produced, and what actually is used,
as scientists unnecessarily restrict image sizes to match computational
capabilities. Brute force solutions for scaling to massive images are expensive,
difficult to maintain, and require expertise usually out of reach for smaller
institutions. VisStore is a combined software/hardware/cloud solution that
enables ease of use for image data of any size. No more complicated than a USB
drive, VisStore allows users to easily access, process, and distribute giga and
terapixel 2D and 3D images within a workgroup, a company, or even globally
distributed environments.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The technology behind VisStore
enhances the state-of-the-art for handing massive image volumes. Modern software
tools often stop scaling when data size exceeds main memory, and this has been a
limiting factor for microscopy imagery. When dealing with image data, the
hierarchical streaming software infrastructure implemented in VisStore
essentially extends the memory hierarchy of a workstation to both an external
network-attached hard drive (NAS), and even cloud-based storage. With each
component acting as a cache, VisStore achieves performance through on-demand
data access to proprietary file layout that minimizes the amount of data
transferred between levels, enabling efficient scaling to images of any size.
This will support development for: (i) automated ingestion and conversion of
images coming from microscopy or medical devices; (ii) a simple user interface
and tool to manage local and remote storage of data; and (iii) a tool to select
and export data for integration with existing workflows.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The project engages the Moran Eye Center, the Associated Regional and
University Pathologists, Inc. (ARUP) laboratories and the Oregon Health &amp;
Science University to develop and tests a prototype acquiring giga- and
teravoxel images and test its commercial value to translate this technology from
research discovery towards a commercial reality. In particular, the graduate and
undergraduate students supported by the project will be directly involved in
these entrepreneurial activities. They will cooperate directly with the early
adopters of the technology at the collaborating institutions and receive hands-
on experience in how to identify and resolve their pain points and ultimately
translate the raw technology into a product with commercial value.