* 1602409
* A comprehensive program in modern dynamics: flexibility, rigidity and low complexity  systems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2021
* Anatole Katok, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2021
* USD 379,591.00

The proposed program will advance research across the principal areas of the
modern structural theory of dynamical systems. A classical dynamical system is a
space together with a map or flow of the space into itself. Sometimes there is
also a group of symmetries of the space. If the group of symmetries is
complicated enough, the system is often "rigid". This means the important
dynamical properties of the symmetries cannot be changed without destroying the
entire system. In contrast, the classical systems, with a single map or flow,
are often quite flexible. This research program is aimed at understanding this
flexibility.

In hyperbolic dynamics there is a contrast between behavior of classical smooth
systems (diffeomorphisms and flows) and actions of higher rank abelian groups.
The latter, which have been at the center of the PI's research during the last
decade, exhibit remarkable rigidity of behavior. Classical systems, on the other
hand, are quite flexible. The principal challenge of the flexibility program is
that numerical dynamical invariants can only be precisely calculated in very few
cases, mostly of algebraic origin. Most known constructions are perturbative and
hence at best would allow to cover a small neighborhood of the values allowed by
the model, or more often, not even that, since homogeneous systems are often
"extremal". So establishing flexibility calls for non-perturbative or large
perturbation constructions in large families to cover possible values of
invariants. This calls for a combination of methods from the theory of Lyapunov
characteristic exponents, smooth ergodic theory, and geometry. While the
principal problems are relatively easy to explain to a fairly broad audience of
mathematicians and scientists familiar with the key notions of the modern theory
of dynamical systems, the point of view is quite new and has been explicitly
formulated by the PI within the last few years. A second direction of research
is the further development of the rigidity program for actions of higher rank
abelian groups. The combinations of techniques and insights that goes under the
name "non-uniform measure rigidity" resulted in the almost definitive
description of maximal rank actions. Those actions turn out to have an
arithmetic nature from measure-theoretic and, with proper qualifications, also
geometric point of view. There are non-trivial implications for the topology of
manifolds that can carry such actions. The proposed research includes further
study of the topology of maximal rank actions, as well as an extension of
arithmeticity results to broader classes of actions whose rank is not related to
the dimension of the ambient manifold. Additional directions of research deal
with zero entropy systems and include several areas of study in both parabolic
(polynomial complexity) and elliptic (low complexity) systems.