* 1602221
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Investigating the Shift in CEO Hires in the United States
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2016,04/30/2017
* Neil Fligstein, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 04/30/2017
* USD 11,982.00

SES-1602221 Neil Fligstein Matthew Stimpson University of California-Berkeley

Much of the sharp increase in income inequality over the past forty years in
the United States is due to surging pay for business executives. This
dissertation will contribute to public debate about appropriate pay levels for
CEOs by putting the rising demand for "superstar" CEOs into historical context.
The research investigates an understudied mechanism contributing to rising
executive compensation: the rise in outside CEO hires at large U.S. firms since
the middle of the 20th century. The percentage of new CEOs hired from outside
the company (rather than promoted from within) more than doubled from 1970 to
2005, and evidence suggests that this upward trend is even starker if the entire
post-WWII period is considered. CEOs hired from outside the company tend to have
higher compensation than those promoted from within, and hence this rise in
outside hires is linked to surging executive pay. To help explain this shift
towards outside CEO hires, this dissertation will (1) better document when and
in which industries outside CEO hires first became common and (2) investigate
how evaluations of these outside hires by the business community have changed
since the middle of the 20th century.

Many explanations of the steep rise in executive compensation since the 1970s
rely on the existence of an external market for CEOs. This external CEO market
has expanded dramatically over the past half-century, and this dissertation will
investigate the shift towards outside CEO hires among publicly traded firms in
the United States. Prior accounts of the emergence of an external CEO market
treat outside CEO hires as a stable phenomenon rather than a practice whose
meaning has changed and whose acceptance needs to be explained. Many
explanations highlight the economic changes that arose in the 1980s, but the
pre-1980s period is rarely studied as a comparison case. The research design of
this dissertation will address these shortcomings to provide a more compelling
account of the shift towards outside CEO hires. The study will (1) construct a
data set of CEO successions at 500 large, publicly traded U.S. firms from 1950
to 2015 and (2) use content analysis of newspaper articles and analyst reports
to inspect how evaluations of outside CEO hires have changed over time. In
addition to clarifying explanations of rising CEO pay, this research will help
explain how a value for general management skills became institutionalized in
practice, granting those seen to possess these skills with the flexibility to
reap greater rewards in the labor market.