* 1602403
* GEM: The Dynamics of a Substorm: Auroral Streamers, Plasmasheet Flows, and Substorm Onset
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Kyle Murphy, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Chia-Lin Huang
* 07/31/2021
* USD 274,913.00

This project will investigate the hypothesized link between auroral streamers
and events in the magnetotail leading to large auroral and geomagnetic
disturbances called substorms. Substorms are powered by the explosive release of
energy stored in the stretched magnetotail fields but the details of the energy
release mechanism and associated dynamics have so far not been resolved.
Understanding the cause of auroral substorms is a key problem in space weather
research. Auroral streamers, the focus of this project, are finger-like
structures in the auroral emissions aligned in the north-south direction on the
nightside that travel from the poleward edge of the auroral oval towards lower
latitudes. Observations for a number of events indicate that the auroral
streamers are signature in the ionosphere of bursty flows of plasma far out in
the magnetotail. The direction of their motion indicates that the bursty flows
are transporting energy and plasma towards Earth from farther out in the
magnetotail. A number of studies have observed auroral streamers reaching the
initial location of substorms just prior to their explosive onsets leading to
speculation that these flows may be involved in substorm triggering. If true,
the characteristics and motion of auroral streamers will very likely give fresh
insights into the long-debated dynamics of substorms. There are practical
reasons for understanding how these large-scale auroral and geomagnetic
disturbances are created. They lead to increased satellite drag, interfere with
navigation and communications systems, and, in extreme cases, can disrupt
electric power grids. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has several unique
aspects. In an effort to minimize or remove observer bias, automatic tracking
routines will be applied to identify auroral streamers in all sky images during
isolated substorms. A technique called Statistics of Point Processes will be
used to determine if there is a relationship between auroral streamers and
substorm onsets. In addition, correlation analysis will be performed to
investigate the relationship between bursty flows in the magnetotail and auroral
features. A further objective will be to investigate whether auroral beads are
consistently present during substorm onsets. Auroral beads are structures
thought to be produced by the ballooning instability in the magnetotail. A
positive result would imply that the ballooning instability has a possible role
in substorm onsets.