* 1602931
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: State-level factors and passage of Right-to-Work laws
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2016,02/28/2018
* Johnnie Lotesta, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 02/28/2018
* USD 11,743.00

As of 2015, twenty-five states have passed Right-to-Work (RTW) laws prohibiting
union security agreements and governing collective bargaining rights. Existing
literature expects that states with relatively high levels of unionization and
economic development will arrive at the same policy outcome, rejecting RTW
proposals. These factors do not explain divergent RTW outcomes in states with
similar economies such as those of the Industrial Midwest. In both the 1950s and
2010s, highly-unionized, industrial Midwestern states like Indiana, Michigan and
Ohio faced legislative and referendum proposals for RTW. Despite similar
conditions, these states arrived at different policy outcomes. Indiana passed
RTW in 1957 and 2012; Ohio voted against it in 1958 and 2011, and Michigan
failed to introduce RTW in the 1950s, but passed it in a surprising victory in
2012. These cases challenge expectations from existing literature and pose the
following question: why have Indiana, Michigan and Ohio followed divergent paths
through right-to-work, despite sharing similar political and socioeconomic
profiles? That is the question this research seeks to answer. Answering these
questions will contribute to the sociology of labor and understanding
organizational processes and state practices that shape policy outcomes, a topic
of concern for policy practitioners, academics and the public alike. Further,
the research will result in a data repository that will be a rich resource for
future scholars of these topics.

Given that the interest groups who won Right-to-Work (RTW) contests in Indiana,
Michigan and Ohio formed strategic partnerships with state parties, this project
hypothesizes that these party coalitions explain divergent RTW outcomes across
the three cases. Drawing from recent work in political science, the sociology of
political parties, and the sociology of knowledge and expertise, this project
proposes that party coalitions shaped RTW outcomes by building broad bases of
organizational support, deploying campaign language that targeted multiple,
disparate constituencies, and establishing the cognitive frameworks appropriate
for evaluating RTW. This project tests these hypotheses through a comparative-
historical analysis of RTW battles in Indiana, Michigan, and Ohio in the 1950s
and 2010s. In so doing, this dissertation promises to make three important
contributions. First, it will contribute to the RTW literature by providing
explanation for otherwise anomalous cases. Second, it will contribute to the
sociology of parties by specifying the mechanisms through parties shape policy
outcomes. Third, it will facilitate future research by preserving all original
source materials in a digital repository, creating a storehouse of information
from which researchers, policy practitioners and the public may learn about RTW,
the labor movement, and political parties in the United States. In these ways,
this dissertation promises to deepen our understanding of the organizational
processes and state practices that shape policy options and outcomes in the
public sphere, a topic of concern for policy practitioners, academics and the
public alike.