* 1602586
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Academic Performance,Gender and Hiring
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2017
* Natasha Quadlin, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 04/30/2017
* USD 11,842.00

Doctoral Dissertation Research: Academic Performance, Gender, and
Hiring&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research consistently shows that differences in
levels of education--e.g., a high school diploma&lt;br/&gt;versus a Bachelor's
degree--are associated with different labor market outcomes, including earnings
and occupational prestige. Scholars do not yet understand whether differences in
academic performance among those with Bachelor's degrees also contribute to
employment inequalities. This question is an important consideration not only
because achievement is stratified within the student population, but also
because students differ in the extent to which they invest time and effort in
their academic performance. Women, in particular, typically have higher grades
and spend more time on academic activities than men, but it is unclear whether
these efforts pay off at the point of hiring. Accordingly, this project
addresses three key questions: Are there returns to academic performance in the
labor market? If so, what are they? And, do these returns vary for men and
women? This research can help us understand persistent inequalities between
women and men.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will conduct original,
experimental data collected in two related studies to answer these questions.
Study 1 is an online audit experiment, also known as a field experiment or
correspondence study. Matched pairs of job applications will be sent to
approximately 1,250 entry-level employers in five metropolitan areas in the U.S.
Applicants' college GPA, gender, and major will be experimentally manipulated to
establish their causal effects on several labor market outcomes, including
callback rate and potential starting salary. Study 2 is an online survey
experiment designed to analyze the mechanisms behind the patterns observed in
Study 1. A pool of respondents who are hiring decision-makers at U.S. firms will
evaluate the same resumes presented in Study 1 and provide feedback about
applicants and their credentials. Taken together, these studies will help
explain how and why employers evaluate academic performance for men and women,
while potentially uncovering important inequalities in the transition from
college to work. This research contributes to sociological research on
persistent inequalities as well as has practical implications for human resource
and other managers interested in promoting diversity and workplace fairness.