* 1602367
* RAPID: El Ni単o Southern Oscillation Events, Migration, and Resilience
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2016
* Jerry Jacka, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 12/31/2016
* USD 26,163.00

This award supports scientific research on processes that foster social-
ecological resilience in the face of global climatic changes. Researchers have
found that the capacity of a system to withstand shocks and uncertainties is a
property of a system's overall resilience, not just the resilience of the
specific component under stress. Some aspects of a social-ecological system,
such as cultural worldviews, are more resistant to change and change more slowly
than other aspects, such as rules and norms, which change more quickly.
Surprisingly, while systems for allocating resources generally change fastest of
all, little is known about how this actually happens and how the changes work
their way through the system as a whole to finally affect rules, norms, and
worldviews. At a time when resources throughout the world are increasingly under
stress from war, population movement, and natural disasters, it is critical for
policy makers and citizens, as well as scientists, to understand the social
processes through which resource reallocation is achieved when a social-
ecological system is under stress. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Therefore,
anthropologist Dr. Jerry Jacka (University of Colorado, Boulder) will return to
the highlands of Papua New Guinea (PNG), where he has been investigating the
relationships between resilience and vulnerability since 1998. The highland
social-ecological system is currently under stress because of an El Ni単o
Southern Oscillation (ENSO) event. ENSOs, which are caused by variations in the
surface temperature of the waters of the eastern Pacific Ocean, happen
irregularly but when they do, the effects can be devastating. Horticulturalists
in highlands PNG are severely impacted during strong El Ni単os because the
accompanying frosts and droughts devastate their subsistence food crops. During
previous ENSO weather events, highland people migrated to lower altitude areas,
where they could find temporary accommodation with lowland residents. However,
economic development, population pressures, and changes in the governance of and
access to natural resources are restricting these traditional responses. This
affords the researcher an opportunity to observe the processes by which new
responses are developed. Data will be gathered through ethnographic fieldwork.
Local resource managers from four communities (two migrating communities and two
host communities who take the migrants in) will be interviewed to understand the
decisions and practices related to mitigating vulnerabilities to ENSO events.
Research participants will also engage in rankings of risks and concept mapping
to understand how El Ni単os are characterized and conceptualized in a diversity
of livelihood contexts. Government and non-governmental officials will be
interviewed to look at regional and state-level responses to the climate crisis.
Findings from this research will illuminate the factors that promote social-
ecological resilience and will be generalizable to other contexts and other
stresses.