* 1602032
* PFI:AIR-TT:  Scalable Hydrothermal Flow Manufacturing of High Value-Added Precision Nanoparticles
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Spyros Svoronos, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 08/31/2019
* USD 210,881.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating a continuous
flow hydrothermal reactor technology to address industry needs for scalable high
precision production of nanomaterials. The hydrothermal reactor technology will
be applied to the production of nanomaterials for use in water quality testing
sensors. Current production of nanomaterials is dominated by batch synthesis
techniques, which lack reproducibility, are often poorly scalable, and are
inefficient. These limitations present a barrier to industrial production and
use of nanomaterials. The continuous flow hydrothermal reactor technology can
address these limitations by providing a system capable of rapid scalable
production of nanomaterials with high precision, significantly reduced waste
relative to conventional batch processes, reduction or elimination of harmful
organic solvents, and fully integrated one-step production.

One of the most important resources of a healthy civilization and environment is
the availability of clean water. Trace water testing represents a significant
societal benefit by allowing water quality issues to be understood and correctly
addressed before public health is affected. However, existing trace water
quality testing typically relies on slow and expensive analysis methods, which
decreases the availability of routine testing. Sensors based on surface enhanced
Raman spectroscopy (SERS) have the potential to provide a rapid and inexpensive
test for trace level contaminants, making testing of potable, natural, and
industrial process waters much more available. The effectiveness of these
chemical sensors is critically dependent on the quality and reproducibility of
the nanomaterials used in their manufacture. This project will apply the
advantages of the continuous flow hydrothermal reactor technology to the
manufacture of various nanomaterials for water quality testing sensors in order
to increase particle quality and reproducibility, improve production efficiency
(by reducing cost, waste, and synthesis time), and improve sensor performance.
At the conclusion of this project, a fully integrated scalable pilot reactor
system will be constructed and optimized for the production of various sensor
nanomaterials.

This PFI : AIR TT project addresses technology gaps related to the scalable
reactor design, optimized synthesis chemistry, and inline coating as the
technology translates from research discovery toward commercial application.
Based on industry requirements and the unique capabilities of the continuous
flow hydrothermal reactor technology, the synthesis chemistry and reactor
materials will be tailored to maximize the precision, quality, and size range of
the product particles. Studies on the growth kinetics, reactor design criteria,
and reactor construction will be conducted to determine optimal reactor design
parameters for scalability and production of the particles of interest.
Optimization of the online particle characterization and determination of
process control parameters will occur. Finally, the inline surface modification
system will be developed to complete the fully integrated reactor system and
allow for single step production of sensor particles.

In collaboration with OndaVia Technologies, a company with expertise in water
quality sensing and SERS sensor technology, nanomaterials will be incorporated
into sensor cartridges for evaluation. Personnel involved in this project,
including one graduate student and at least three undergraduate students, will
gain innovation, technology transfer, and entrepreneurship experiences through
interactions with OndaVia Technologies and the UF Entrepreneurship & Innovation
Center, and participation in the research activities.