* 1602009
* Collaborative Research: P2C2--Reconstructing Spatiotemporal Climatic Patterns for Northeastern Canada
* GEO,AGS
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2020
* Caroline Ummenhofer, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 05/31/2020
* USD 115,540.00

This collaborative project generally aims to generate new tree-ring data from
Blue Intensity (BI is proposed as a direct proxy for density) and three
anatomical measurements of cell number (CN), lumen diameter (LD) and cell wall
thickness (CWT) all of which have proposed links to climate. New tree-ring
samples will be collected along a latitudinal transect to fill a large spatial
gap in paleoclimatic data and potentially allow the inference of spatial shifts
and patterns in climatic variability over the past several centuries.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This transect extends from southern, coastal to near-
coastal sites in Newfoundland and southeastern Labrador to the Mealy Mountains
Park and Reserve in central Labrador, and to latitudinal treeline near Napaktok
Fjord north of Nain and outlier sites just to the north. These new collections
will be used to update existing datasets and better quantify past climate and
environmental variability across space and time and extend the record into the
Medieval Climate Anomaly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The climate of Labrador and
Newfoundland is largely determined by the prevailing western North Atlantic's
atmosphere-ocean dynamics including effects of the Labrador Sea, a key component
of the Earth's thermohaline circulation system. Other influences include
dominant climate modes such as the North Atlantic Oscillation (NAO).
Reconstructions of northwest Atlantic sector sea surface temperatures (SST),
land temperature, sea-ice extent and hydroclimate, as well as analyses of
instrumental and reanalysis data, could potentially improve the current
knowledge of climate change in this highly dynamic region.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching research questions are: 1) What are the
underlying causes and patterns of long-term climate variability across the
region? 2) How does the climate of the anthropogenic period compare with prior
centuries?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project involves the potential for a unique
and potentially transformative analytical technique (i.e., Blue Intensity) for
exploring climate processes in circumpolar regions. There is also outreach to
Labrador's northernmost village of Nain, where communities must cope with severe
socioeconomic challenges amid recent climatic extremes.