* 1602677
* Probing the Epoch of Reionization by Intensity Mapping Ionized Carbon ([CII]) with TIME-Pilot
* MPS,AST
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2019
* Abigail Crites, Crites                  Abigail        T
* Fellowship Award
* Harshal Gupta
* 05/31/2019
* USD 289,000.00

Abigail Crites is awarded an NSF Astronomy and Astrophysics Postdoctoral
Fellowship to carry out a program of research and education at the California
Institute of Technology. Crites will work on the development of the Tomographic
Ionized Carbon Intensity Mapping Experiment (TIME-Pilot), a new instrument
designed to measure signatures of ionized carbon in the early universe. This new
instrument will improve our understanding of the history of star formation
during a poorly studied period when the universe was evolving rapidly. The
planned measurements will constrain the density of star formation and establish
the technique of ionized carbon detection as a new, viable way of probing the
early history of the forming universe. Alongside this work, Crites will conduct
an outreach effort that first includes visits to Los Angeles area public high
schools to provide a broad introduction to science, followed by bringing 1 - 2
students to work in the TIME-Pilot group's laboratory during the summer.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Tomographic Ionized Carbon Intensity Mapping
Experiment (TIME-Pilot) is a new cryogenic, mm-wavelength spectrometer designed
to measure clustering fluctuations in the 157.7 micrometer ionized carbon [CII]
emission line during the Epoch of Reionization (EoR) and carbon monoxide in the
epoch of peak star formation rate. This will be accomplished through intensity
mapping of [CII] in order to detect clustering fluctuations and test the
predicted [CII] amplitudes of faint emission from the earliest dwarf galaxies. A
[CII] detection with TIME-Pilot would constrain the density of EoR star
formation and would make [CII] emission a viable new tool for understanding the
EoR. Crites will focus on both completing the development of the TIME-Pilot
instrument and conducting an analysis of the systematic effects from the
foreground that will need to be accommodated in order to extract the [CII]
signal. High school students in the outreach program will receive classroom
visits describing the practice of science, followed by a small number of
students being invited to work with the TIME-Pilot group's laboratory for hands-
on experience during the summer.