* 1602126
* Collaborative Research:  Persistence, entrainment, and function of circadian rhythms in arctic ground squirrels
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2015,07/31/2017
* Charles Buck, Northern Arizona University
* Continuing Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 07/31/2017
* USD 327,024.00

The Earth's light-dark (LD) cycle is the strongest cue for entraining circadian
rhythms and is considered the primary driver for the emergence and evolution of
endogenous clocks. In polar regions, however, photoperiod exhibits extreme
annual variation culminating with the sun remaining above or below the horizon
for extended periods. Without a defined LD cycle, some arctic residents lose
daily organization of behavior and physiology, and it has been hypothesized that
the molecular clockwork that drives circadian rhythms may be weak or absent in
arctic vertebrates. This study tests the hypothesis that persistence of
circadian organization in some arctic mammals is adaptive because it allows
organisms to minimize thermoregulatory costs. Specifically, the investigators
will examine persistence, entrainment, and function of circadian rhythms in the
arctic ground squirrel (AGS) during the continuous daylight of the active season
and the continuous dark of hibernation. Four research objectives span from
molecular and neurobiological mechanisms to physiological, behavioral and
ecological adaptation: (1) determine when circadian rhythms are exhibited during
the annual cycle of free-living AGS and establish if the onset of rhythmicity in
spring coincides with first exposure to light, (2) determine if circadian
rhythms persist in the master clock of AGS during hibernation by measuring
patterns of clock gene expression in the suprachiasmatic nuclei (SCN) of the
brain, (3) determine if AGS entrain circadian rhythms to daily changes in light
quality or intensity, and (4) investigate patterns of re-entrainment and the
function of rhythms in the arctic summer by experimentally phase-shifting free-
living ground squirrels and measuring metabolic costs of nocturnal activity.
Whether circadian rhythms persist during hibernation is contentious.
Transcription and translation are thought to be globally suppressed during deep
torpor and the only study to examine clock-gene expression within the SCN during
multi-day torpor found no evidence of oscillations. However, circadian body
temperature rhythms have been observed in some studies of captive ground
squirrels during torpor and timing of arousals has been hypothesized to be
controlled by a circadian clock. Persistence of oscillations in clock-gene
expression in the SCN would support existence of tissue-specific mechanisms for
translational control of a subset of genes relevant to survival during
hibernation. In contrast, expression of daily rhythms may not be compatible with
hibernation; SCN function and or output may be inhibited to prolong torpor. This
study integrates research and learning by (1) training post-docs and students
from three universities in ecophysiological studies in the laboratory and field,
(2) inclusion of Alaska Natives in research through participation in the Alaska
Native Science and Engineering Program, and (3) increasing K-12 students'
engagement in research by participating in Teacher Research Experience programs.
Results of research will be disseminated locally in classroom presentations and
nationally through the University of Alaska media relations team.