* 1602784
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:   The Role of Social Entrepreneurship in Addressing Poverty.
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2018
* Nevena Radoynovska, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Toby Parcel
* 04/30/2018
* USD 12,000.00

SES-1602784&lt;br/&gt;Brayden King&lt;br/&gt;Nevena
Radoynovska&lt;br/&gt;Northwestern University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Social
entrepreneurship - broadly understood as the use of market principles to address
social needs - has raised high expectations for curbing global poverty and
social exclusion. Yet, despite impressive growth in attention to social
entrepreneurship, surprisingly little is known about when, how and why it
succeeds or fails in addressing social problems. Beyond theoretical
contributions of interest to scholars, the project has potential implications
for the expanding regional, national and supranational institutions that have
turned to social entrepreneurship in the face of scarce public funding and
growing socio-economic inequalities. Study findings could possibly offer
valuable insights for tailoring social entrepreneurship policies to local needs,
opportunities, and power structures, as well as for identifying when alternative
(or additional) actors and initiatives might be leveraged to address poverty and
social exclusion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This dissertation uses mixed methods to
investigate the factors and mechanisms that help and/or hinder social
entrepreneurship in addressing poverty and social exclusion. The empirical
context is social entrepreneurship in Paris and its surrounding 'banlieues' -
communities marked by disproportionate levels of poverty, unemployment and
additional forms of exclusion. Part I uses national-level quantitative data (an
original dataset of 1033 French social enterprises selected on the basis of
organizational form and entrepreneurial profile) to investigate the conditions
under which social entrepreneurs/enterprises succeed or fail in terms of their
economic survival and social mission(s). Using event history analysis
(2002-2015), the project analyzes the founding and survival rates of social
enterprises based on their geographic location, sector of activity, founder and
community characteristics, and commercial and social organizational missions.
Part II relies on semi-structured interviews to investigate how different actors
construct the meaning of success, failure and impact in social entrepreneurship,
and the mechanisms that limit SE's ability to reduce social exclusion in
communities. Interviews are conducted with three groups of actors in the Ile-de-
France region of France: (1) founders/current directors of social enterprises,
(2) strategic directors of organizations providing support (e.g., financial,
training, mentorship, networking) to social entrepreneurs and enterprises, and
(3) "unsuccessful" social entrepreneurs who had an entrepreneurial idea but did
not ultimately found an organization and/or whose social enterprise was
dissolved within a year of establishment. Interviews are transcribed and
translated from French, analyzed first inductively, then systematically using
qualitative coding software (Atlas.ti). The quantitative dataset, findings,
codebook, and aggregate summary data from Atlas.ti will be made available to the
public, while executive summaries will be provided to each participating
organization/individual as well as interested policy-makers and public
institutions.