* 1602590
* A Terrestrial Perspective of Last Millennium Hydroclimate Variability in the Central Tropical Pacific
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2021
* Jessica Conroy, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 04/30/2021
* USD 367,487.00

The tropical Pacific plays an enormous role in shaping global climate patterns,
yet our understanding of how tropical Pacific climate has varied in the past
remains uncertain due to sparse observations across this vast region. This
research project will use lake sediments to reveal changes in precipitation and
evaporation on the central tropical Pacific island of Kiritimati during the last
1000 years. The outcomes of this project will provide insight into the nature of
multidecadal to centennial tropical Pacific climate variability, timescales
critical in the context of future climate trends.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research will produce new proxy records of central tropical Pacific
climate. Time series of elemental abundance, biological indicators of lake water
conductivity, and stable oxygen isotope ratios of ostracod calcium carbonate
spanning the last millennium will provide a multi-proxy perspective on past lake
water balance and atmospheric moisture balance. In addition, new weather,
limnologic and stable oxygen isotope measurements of lake and groundwater will
promote a more quantitative understanding of the climate controls on lake water
balance within the framework of a proxy system model for lake water and ostracod
oxygen isotope ratios. These newly developed records will permit hypothesis
testing of whether meridional or zonal changes in atmospheric circulation played
a more prominent role in controlling spatial patterns of tropical Pacific
hydroclimate variability.