* 1602347
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Formal Modeling Of Raw Material Procurement
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2016,10/31/2017
* Curtis Marean, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 10/31/2017
* USD 11,640.00

The decisions that people make in regards to the choice and movement of raw
materials for technology is a crucial question in the social sciences that has
important impacts on all societies, from small to large scale. Researchers will
study through computer and mathematical modeling integrated with archaeological
data how early modern humans moved around the landscape, organized their
technology, and made choices of raw materials for stone tool manufacture when
they faced major climatic and environmental change during formative periods of
evolution. Past scholarship on these relationships has relied on informal
(qualitative) models. In this research raw materials are considered either to be
specifically and directly selected for a certain quality, or raw materials are
opportunistically selected when encountered on the landscape, using formal
logic-grounded modelling that allows for pin-pointing why a model is wrong or
not. In the social sciences, there is growth in the development of formal
modeling of human behavior and social and cultural systems. All models must
begin simply, and this research, through its use of two simple models, will
illustrate how formal models can be applied to questions of technological change
and the procurement of materials and thus contribute to that ongoing development
of social science modeling. The researchers will seek out and work with
undergraduates at Arizona State University (ASU) to assist in expanding the
models thus contributing to STEM-based education in the social science. On
completion, the models will be used a teaching experience for undergraduate
students at Nelson Mandela Metropolitan University, South Africa and ASU.
Additionally, the model framework that will be produced by the researchers can
be applied to other examples of tool resource choice regardless of raw material
type in archaeological sequences throughout the world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
researchers will examine the role and importance of stone tool raw materials in
the technological organization and mobility strategy of early modern humans when
facing major climatic and environmental change during the Middle to Late
Pleistocene in the Mossel Bay region on the south coast of South Africa. Using
excellent high-resolution climate/environmental and archaeological data from
this region, the researchers will contrast two formal models, test different
hypotheses drawn from those models and the effects independent variables have on
the selection of stone tool raw materials. This endeavor will highlight which
raw materials were more time-efficient to use during changing environmental and
behavioral contexts, and will provide valuable data on the choices early humans
made regarding raw materials that will be integrated into a comprehensive
computational model of hunter-gatherer resources that include food resources.
Ultimately the researchers will provide needed clarity as to whether the
cultural adaptive response to climatic and environmental change during the
formative periods of our modern human evolution was driven by a mobility
strategy that precluded any specific investment in stone technology and only
prioritized moving people to the food resources, or if the response was an
increased reliance on technological innovation facilitated by strategic
selection of raw materials that demanded technical insight in raw material
characteristics.