* 1602788
* Collaborative Research: Testing Laurentide Ice Sheet Climate Response and Younger Dryas Trigger with Glacial Varves
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2022
* Nigel Wattrus, University of Minnesota Duluth
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 07/31/2022
* USD 134,328.00

This project has two objectives. 1) Document the response of the former ice
sheet that covered the North American mid-continent to rapid climate changes
that occurred at the end of the last ice age. Such a record enhances our ability
to predict the response of ice sheets to modern climate change. 2) Test the role
of increased freshwater influx to the Atlantic Ocean as a possible trigger for
these rapid climate changes, specifically the cold interval known as the Younger
Dryas. Modern freshening in the North Atlantic and Arctic Oceans has raised
concerns that global warming driven increases in glacier runoff could trigger
climate cooling. To evaluate models that use this event to assess the future
response of the Atlantic Ocean to predicted freshening, the connections (if any)
between freshwater discharge and routing before and during the Younger Dryas
need to be resolved.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary records that will be
generated are varve thickness datasets from a large glacial lake, proximal to
the former ice sheet. Glacial varves are yearly sediment couplets that appear
similar to tree rings, and as such provide an annually resolvable record of how
climate affected the ice sheet. The varves will be recovered by coring sediments
from many lakes, spanning a broad region west of Lake Superior. By matching
thickness patterns between all sites, a 5000+ year time series is anticipated.
Working in collaboration with staff at Voyageurs National Park (Minnesota), this
work will be showcased for the general public via a permanent indoor exhibit on
varves as records of climate and environmental change.