* 1602941
* Collaborative Research: GEM--Comparing Simulations of Electron Acceleration in Kinetic Alfven Waves with Observations from the Van Allen Probes in the Inner Magnetosphere
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Christopher Chaston, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 07/31/2021
* USD 96,231.00

The focus of this project is study a class of waves known as kinetic Alfven
waves (KAWs) that may play an important role in the formation of the aurora. New
observations from the Van Allen Probes mission show that these waves are a
common during space weather storms. Interactions between these KAWs and
electrons can result in penetration of these electrons into the atmosphere.
Their penetration into the upper atmosphere leads to changes into electrical
characteristics of the upper atmosphere. Understanding the factors that control
the electrical properties of the upper atmosphere is essential to producing
better space weather forecasts. The project will use a combination of numerical
models and observations to investigate the process that transfers energy from
the KAWs to the electrons. Undergraduate and graduate students will actively
participate in this project. The investigators will also plan to provide
opportunities for undergraduates to participate in the research through
partnership with National Undergraduate Fellowship Program in Plasma Physics and
Fusion Energy Sciences program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposers will use a
hybrid Gyrofluid-Kinetic-Electron (GKE) model to study the recently observed
traveling and standing Alfven waves prevalent through the inner magnetosphere
during substorms. Van Allen probes data will be used to derive simulation
parameters and compare with simulation output. This investigation will determine
how and to what extent KAW energy flux is converted to electron energy flux in
the inner magnetosphere. It will determine to what extent this mechanism is an
efficient and effective pathway for enhanced energization and scattering of
plasmasheet electrons into the loss cone, for additional heating of the
ionosphere due to this scattering and for additional Poynting flux into the
ionosphere.