* 1602493
* International Conference On Design of Experiments - ICODOE 2016
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/2016,06/30/2018
* E Olusegun George, University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2018
* USD 10,000.00

The International Conference on Design of Experiments (ICODOE 2016) will be held
at the University of Memphis on May 10-13, 2016. The design and analysis of
experiments is at the foundation of the scientific method; it is used in
applications across all scientific disciplines and engineering. The conference
will help in the advancement of knowledge in the area of experimental design as
prominent researchers from all over the world will be participating in the
conference. This award provides travel support to increase the number of junior
researchers who are able to attend.

The primary objective of the conference is to encourage and support young
researchers in the field, to make them aware of the latest developments, and
also to bring them together with established researchers in experimental design.
The conference will also catalyze research in new directions by bringing
together leading researchers from all over the world in the area of design and
analysis of experiments and practitioners in the pharmaceutical, chemometric,
physical, biological, medical, social, psychological, economic, engineering, and
manufacturing sciences. Topics of the conference include design of experiments
for big data, design for uncertainty quantification, computational methods, and
computer experiments. The focus will be on emerging areas of research in
experimental design as well as innovations in traditional areas. Additional
information is available at the conference web site:
www.memphis.edu/msci/news/icodoe2016.php