* 1602597
* The Physics of the Smallest Stars and the Planets That Orbit Them
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2016,12/31/2018
* Elisabeth Newton, Newton                  Elisabeth      R
* Fellowship Award
* Harshal Gupta
* 12/31/2018
* USD 248,750.00

Elisabeth Newton is awarded an NSF Astronomy and Astrophysics Postdoctoral
Fellowship to carry out a program of research and education at the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology. Newton will study M dwarf stars using data from the
Kepler space telescope and new ground-based observations with the Infrared
Telescope Facility (IRTF). An M dwarf star is the smallest, most common type of
star in the Galaxy. A detailed understanding of M dwarfs is important in its own
right, but also because they are perhaps the best places to discover Earth-like
planets: the smaller size of the star enhances the signal from an orbiting
planet. Equipped with this detailed understanding, Newton will investigate
planetary systems around M dwarfs. She will also develop and teach an
introductory astronomy course for the Boston University Prison Education Program
(BUPEP), with the goal of increasing the mathematical skills, quantitative
reasoning, and scientific literacy of inmates in preparation for life outside
prison.

Newton will undertake a multi-pronged observational study of M dwarfs, with a
focus on evolutionary trends in stellar and planet populations. The program will
consist of (1) using photometry from Kepler surveys to measure rotation periods
for field M dwarfs and analyze their angular momentum evolution; and (2) a new,
extensive campaign with the IRTF to study magnetic field strengths in cool
dwarfs. Newton will target M dwarfs with measured rotation periods to
investigate the relation between magnetism and rotation, and M and K dwarfs with
measured radii to test whether magnetism can be responsible for the observed
radius inflation. Finally, Newton will use information on the masses,
metallicities, and ages of low-mass M dwarf planet-hosts to investigate the
origins of multi-planet systems in compact orbits. As part of her education
plan, Newton will develop and teach an introductory astronomy course, which will
be the first science course offered to inmates through BUPEP, and which will
serve as the foundation for a sustainable astronomy curriculum within the
program.