* 1602169
* Magnetically Supported Accretion Disks Around Black Holes: Observational Diagnostics from Numerical Simulations
* MPS,AST
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2019
* Greg Salvesen, Salvesen                Greg
* Fellowship Award
* Harshal Gupta
* 09/30/2019
* USD 289,000.00

Greg Salvesen is awarded an NSF Astronomy and Astrophysics Postdoctoral
Fellowship to carry out a program of research and education at the University of
California, Santa Barbara. Salvesen will perform advanced numerical simulations
to understand how strong magnetic fields influence black hole X-ray Binaries (BH
XRBs), which consist of a black hole feeding on a disk of X-ray emitting gas
from a companion star. Understanding BH XRBs is key to learning about other
types of black holes as well. The center of nearly every galaxy (including our
own) hosts a supermassive black hole surrounded by a disk of gas, but
supermassive black holes are very difficult to understand because they change
very little over our lifetimes. Because BH XRBs are thought to be scaled down
versions of supermassive black holes, and exhibit changes on timescales
accessible to astronomers, they are ideal laboratories for studying how material
accretes around a black hole. Alongside this work, Salvesen will create a
website featuring real astronomical data that have been converted into sound
samples, and he will develop workshops to convey classroom astronomy concepts
through sound to K-12 students with visual impairments or limited English
proficiency.

Salvesen will undertake numerical simulations of strongly magnetized accretion
disks to calculate two direct observable quantities of BH XRBs: (1) the spectrum
of light emitted by an accretion disk subjected to magnetic fields of various
strengths and geometries, as well as quasi-periodic oscillations produced by
accretion disk variability; and (2) the spectrum of light absorbed by
magnetically driven disk winds, and manifested in diagnostic probes (e.g.,
spectral lines of highly ionized atoms). Salvesen will then compare the
simulations with the observed properties of BH-XRBs to determine if the emission
and absorption spectra of these objects can be used to understand the influence
of strong magnetic fields on black hole accretion disks. Salvesen will also
create the Astronomy Sound of the Month (ASOM) website and develop
"sonification" workshops to convey basic astronomy concepts to visually impaired
or English-language learning K-12 students.