* 1602633
* Collaborative Research: P2C2--Multi-proxy Reconstructions of North Pacific Decadal Variability from Bivalve Mollusks and Trees
* GEO,AGS
* 05/15/2017,04/30/2020
* Daniel Griffin, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 04/30/2020
* USD 41,660.00

This project has three main scientific goals aimed at: 1) benchmarking pre-
industrial ranges of North Pacific decadal variability for comparison to
observed 20th century patterns as well as modeled paleo and future datasets of
hemispheric climate; 2) addressing unresolved questions regarding poor agreement
among existing tree-ring reconstructions of North Pacific decadal variability
and the possibility that linkages across marine and terrestrial systems vary in
character and strength over time; and 3) examining long-term linkages between
the North Pacific and tropical Pacific by comparing reconstructions of North
Pacific decadal variability to independent reconstructions of the El Nino
Southern Oscillation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Decadal-scale variability in the
North Pacific Ocean plays a fundamental role in the socioeconomic and
environmental dynamics of western North America with clearly established
implications for fisheries production, forest growth, wildfire, drought, and
snowpack. This major mode of Earth's climate system has historically been
characterized as the Pacific Decadal Oscillation for which signatures have been
identified in biological and physical indicators across Asia, Australia, and
South America and even in global-scale trends in sea level and surface
temperature. However, there remains considerable and long-standing uncertainly
in its behavior prior to AD 1900 and the extent to which 20th century dynamics
are atypical in a multi-centennial context. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this study,
three paleoclimate proxy data sources will be integrated to reconstruct North
Pacific decadal variability. First, a network of exactly dated chronologies will
be produced from growth-increment widths of long-lived marine bivalve Pacific
geoduck (Panopea generosa), the growth of which is demonstrated to be highly
sensitive to sea surface temperatures. Radiocarbon (14C) data in geoducks, once
cross-dated and placed in the appropriate calendar years, will yield another
perspective on North Pacific decadal variability with information regarding
long-term changes in water mass age and coastal ocean circulation. Finally,
existing tree-ring chronologies from the North Pacific rim will be integrated
with the geoduck data to maximize reconstruction power and accuracy in a multi-
proxy approach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts involve support for an
early career scientist, grad student, and post-doc, and will involve
undergraduate students in the research activities. The research aims to provide
useful insights into PDO variability, the reasons for divergence among regional
tree ring records, the environmental settings of native cultures and fisheries
in the past, and insights into marine reservoir effects. If achieved, these
would be important scientific impacts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal has an
element of risk but that risk is offset by the potential benefit in new
scientific understanding.