* 1602583
* The Eye of the Storm: A Detailed Study of Star Formation in our Extreme Galactic Center
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2017
* Cara Battersby, Battersby               Cara           D
* Fellowship Award
* Harshal Gupta
* 07/31/2017
* USD 89,000.00

Cara Battersby is awarded an NSF Astronomy and Astrophysics Postdoctoral
Fellowship to carry out a program of research and education at the Harvard-
Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics. Battersby will undertake radio astronomical
observations of dense molecular gas within the innermost regions of the Milky
Way, known as the Central Molecular Zone (CMZ). Studying the CMZ is important,
because it provides a rare glimpse of how gas is converted into stars under the
hot, dense, and turbulent conditions present near the center of the Galaxy.
Because most stars in the early universe are thought to have formed under
extreme conditions similar to those found in the CMZ, the proposed studies would
enable a better understanding of star formation in the early universe. Battersby
will also develop a mentorship and science communication program centered around
undergraduate students from underrepresented backgrounds, to enhance the
retention of these students in scientific and technological
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because stars form from cool, collapsing molecular
clouds which radiate most of their energy at long wavelengths, the proposed
observations with the Submillimeter Array (SMA) are ideally suited to the study
of deeply embedded star formation in the Galaxy's CMZ. With the SMA, Battersby
is leading the first wide-field subparsec survey of the CMZ, which will: (1)
yield a comprehensive census of dense cores in the CMZ; (2) compare their basic
properties with star-forming clouds in the Galactic disk; and (3) determine if
star formation in the CMZ is consistent with a hypothesized critical density or
universal relationship for star formation. For the educational component of her
program, Battersby will recruit undergraduate students from backgrounds that are
traditionally underrepresented in STEM to develop them into effective science
communicators. The recruits will then participate in educational events to bring
concepts from modern scientific research to underserved high schools in the
Boston area.