* 1602900
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Re-entry organizations and the formally incarcerated
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2016,02/28/2017
* Joshua Whitford, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* marie cornwall
* 02/28/2017
* USD 6,678.00

Mass incarceration is a social problem in the U.S and it creates the concern of
how to reintegrate a large number of former prisoners, many of whom have served
lengthy sentences, back into society and back into the workforce. Even as the
trend towards mass incarceration seems to be reversing, a large population of
people remains who exit jails and must attempt to reenter society. Racial
minorities represent a significant portion of these returning prisoners, notably
African Americans and Latinos. Women also have also been affected by mass
incarceration; as a result of the War on Drugs, drug felony convictions (in
addition to non-violent property offenses) account for nearly 80 percent of the
female inmate population (Women in Prison Project 2006). Furthermore, as
scholars have demonstrated, there is a social stigma attached to a criminal
record that serves to limit the job opportunities of people returning from
prison, even more so, when those individuals are minorities. The successful
reintegration of former prisoners is a social good that benefits all of society
as it reduces the risk of future crime (and the cost of re-incarceration) and
makes for a safer, less unequal society. This study is a qualitative case study
of a private re-entry organization in Cleveland Ohio that will help understand
the re-entry process.

The proposed research is a qualitative case study of a private reentry
organization in Cleveland, Ohio. The major research questions are: 1) Do reentry
organizations purposefully broker social and cultural capital for their
clientele? How does such brokerage occur? 2) Does the gender of the formerly
incarcerated client affect how and what social and cultural capital is brokered
by the organization? If so, how? And finally, 3) What is the impact of such
brokerage of social and cultural capital on the formerly incarcerated individual
who is seeking to reintegrate into society? Data were collected via participant
ethnography and interviews with those who make use of the reentry organization
and their caseworkers. The intellectual merit of this research is that it will
illuminate the sociological processes of reentry of the formerly incarcerated
particularly in relation to the brokerage of social and cultural capital by a
reentry organization. The findings of the research should have the impact of
informing future programming models for future reentry organizations and should
also influence policies adopted by the governmental agencies that fund those
organizations. The findings of this research will be useful, not only to the
reentry field, but also to organizations attempting to reintegrate any
stigmatized or marginalized population such as the homeless, the disabled, and
refugees. Due to the focus on gender, this research will also be useful for
other organizations that work with mixed populations by making them more
cognizant of the potential pitfalls of "gender-neutral" policies.