* 1602298
* Support for Active and Smart Matter: A New Frontier for Science and Engineering Conference; Syracuse University; June 20-23, 2016
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2016,08/31/2016
* Cristina Marchetti, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2016
* USD 20,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Division of Materials Research,
the Division of Physics, and the Division of Chemical, Bioengineering,
Environmental, and Transport Systems contribute funds to this award that
provides support for an Institute of Complex and Adaptive Matter conference on
active and smart matter to be held at Syracuse University in June of 2016. This
conference brings together a diverse group of scientists from a wide variety of
disciplines: physics, chemistry, biology, engineering, and medicine. The focus
of the conference is on the merging of science and engineering using active and
smart matter platforms. Examples of issues that will be addressed include how
active and smart matter can help drive self-assembly to build self-replicating
objects, and what physical interactions lead to observed patterns in systems
whose constituents can communicate with each other. NSF support will enable the
participation of 100 contributors, who might not otherwise be able to attend.
Approximately one-third of the participants will be young researchers, graduate
students and postdoctoral researchers, who will also benefit from mentorship
activities during the conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;he Division of Materials Research, the Division of
Physics, and the Division of Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental, and
Transport Systems contribute funds to this award that provides support for an
Institute of Complex and Adaptive Matter conference on active and smart matter
to be held at Syracuse University in June of 2016. This conference brings
together a diverse group of scientists from a wide variety of disciplines:
physics, chemistry, biology, engineering, and medicine. The focus of the
conference is on the merging of science and engineering using active and smart
matter platforms. Examples of issues that will be addressed include how active
and smart matter can help drive self-assembly to build self-replicating objects,
and what physical interactions lead to observed patterns in systems whose
constituents can communicate with each other. NSF support will enable the
participation of 100 contributors, who might not otherwise be able to attend.
Approximately one-third of the participants will be young researchers, graduate
students and postdoctoral researchers, who will also benefit from mentorship
activities during the conference.