* 1602515
* Workshop series on research, education and workforce development efforts at Iowa State University to engage persons with disabilities
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/2016,12/31/2017
* Sriram Sundararajan, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 12/31/2017
* USD 13,920.00

The proposed effort consists of increasing awareness amongst Iowa State
University faculty about opportunities in research, education and outreach that
engage individuals with disabilities. This objective will be achieved by through
a series of three workshops on campus that will cover national and local
perspectives and highlight opportunities, case studies and best practices in
this arena. Persons with disabilities are severely underrepresented in the
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) fields of study. This
group consists of an entire population of lifelong problem solvers. Engaging
them into the STEM educational pipeline and the STEM workforce is to the benefit
of national interests. The efforts of the workshop will contribute to faculty
development at Iowa State University by enhancing their understanding of 1)
diversity and inclusivity with respect to persons with disabilities and; 2)
opportunities, resources and best practices in engaging persons with a wide
range of learning abilities. Consequently the project stands to broaden
participation of under-represented groups in STEM, broaden the research and
education portfolio at Iowa State University and contribute to STEM workforce
development for the nation. Finally, the dissemination of findings from the
workshops will help educate broad communities in the state and nation on these
topics.

The proposed effort is to increase awareness amongst Iowa State University
faculty about opportunities in research, education and outreach that engage
individuals with disabilities. This will be achieved through a series of three
on-campus workshops: 1) Research and Outreach, focusing on technical research
that addresses challenges faced by persons with disabilities; 2) Universal
Design I, introducing the concept of making educational environments and
products more inclusive for all students, staff, faculty and visitors and; 3)
Universal Design II, which will feature presentations by faculty and staff who
have implemented universal design into their courses and a tutorial of existing
resources at Iowa State. The findings, observations and recommendations from the
workshops will be disseminated through publicly available websites at Iowa State
University and via presentations/publications at ASEE national conferences and
the Iowa NSF-EPSCoR annual meeting in Summer 2016. The workshops cover research
aimed at 1) providing technical solutions to challenges faced by persons with
disabilities and; 2) tools used for enabling access to instruction for students
with a wide range of learning abilities. The proposed effort will also
contribute to faculty development at Iowa State University by enhancing their
understanding of 1) diversity and inclusivity with respect to persons with
disabilities and; 2) opportunities, resources and best practices in engaging
persons with a wide range of learning abilities. Consequently the project stands
to broaden participation of under-represented groups in STEM and broaden the
research and education portfolio at Iowa State University. Finally, the
dissemination of findings from the workshops will help educate broad communities
in the state and nation on these topics.