* 1602937
* Workshop on Multiphase Continuum Modeling of Particulate Flows, December 9-11, 2015, Gainesville, FL
* ENG,CBET
* 12/01/2015,11/30/2016
* Jason Butler, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 11/30/2016
* USD 15,000.00

#1602937 Butler, Jason E.

This award will enable U.S. scientists and engineers representing diverse
disciplines to participate in a workshop titled "Multiphase Continuum Modeling
of Particulate Flows," which will be held December 9 - 11, 2015 in Gainesville,
FL. The workshop will explore the development of improved continuum models to
accurately predict the dynamics of particulate flows. Although the equations of
motion that govern flows of simple fluids are well established, the
corresponding equations for particulate flows pose special challenges. Flow-
induced rearrangements of the suspension microstructure must be modeled properly
in order to calculate accurately the flow of the suspension. The workshop will
explore experimental results and simulation outcomes to try to reconcile data
and information regarding flows describe by continuum models. Participants will
be asked to identify key outstanding challenges that are common to a wide range
of particulate flow regimes. The identification of common issues will help
reduce duplication of efforts across disciplines and focus the community on
concentrated steps toward solving particulate flow problems in a unified way.

Particulate flows are ubiquitous in natural and industrial processes. The motion
of river and ocean sediment, the flow of fibers in the manufacturing of
composite materials, the flow of blood through arteries and veins, the motion of
bubbles in biological reactors, the flow of colloidal particles in directed-
assembly of novel materials are just a few examples. Despite their commonplace
appearance, these flows pose unique challenges for modeling and computation.
Solving these challenges could help scientists and engineers better predict the
behavior of these materials in flow, design improved equipment for advanced
manufacturing, and reduce costs and environmental impacts. This award will help
support scientists and engineers, especially young researchers, to attend this
workshop.