* 1602210
* Bridge to the Doctorate at California State University, Los Angeles: CSU-LSAMP-BD Cohort 13
* EDU,EES
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2018
* Margaret Jefferson, University Enterprises, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 07/31/2018
* USD 1,074,999.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in diversifying the STEM workforce through the
development of highly competitive students from groups historically
underrepresented in STEM disciplines: African-Americans, Alaska Natives,
American Indians, Hispanic Americans, Native Hawaiians, and Native Pacific
Islanders. The goal of the LSAMP Bridge to the Doctorate (BD) activity is to
increase the quantity and quality of STEM graduate students from
underrepresented populations, with emphasis on Ph.D. matriculation and
completion. BD programs implemented in the nation's institutions of higher
education contribute to addressing one of the objectives in NSF's 2014-2018
Strategic Plan, namely to "integrate education and research to support
development of a diverse STEM workforce with cutting-edge capabilities." For the
U.S. to remain competitive globally, it must provide exceptional educational
preparedness in STEM areas that underpin the knowledge-based economy. California
State University, Los Angeles, one of the 23 California State University
campuses included in The California State University-Louis Stokes Alliance for
Minority Participation (CSU-LSAMP), will implement a comprehensive BD Program,
which will result in the production of well-trained, highly skilled STEM
professionals from underrepresented groups. Therefore, the project will
contribute significantly to increasing the diversity and representation in
academia and the STEM workforce, thereby increasing the nation's
competitiveness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;California State University, Los Angeles,
will provide a Master's level "bridge" to doctoral-level study for a cohort of
12 graduates of LSAMP undergraduate programs. The Master's-level experience is
designed to increase participant persistence and competencies in STEM and their
advancement to STEM doctoral programs following completion of the Master's
degree. In addition to receiving substantial financial support to enable the BD
Fellows to focus full time on course work and research, the Fellows have the
opportunity to participate in an integrated set of activities. These activities
include: (1) monthly and quarterly meetings with the BD Project Director to
monitor student progress and provide comprehensive advisement; (2) a workshop
series focused on information/tools needed for adjustment to and success in
graduate school; (3) writing support; (4) weekly professional seminars; (5)
community building activities; (6) "connecting" Fellows to doctoral programs
through collaborations with faculty and programs at Ph.D. institutions; and (7)
assistance with applications to Ph.D. programs, financial aid and fellowship
programs.