* 1602607
* GEM: Extending the Capabilities of CubeSats for Measuring Radiation Belt Precipitation
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Sigrid Elschot, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 08/31/2020
* USD 270,000.00

This project will increase the science return from the still operating NSF
FIREBIRD-II CubeSat mission and apply lessons learned from this effort to
broaden the objectives of other upcoming CubeSat missions. CubeSats are recently
developed economical tools that because of their size and low cost can carry
aloft only a few instruments generally built using off-the-shelf components.
Because of this, observations must be designed to narrowly focus on the specific
science objectives of the mission. Despite this limitation, NSF's CubeSat
program has demonstrated a high scientific output from CubeSats launched since
the initiation of this program in 2010. The ultimate goal of this project is to
contribute to the design of multipoint networks and constellation-type campaigns
that use simpler payloads but combined can be targeted to attack some of the
more complex problems in the Geospace environment and related fields. The
broader impacts of this project are significant. The project builds directly on
previous NSF investment in the FIREBIRD-II mission, and will maximize the
benefits (both scientific and in terms of student education and training) from
this and future CubeSat missions supported by NSF. The project will likely
contribute to a better understanding of 'space weather' by better understanding
the radiation belt sources and losses and thus indirectly contribute to more
robust space infrastructure. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A key challenge to be
addressed in this project is in integrating disparate types of measurements
across platforms to address scientific problems that are beyond the original
scope of the individual missions. For the FIREBIRD-II mission, this translates
into the development of additional data products such as electron spectra that
enable exploring science questions about the spatial scale of precipitation
where coordinated measurements can get at the picture but the data needs to be
transformed into forms that are comparable to other instruments. To investigate
the spatial scales of precipitation regions, electron observations by FIREBIRD-
II can, for example, be combined with ground-based VLF receivers capable of
detecting D- and E-region ionization due to precipitating radiation belt
electrons or radars that observe the associated ionospheric heating signatures
from lower energy electrons. The lessons learned in this development will be
applied to the upcoming AFRL DSX and VPM CubeSats scheduled for launch in the
end of 2016 and early 2017, respectively. Combining these CubeSats with
FIREBIRD-II and other existing space assets that measure radiation belt electron
precipitation, lightning observing networks on the ground, radars, VLF
receivers, and a sophisticated model of lightning whistler propagation and
dissipation, a campaign will be developed to study for the first time the
radiation belt - lightning interactions from the lower atmosphere to the
ionosphere to space and observe the resulting precipitation.