* 1602660
* HCC: Small: Exploring the Emergent Dynamics Between Nonprofit Organizations and a Technologically-Enabled, Innovative Public
* CSE,IIS
* 12/01/2015,09/30/2016
* Amy Voida, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 09/30/2016
* USD 189,535.00

This research examines how and why members of the public are using technology to
work with nonprofit organizations and begins to explore how new technologies
might be designed to foster more productive partnerships between nonprofit
organizations and the public. Mobile information and communication technologies
have fundamentally changed the nature of grassroots organizing, enabling members
of the public to rapidly and flexibly organize themselves in order to accomplish
a variety of goals. However, nonprofit organizations have often failed to
leverage the public's innovative and civically-engaged uses of technology for
their benefit. This research will undertake two synergistic lines of inquiry to
address such issues, one consisting of empirical research, and the other
developing design principles. A three-phase empirical study will examine the
role of technologies in fostering partnerships between the public and
nonprofits. The first phase will explore the use of social media, a technology
foregrounding social context, for online advocacy. The second will examine
distributed work technologies, predominantly foregrounding temporal context, for
virtual volunteering. The third will investigate the use of mobile technologies,
foregrounding physical context, for mobile giving. Each phase will be motivated
by the same high-level research questions, allowing synthesis across phases and
generalization about the role of technology in bridging between the public and
nonprofit organizations. In the design inquiry, a series of low-fidelity and
medium-fidelity prototypes will be developed that embody design recommendations
derived from the empirical inquiry, taking advantage of new permutations of
social, physical and temporal contexts. A series of focus groups and design
workshops will provide feedback to help guide iteration on the design of the
prototypes. This research will provide empirical evidence of how technologies
used for online advocacy, virtual volunteering and mobile giving influence the
dynamics between nonprofit organizations and members of the public. It will
advance theoretical knowledge about the role of nonprofits in a changing
technological landscape of public civic engagement. This research will also
derive theory about the roles of social, physical, and temporal contexts in
civically-engaged technology use.

Understanding the way that members of the public are using technology to work
with nonprofit organizations is critical for fostering and designing
technologies to support productive partnerships moving forward. This research
also provides an opportunity for students to participate in civically engaged
scholarship, the kind of scholarship that has been shown to attract the
participation of minorities in computing disciplines.