* 1602097
* Collaborative Research: P2C2--The Role of El Niño/Southern Oscillation (ENSO) Nonlinearities and Asymmetries in Modulating Tropical Pacific Climate
* GEO,AGS
* 05/15/2016,04/30/2020
* Fei-Fei Jin, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 04/30/2020
* USD 430,283.00

This collaborative project generally aims to develop a multi-scale model-proxy
synthesis to explore the relationship between multi-decadal ENSO variability and
tropical Pacific seas surface temperature (SST) gradients in past climates and
help assess model skill in simulating these relationships in past, present, and
potential future climates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The activity of El Niño/Southern
Oscillation (ENSO) varies significantly at multi-decadal to centennial
timescales, even in the absence of external forcing. Periods of increased ENSO
activity may affect the mean state of the tropical Pacific, via a decrease of
the zonal SST gradient due to residual heating from large El Niño events. In
turn, ENSO-modulated multi-decadal variations of the zonal SST gradient can
exert influence on global temperature trends. These causal links are argued to
be poorly constrained in models and observations, at
present.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The merit of the project is high because it
identifies an interesting scientific issue (i.e., the ENSO-mean state
interaction) that is important for advancing our understanding the dynamics of
ENSO and decadal climate variability that can benefit from using paleo-climate
proxies. The anticipated results have the potential to aid in interpreting the
decadal variability observed in the present-day climate and the selection of
climate models that have the potential to make more accurate projections of
future climate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Broader Impacts involve the potential
for creating increased confidence in theory and models of future climate in the
tropics; helping create a new generation of earth scientists willing to bridge
the divide between the worlds of modeling and paleoclimate data; support two
early career female scientists; and support two doctoral students.