* 1602428
* SCH: EXP: RadiOptiMeter: Long-Term and Fine-Grained Breathing Volume Monitoring for Sleep Disordered Breathing (SDB)
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2016,09/30/2018
* Min-Hyung Choi, University of Colorado at Denver
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 09/30/2018
* USD 575,000.00

Sleep disordered breathing (SDB) in children is considered to be a public health
problem with serious consequences such as decreased cognitive function, poor
school performance, daytime sleepiness and increased cardiovascular risk.
Current diagnosis of SDB is performed in hospital sleep laboratories by
monitoring patients with a host of cardiorespiratory sensors attached at various
positions on the patient?s body. This obtrusive form of monitoring is
inconvenient to patients and require tremendous amount of attention from
technicians to ensure study quality. Children, especially, tolerate the study
very poorly; often removing sensors, having trouble sleeping, and necessitating
repeat investigations. This project aims to develop a new method to remotely and
continuously monitor breathing volume and breathing patterns of human subjects
during sleep studies using optical signals assisted by radio frequency signals.
We introduce RadiOptiMeter, a hybrid radio-optical breath volume monitoring
approach that couple the unique characteristics of radio frequency (RF) signals
with image stream captured by a depth-CO2-thermal camera to accurately estimate
breathing volume of sleeping patients from afar. This study is the first step in
the development of non-invasive respiratory monitoring. Utilizing this novel and
non-invasive device to measure breathing during sleep will begin a research
program to promote future diagnosis of SDB in the comfort of the child?s home,
with no in-hospital laboratory expenses or the expense of the disposable medical
equipment which equates to thousands of dollars a year in each sleep
laboratory.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate a new method to
continuously monitor breathing volume and breathing patterns of humans during
in-hospital sleep studies using radio frequency and optical signals. We
introduce RadiOptiMeter, a hybrid radio-optical breath volume monitoring
approach that couple the unique characteristics of radio frequency (RF) signals
with image stream captured by a depth-CO2-thermal camera to accurately and
continuously estimate breathing volume of sleeping patients from afar. We
propose techniques to address challenges brought about by the body movement
during sleep, environmental wireless signal noises, and the diversity of patient
populations. An expected outcome is a robust and accurate breathing volume
monitoring system for SDB studies. The cooperation between each of the proposed
devices allows us to exploit the synergistic effects of the devices to cover the
limitations imposed by each device type and provides system redundancies. These
redundancies ensure reliability for long-term monitoring tasks, which are
critical for clinical applications. Our proposed research will make the
following key contributions to enable new non-contact vital signal monitoring
system: (1) Analytical models, experimental tools, and evaluation results of a
breathing volume estimation method using a vision-based system (VVE) which
include 4D volumetric model and skeletal structure analysis from depth-
CO2-thermal (DCT) camera outputs. (2) Analytical models, experimental hardware
and software components, and evaluation results of a RF-based breathing volume
estimation (RVE) system, that uses neural-network-based machine learning for
chest displacement- to-volume matching. (3) A hybrid radio-optical breathing
volume estimation system (RadiOptiMeter) that synergistically combines the VVE
and RVE to perform continuous and fine-grain monitoring. RadiOptiMeter includes
body movement tracking, automatic antenna steering, and a set of controlling and
synchronizing algorithms for a harmonic integration of the whole system. This
collaborative effort between researchers at the Department of Computer Science
and Engineering and medical doctors at Sleep Medicine Research at the Children?s
Hospital Colorado is the first step in the development of non-invasive
respiratory monitoring. A novel non-invasive device to measure breathing during
sleep will be the first step in the necessary foundational research to promote
future diagnosis of SDB in the comfort of the child?s home, with no in-hospital
laboratory expenses or the expense of the disposable medical equipment which
equates to thousands of dollars a year in each sleep laboratory. This project
also provides an excellent methodd to train graduate students to conduct this
vision-based research project. The RadiOptiMeter concepts serves as an exciting
and appealing tool for structuring a variety of educational activities.
Moreover, the project results will be disseminated through scholarly
publications and active outreach through our existing and potential industrial
partners.