* 1602451
* RAPID: Severe Drought and Historical Extreme Flood (October 1-4, 2015) Regime in South Carolina: Assessment of the Water Quality Situation
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/2015,10/31/2017
* Ashok Mishra, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 10/31/2017
* USD 51,019.00

1602451 Mishra

South Carolina has recently experienced a severe drought followed by an extreme
flooding that was initiated October 1, 2015. The combination of the extensive
drought from the previous months followed by the historical extreme rainfall
event will likely change the water quality dynamics in rural, agricultural, and
urban watersheds. Specifically, the deficit in precipitation has likely led to
the deposition of pollutants within the soil. During the extreme rain event and
subsequent flooding, these pollutants have been discharged into waterways, with
the result that stagnant water in urban areas may lead to serious issues of
water quality. The drought-flood regime may affect water quality differently
based on rural, agriculture and urban landscape patterns of the state. The
combination of extreme events is expected only to increase, resulting in the
need to advance understanding as to how these extreme rain and flooding events
affect the dynamics of water quality.

The objective of this RAPID project is to collect perishable water quality
related data that will lead to enhanced understanding, particularly regarding
how these ever more frequent combination of droughts and floods extremes affect
water quality in different types of landscape. Given the need for fast
acquisition of environmental related data (e.g. the quality of urban stagnant
flood waters are data that are perishable) the investigators will deploy rapid
response teams to document quickly these real-time consequences of extreme
floods. The scope of activities includes: a) collect water quality samples from
rural and agriculture dominated watersheds following this recent historical
flood event, to establish relationship between climate extremes and water
quality parameters; b) collect data on stagnant urban flood waters, which may
contain oil, chemicals and sewage that are a public health concern, for
laboratory analysis; and c) perform sensitivity analysis to identify the water
quality parameters that are mostly affected during this rapid transition from
drought to flood. The combined impact of drought and flood extremes on water
quality is currently not well understood. This research will bring new knowledge
on the effects of drought-flood cycle on water quality at urban, rural and
agricultural watersheds. The perishable data can be used to improve water
quality model calibration based on a combination of extreme events scenarios.
This project is anticipated to advance current knowledge on drought-flood
impacts on environmental sustainability. Research findings can be applied to
urban watersheds in southern and also south-western states (e.g., Texas and
California) of the U.S. because of frequent combination of drought and flood
events.