* 1602131
* Collaborative Research: Extreme Events and Ecological Acclimation: Scaling from Cells to Ecosystems
* BIO,EF
* 07/01/2015,05/31/2017
* Kiona Ogle, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 05/31/2017
* USD 29,761.00

Forests are vital natural and economic resources that support habitat for plants
and animals, protect water quality, offer opportunities for recreation and
provide jobs and wood for people. Forests are sensitive to the effects of
climate change including drought, shifts in weather, and invasion by insects.
Little is known about the effects of repeated droughts brought on by climate
change or how these effects occur from the tree cells to entire regional
forests. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Droughts in the past decade have occurred across
much of the western and southwestern United States. These droughts have led to
severe consequences on forests, such as widespread forest die-off. This award
will answer a fundamental gap in scientific understanding with profound
implications for the future of western U.S. forests. Are trees that survive a
severe drought more vulnerable or less vulnerable to the next drought? Over two
years, the research will assess water stress and scale these measurements of
drought vulnerability from the cell level in individual branches to entire
ecosystems across four western States. It will draw on tree-core records,
measurements of plant populations, anatomy of tree water transport, and
measurements of whole-ecosystem fluxes of carbon and water. The ultimate goal is
a predictive framework across different spatial scales that will allow
prediction of which forests are most vulnerable and the return frequency of
drought that's survivable versus lethal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
incorporates an extensive commitment to training of scientists at the
undergraduate, graduate, post-doctoral, and early-career levels. The project's
research will be directly linked with teaching activities by incorporating
findings and projects into five undergraduate and two graduate courses across
Northern Arizona University, Princeton University, and the University of Nevada,
Reno. The research will enable entire continent wide drought monitoring. The
research will develop sensor capacity needed for establishing a continent-wide
forest drought-monitoring network. The technology developed can aid land
managers with the USFS in managing US Forest Lands. High resolution
meteorological and plant water status sensors will be developed and deployed,
and measurements of forest canopy cover will be made across a broad spatial
scale. In addition, these measurements can also supplement the national USFS
information such as the Forest Inventory and Analysis program.