* 1602135
* PFI:AIR - TT:  Low Temperature High Performance Metallization using Reactive Ink Chemistries
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2016,09/30/2017
* Mariana Bertoni, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 09/30/2017
* USD 200,000.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating reactive ink
science and technology to fill the need for low temperature, high performance
and low-cost photovoltaic metallization. The development of reactive inks for
solar cells is important because of the savings incurred by reducing the total
amount of precious silver and also because the outstanding electrical properties
these inks have shown can significantly enhance photovoltaic performance while
reducing the overall cost of solar energy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will result in a proof-of-concept demonstration that reactive silver inks can
replace costly high temperature pastes and low-temperature nanoparticle pastes
in solar cell metallization. This reactive silver ink has the following unique
features: resistivity comparable to metallic silver, 3.7 micro-ohm-cm, and
contact resistances of 1.8 ohm-cm2 on silicon heterojunction cells, even when
printed below 90Â°C. These features enable solar cell field factor (FF) higher
than 70% and Power conversion Efficiencies higher than 18%, with much finer
control of the finger width and silver consumptions an order of magnitude lower
when compared to the state-of-the-art solar cell heterojunction market space.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the following technology gap as it
translates from research discovery toward commercial application. The further
reduction of the contact resistance to values below 1.2 ohm-cm2 is required to
propel solar cell efficiencies above 20%. The project will approach this by
optimizing the ink chemistry and developing adhesion promoters. While SiO2
particles could be easily incorporated like traditional silver pastes do to
enhance adhesion, these glass frits require high temperatures (&gt;350 deg. C)
to form Ohmic contact. The proposed project will look into implementing Sn- and
Sn/Pd-based promoters, commonly used in electrochemical and electroless
deposition of noble metals on polymers and oxide surfaces. The goal is to print
the entire metallization layer, metal plus the adhesion promoter. This reduces
capital equipment costs, speeds production, simplifies synthesis, and reduces
metal contamination across the cell.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition, personnel
involved in this project, two graduate students, will receive hands-on
experience developing products for commercial applications while working closely
with industry partners. They will also receive technology transfer experience by
learning about Phase I SBIR funding opportunities and other entrepreneurial
training through the Arizona Technology Transfer
Office.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project engages two important partners: Techniq
Inc. (advanced metallization experts) and Simplexity Product Design (printer
designers) to allow for pilot testing environment, guided commercialization and
the joint development of high throughput, low cost capital equipment.