* 1602994
* OP:  Collaborative Research:  Non-Hamiltonian Wave Dynamics in Atomic & Optical Models
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Panayotis Kevrekidis, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 08/31/2020
* USD 160,010.00

This project focusses on the effects of energy gain and/or loss when waves
propagate through non-linear media. The simplest kinds of wave motion exhibit a
property called isochronism which was first observed by Galileo: The frequency
of oscillation of the wave is independent of its amplitude (or size). Wave media
in which this simple behavior is observed are called "linear". Non-linear media
are also known, in which the frequency of the wave varies with its amplitude. If
the medium is also dispersive (like a prism), then waves with different
frequency will travel with different speed. The combined effects of non-
linearity and dispersion can be quite striking, as with the formation of
solitons - stable wave patterns that propagate through the medium without
changing shape. A central focus of this work is to explore how solitons and
other coherent structures that form in non-linear media, such as vortices, are
responsible for the localization and transport of energy and information. If the
medium through which the wave propagates is dissipative, then energy is lost to
friction or radiation, and so stabilizing the flow of energy and information
requires energy input (gain). The work will focus especially on the interplay of
gain and loss in current experimental, theoretical, and computational
investigations into the behavior of non-linear media formed from ultra-cold
atomic vapors.

This project involves the comprehensive examination of some selected key aspects
within this class of systems. The study is based on variants of one of the most
prototypical and most relevant models for the evolution of nonlinear waves: the
nonlinear Schroedinger (NLS) equation. The NLS equation is at the heart of a
wide variety of physical phenomena including, but not limited to, optical
fibers, condensed matter physics, plasma waves, and deep water freak/rogue waves
in fluid mechanics. In particular, the group will study the effects of gain and
loss within the realm of (A) optical systems that have the so-called Parity-Time
reversal (PT) symmetry, and possess a delicate balance between external gain and
intrinsic loss that can robustly sustain the existence and propagation of
coherent structures, (B) finite temperature Bose-Einstein condensates which have
been proposed as candidates for sustaining/processing quantum information that
could potentially realize the next generation of computational architectures,
and finally, (C) exciton-polariton condensates, which provide another pristine
and very accessible experimental setting for the manipulation of macroscopic
quantum mechanics. Within these systems, the group will explore the interplay of
the intrinsic scales induced by nonlinearity and dispersion and the extrinsic
ones, stemming from gain and loss, and how this interplay affects the existence,
stability and dynamics of different coherent structures that are the building
blocks of information storage and processing. Within this program, the group
expects to generate mathematical models and methods, as well as computational
techniques, that will not only shed light to these particular atomic and optical
applications and their experimental observations, but which may also be of
broader use for the study of other non-conservative systems.