* 1602595
* Spectral Mining: Transforming Spectroscopic Galaxy Surveys into Transient Surveys
* MPS,AST
* 10/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Or Graur, Graur                   Or
* Fellowship Award
* Harshal Gupta
* 07/31/2020
* USD 266,000.00

Or Graur is awarded an NSF Astronomy and Astrophysics Postdoctoral Fellowship to
carry out a program of research and education at the Harvard-Smithsonian Center
for Astrophysics. Graur's research seeks to transform large spectroscopic survey
observations into searches for transient events (transients), such as supernova
explosions and the disruption of stars by black holes, that are thought to be
important in the lifecycles of stars and galaxies. Graur will study two types of
transients: Type Ia Supernovae (SNe Ia), which are supernovae occurring in two
stars orbiting one another; and Tidal Disruption Events (TDE), which are bright
flares produced when a supermassive black hole (SMBH) at the center of a galaxy
disrupts the material from a nearby star. Few SNe Ia and TDEs have been observed
to date, however, and Graur's work has the potential to drastically increase the
detections of SNe Ia and TDEs, allowing astronomers to study these transients in
a statistical manner. Graur will also build a mentoring program in which
postdoctoral scholars and graduate students will supervise high school students
in advanced scientific research projects.

Graur will enhance his supernova detection code to enable detection of all types
of transients in large scale spectroscopic galaxy surveys, starting with the
Sloan Digital Sky Survey, and will integrate the enhanced code into the upcoming
Dark Energy Spectroscopic Instrument survey. The focus of his research will be
to enlarge the number of SNe Ia and TDE detections to make statistical analyses
of these events possible. Assembling a statistical sample of SNe Ia would allow
measurement of SNe Ia rates as a function of galaxy stellar mass, thereby
improving constraints on the nature of SNe Ia progenitors. Similarly, enlarging
the number of TDE detections through dedicated surveys would allow a better
understanding of the behavior of TDEs, and stellar parameters inferred from the
TDE emission would provide a novel method to measure SMBH masses and mass
distributions. For the educational component of his work, Graur will develop a
research mentoring program called SRMP@Harvard, in which about 15 postdoctoral
scholars and advanced graduate students will supervise about 50 high school
students from the Cambridge and Boston areas in active scientific research.