* 1602352
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Constrained Choices:  Negotiating Work, Family, and Legality
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2017
* Jacqueline Hagan, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 04/30/2017
* USD 10,323.00

SES-1602352&lt;br/&gt;Jacqueline Hagan&lt;br/&gt;Holly K. Straut
Eppsteiner&lt;br/&gt;University of North Carolina, Chapel
Hill&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A large body of work-family scholarship has evolved to
examine how women in the United States make decisions related to work and
family. Yet despite the significant presence of female immigrants in the United
States, few studies have examined these issues among foreign-born women,
particularly the five million women who are undocumented. Undocumented, foreign-
born women have lower labor force participation rates than their male
counterparts, documented immigrant women, and native-born women. To examine how
foreign-born Latina women make decisions about work and family under precarious
legal conditions, this doctoral dissertation research examines three questions:
1) How do Latina immigrant women?s legal status and family structure shape their
labor force decisions and opportunities within new destination communities in
the United States? 2) How do Latina immigrants negotiate motherhood under
conditions of precarious legal status? 3) How do women in a new destination
community interpret and respond to shifting immigration policies and contexts of
reception at federal, state, and local levels? To answer these questions, the
co-PI is conducting in-depth interviews with Latina immigrant mothers in central
North Carolina and participant observation at community meetings that discuss
immigration programs and policies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
contribute to sociological knowledge by bridging the work-family and
international migration literatures, developing understanding of women's labor
force decisions in new immigrant destinations in the United States, and
generating new understanding of gender and international migration policy. These
findings will be relevant for scholars of international migration, gender, and
work and occupations, as well as policymakers at local, state, and federal
levels and immigrant-serving organizations. This research is particularly
important at a time when different levels of the U.S. government are seeking to
address rights and regulations related to the undocumented population and
members of mixed-status families.