* 1602616
* Experiments on Solid Helium
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2022
* Robert Hallock, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 05/31/2022
* USD 503,795.00

****Non-Technical Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;Solid 4He is a quantum solid (i.e. the
properties are dominated by quantum effects) with unique properties. For
example, 4He atoms are apparently able to flow though solid 4He as they do
through a liquid. Prior work suggested that this behavior indicated a
"supersolid" state of matter analogous to superfluidity and superconductivity.
This is no longer believed to be the case but the mechanism allowing atoms to
flow through the solid remains a mystery. In this project a different approach
to study the flow of atoms will be used. A pressure difference will be applied
across the solid by a unique technique that does not employ pushing on the
crystal sides. Using this technique we will study the properties of this
fascinating system as a function of flow rate and 3He concentration.
Participating undergraduate, graduate and post-graduate (postdocs) students will
gain experience in fundamental physics and cutting-edge technology and be
prepared for future work in research, teaching or industrial settings. These
investigations may lead to advances in materials science that could have
significant technological implications, for example in
metallurgy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****Technical
Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is centered on an investigation
of a fundamental and important question in Condensed Matter Physics: What is the
mechanism by which 4He atoms are apparently able to flow through a sample cell
that is filled with solid 4He? Prior work by others initially suggested that
there may be a bulk "supersolid" state of matter that may exist in solid 4He at
very low temperatures. This is an issue that aroused intense interest in the
Condensed Matter community, stimulated a number of experiments and theoretical
works, and resulted in a number of possible explanations and some substantial
paradoxes. The theoretical debate insists that perfect crystals of solid helium
cannot be a "supersolid", and that any mass flux through the solid must be
carried by defects. The experimental approach used in this research is to impose
a chemical potential gradient on the solid: for example, by application of a
pressure difference to liquid helium that interfaces the solid instead of
applying mechanical pressure directly to the 4He crystal lattice; or, the
application of a temperature difference to utilize the superfluid Fountain
Effect to drive the flow. The approach employs the known behavior of 4He to
remain a liquid at elevated pressure in the porous material Vycor (a porous
glass), at pressures at which bulk 4He would be a solid. Studies as a function
of temperature and pressure (and 3He impurity concentration) provided further
evidence for flow of the liquid-solid melting curve. The specific mechanism for
this flow will be explored including an exploration of the mechanism by which
the presence of 3He dramatically suppresses the flow at a concentration-
dependent temperature. One approach will be to understand how the flow responds
when the solid is subjected to calibrated applied stress that deforms the solid.
Another approach will be to increase the sensitivity and explore questions about
the possibility of a critical flux and a possible onset of measurable
dissipation. Yet another approach will be to explore the extent to which
pressure suppresses mass injection and the growth of the solid in the presence
of flow under various conditions. The students (undergraduate, graduate) and
post-graduate (postdocs) involved in these studies will gain experience in
fundamental physics and cutting-edge technology. Personnel who leave the group
will be poised to contribute to scientific research and technological
development in industrial, national laboratory, or academic settings.