* 1602564
* Collaborative Research: P2C2--Quantifying the Risk of Widespread Megadrought in North America
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Toby Ault, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 06/30/2020
* USD 316,648.00

This collaborative project generally aims to undertake a data-model synthesis of
tree-ring proxies and climate simulations to identify the strength and origins
of decadal-centennial climate variability.

The science goal of the research is to anticipate the risk of droughts lasting
one or more decades. As such, the research team argues that it is necessary to
understand the origins, patterns, and amplitudes of climate variability at
decadal to centennial (dec-cen) timescales. If dec-cen variations are weak, the
team hypothesizes that climate change impacts on regional hydroclimate will
likely unfold as a consequence of slow-varying changes in radiative forcing. If
dec-cen variations are strong, however, then the team argues that the combined
effects of atmospheric warming and natural variability on long timescales should
be considered jointly in any understanding of climate.

The research team specifically seeks to quantify the amplitude of low-frequency
hydroclimatic variability in models, proxies, and observations, while at the
same time utilizing a new suite of last millennium numerical climate models
produced by the National Center for Atmospheric Research. They will apply both
statistical and dynamical downscaling techniques to this ensemble, including one
ultra-high (temporal) resolution control simulation run and use these results to
drive forward models of tree-ring growth.

Further, the researchers will reprocess all tree-ring width and density
measurements from the Northern Hemisphere archived by the International Tree-
Ring Databank to optimize the amplitude and spatial structure of dec-cen
variability. Both of these products - the high-resolution tree-ring simulations
from climate models and the new dec-cen optimized tree-ring network - will be
evaluated using a robust null-hypothesis for the amplitude and spatial structure
of dec-cen variability. These activities will, in turn, improve the
understanding of the full magnitude dec-cen variability, its spatial footprint,
and its relevance to future megadrought risk.

The Broader Impacts involve organizing two workshops for paleoclimate
researchers and statisticians to explore new methods of inference from this
dataset. In addition, the comprehensive analysis of dec-cen patterns across the
North American tree-ring network will address directly the ongoing debate about
the origins of temporal autocorrelation in tree-ring records and the potential
confounding effects of biological persistence on climate histories estimated
from this proxy. Furthermore, this project will support two graduate students in
the course of the research.