* 1602606
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Explaining the Mechanisms of Collective Bargaining Legislative Outcomes at the State-Level
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2017
* Larry Isaac, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 04/30/2017
* USD 11,995.00

SES-1602606&lt;br/&gt;Larry Isaac&lt;br/&gt;Anna Jacobs&lt;br/&gt;Vanderbilt
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One manifestation of class contention today is
the revival in advocacy for Right-to-Work (RTW) legislation in the last decade.
In 2014 alone, there were 60 proposed RTW bills in 27 states, and the passage of
RTW laws in Michigan (2012) and Wisconsin (2014) has led many to question how
regressive labor laws could be passed in heavily unionized states. Ultimately
the question being asked is embedded in the larger question of who or what
influences the policies enacted by the state? Within the field of sociology,
there are four distinct theories that attempt to answer this general question:
(1) pluralism, (2) elite theory, (3) instrumentalist-Marxism, and (4) state-
centered institutionalism. The increasingly heated battle between labor and
business interests in state legislatures provides a perfect case for testing the
relative merit of four dominant sociological theories of power. The purpose of
this dissertation is to answer the following questions: (1) What factors account
for the variation in state legislators? actions? (2) What factors account for
the fate of proposed collective bargaining bills in state legislatures?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study examines the proposal and passage of all state-
level collective bargaining bills during the 2011-2012 legislative session. The
analysis combines five unique datasets. The first dataset consists of data on
every bill related to collective bargaining proposed among all state
legislatures in the 2011-2012 legislative session (N=2,068). The second has data
on the financial contributions to state-level elections in 2008 and 2010. The
third has information on state and constituent characteristics from the 2010
census. The fourth contains data on state level institutional differences, such
as differences in rules about vetoing, majority rule, and committee appointment
procedures. The fifth dataset will collect publicly available data on the
corporate business ties of all state legislators in 2012. These data will be
used to study two outcomes: First, by using each legislator as a unit of
analysis, the investigator plans to explain variation in legislators? bill
proposals. Second, by using each proposed bill as the unit of analysis,
generalized ordered logistic regression models will predict the outcome of each
bill: (1) proposed, (2) failed in first chamber, (2) failed in second chamber,
(3) vetoed, or (4) passed into legislation. Both analyses will analyze all four
theoretical models.