* 1602469
* Collaborative Research:   GEM--The Excitation and Propagation of Fast Magnetosonic Waves and Their Effect on Radiation Belt Electrons
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Richard Denton, Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 08/31/2020
* USD 58,733.00

This project will investigate the generation, propagation and dissipation of
magnetosonic waves in the inner region of the magnetosphere as well as the
energization of radiation belt electrons interacting with them. In the space
environment near Earth, the plasma is so tenuous that plasma particles (ions and
electrons) rarely collide. However despite this, some portion of the electrons
in the magnetosphere reach dangerously high energies exceeding a million
electron volts. This energy is high enough to pose a risk to satellites orbiting
within the inner regions of the magnetosphere, a preferred location for
communications, navigation, search-and-rescue, weather prediction and national
security satellites. Plasma waves are mainly responsible for the acceleration of
radiation belt electrons to these high energies but they can also contribute to
the scattering of radiation belt particles into the Earth's atmosphere. Many
types of plasma waves are generated in a collisionless plasma in the presence of
a magnetic field and each has its own set of interactions with the charged
particles in the plasma. These waves play a significant role in the dynamics of
the inner magnetosphere and radiation belts. Magnetosonic waves, the focus of
the proposed investigation, are found in the vicinity of the magnetic equatorial
plane in a wide region near the dayside portion of the magnetosphere. The
component of the wave electric field, which is aligned along a magnetic field
line, can continuously accelerate electrons traveling near the speed of the wave
in much the same way that a surfer is pushed forward by an ocean wave. This is
termed Landau damping. Magnetosonic waves are thought to be generated by ring
current protons, and dissipated in accelerating radiation belt electrons, in
effect acting as intermediaries in the collisionless transport of energy between
different particle populations. As a broader impact, this project is led by an
early-career scientist thus contributing to the training of the next generation
of scientists.

The primary goal of this research is to use linear theory and kinetic particle-
in-cell (PIC) simulations to explore the excitation and propagation of fast
magnetosonic waves driven by observed types of ring-like proton velocity
distributions and to use insights gathered to interpret the observed wave
measurements, both datasets from the twin Van Allen Probes. Furthermore,
scattering of radiation belt electrons will be quantified using test-particle
computations, providing clear criteria as to whether and under what conditions
the conventional quasi-linear approach can be applied. Two fundamental science
questions will be addressed: (1) how does the excitation and propagation of fast
magnetosonic waves produce the complex pattern of the observed wave frequency
spectra? and (2) how important to the evaluation of radiation belt electron
scattering are the complex kinetic dispersion properties of the waves compared
to the commonly assumed cold plasma dispersion used in quasi-linear theory? The
generalization of the full kinetic PIC code to account for the dipole magnetic
field in an inhomogeneous medium will be an additional valuable resource for the
radiation belt community enabling a whole spectrum of new studies not previously
possible.