* 1602541
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:   Mechanisms Underlying Discrimination in the Labor Market
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2017
* Trenton Mize, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 04/30/2017
* USD 11,747.00

SES-1602541&lt;br/&gt;Stephen Benard&lt;br/&gt;Trenton D. Mize&lt;br/&gt;Indiana
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite an increase in some legal rights and
acceptance of same-sex relationships, gay men and lesbian women continue to face
disadvantages in the labor market. Gay men earn less than comparable
heterosexual men, and studies have shown that both gay men and lesbian women
face hiring discrimination. Despite these initial studies establishing labor
market inequalities for gay men and lesbian women, there remains little evidence
to explain why the disadvantages exist. Multiple competing explanations exist,
including: (a) disadvantaging stereotypes that link sexual orientation with
assumptions of competence and ability, (b) stereotypes of gay men and lesbian
women as less masculine/feminine than heterosexual men and women, and (c) a
society and labor market that have preferences for traditional masculine
behavior in high status occupations and leadership positions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator will complete two laboratory studies, two
survey experiments, and a test with nationally representative survey data to
examine hiring discrimination and the mechanisms underlying unequal treatment.
Study 1 tests for hiring discrimination in entry-level jobs using both a
controlled laboratory experiment and a survey experiment in a diverse sample.
Study 2 examines hiring discrimination for positions of senior leadership using
a controlled laboratory study and a survey experiment in a diverse sample. Study
3 uses nationally representative survey data to examine the existing patterns of
labor market inequalities. The experimental studies provide key causal evidence
of discrimination and the ability to test for underlying mechanisms, while the
survey data provides generalizable and representative evidence. The project will
provide key evidence to help address existing inequalities and will also serve
as a training site for student research assistants who will learn experimental
research techniques and methodology while working on the project.