* 1602764
* RAPID: GPS Observations of Co- and Post-seismic Deformation in the Argentine Andes, Precordillera, and Sierras Pampeanas from the 16 Sep 2015, Mw 8.3, Illapel, Chile, Earthquake
* GEO,EAR
* 12/01/2015,05/31/2019
* Robert Smalley, University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* Steven Whitmeyer
* 05/31/2019
* USD 32,924.00

Scientists from the University of Memphis in collaboration with scientists from
the Instituto Argentino de Nivología, Glaciología y Ciencias Ambientales will
install 4 new continuous GPS stations and perform post-earthquake survey GPS
measurements on 35 benchmarks in San Juan, Argentina. The measurements will be
used to determine the mid-field co- seismic and post-seismic deformations of the
September 16, 2015 Mw 8.3, megathrust earthquake offshore Illapel, Chile. These
measurements, which capture the deformation field 100-400 km to the east of the
earthquake, will complement similar activities in the immediate epicentral area
in Chile from the Chilean Seismic Network. The mid-field to far-field signals
are small, but significant as they are both poorly modeled and poorly understood
in comparison to the much larger near-field signals. The mid- to far-field
signals sample the response of the South America plate lithospheric stress
guide, and the viscoelastic mantle wedge under the Andes in the west, and South
America cratonic upper mantle to the east.

The South America-Nazca plate boundary is unique as it is the only major
convergent boundary where an almost complete aerial sampling of megathrust
earthquake cycle deformation, from near- to far-field, can be observed in the
upper plate side of a subduction system. Megathrust earthquakes along the South
America-Nazca plate boundary produce large, rapid co-seismic deformations
stretching across the whole continent. They also produce plate-wide post-seismic
deformations that are initially faster than the inter-seismic deformations and
can even surpass the co-seismic offset. These rapidly changing deformations may
play an important role in tectonics by temporally concentrating aseismic
deformation or triggering earthquakes. These signals decay with time, thus a
rapid GPS deployment is necessary to capture the deformation signal before the
signals decrease below the detection level. The proposed activity advances
desired societal outcomes by providing data that would aid in determining
regions of aftershocks that could be used in hazard mitigation efforts and would
contribute to the understanding of earthquake hazard in the region. The project
also contributes to enhanced infrastructure for research through the expansion
of a GPS network and to adjustment of national geodetic reference frames.