* 1602080
* The Relationship Between Grain Structure and Deformation Behavior to the Fracture Mechanism in High Strength-High Ductility Combination Nanostructured Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Devesh Misra, University of Texas at El Paso
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 08/31/2022
* USD 430,084.00

Non-technical Abstract &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research concerning
the next generation of high strength materials is envisaged to extend the state-
of-art of processing of high strength-high ductility alloys with superior
formability. The unlocking of fracture mechanisms underlying high strength-high
ductility combination will be a major breakthrough in guiding the development of
strong and ductile metallic materials. The ultimate objective is to determine
guidelines to pioneer a new frontier of high strength-high ductility materials
for light and efficient solutions involving energy absorption and formability.
Furthermore, new techniques will be developed to understand material behavior
that will be applicable to other metallic systems. The high strength-high
ductility combination of nanograined materials will allow for thinner sections
or components, which will lead to fuel economy in the transportation
sector.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research objective of the award is to determine the fundamental criteria in
obtaining high strength - high ductility combination in metals with grain size
in the nanometer range. The criteria will be elucidated by conducting controlled
mechanical deformation experiments in conjunction with the study of deformed
region via microscopy tools. Experiments will involve increasing the stability
of the principal constituent with decrease in grain size. The criteria will
define if the stability of the principal constituent of the metallic material is
responsible in governing the ductility and delayed fracture of high strength
metallic materials. The changes in deformation behavior will be studied as a
function of grain size from nanograin regime to conventional micrometer regime.
Physical models with predictive capabilities for a wide range of material
systems based on the inter-relationship between grain size, deformation process
and fracture mechanisms will be developed.