* 1602802
* New Directions in the Qualitative Approach to Inverse Scattering Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2018
* Fioralba Cakoni, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 07/31/2018
* USD 220,212.00

The ability to image and perform nondestructive testing of materials using
electromagnetic, sound, or elastic waves is essential in many areas of national
importance, such as the design and manufacturing of exotic materials, public
safety, medical imaging, and underground exploration. Unfortunately, effective
methods for testing complicated materials for structural imperfections or for
identifying unknown targets with little a priori information are still in a
state of infancy. In this NSF-funded project, the PI and her graduate students
will develop entirely new techniques in inverse scattering theory to obtain
reliable target signatures or usable information about objects being examined in
computationally efficient ways. The goal is to minimize dependence on a priori
information describing the physics and/or geometry of unknown targets. This
study will combine practical applications with the mathematical elegance of new
imaging techniques that have recently led to the establishment of a new field in
mathematics called "qualitative methods."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Until not long
ago, essentially all existing algorithms for target identification in inverse
scattering theory were based on either a weak scattering approximation or on the
use of nonlinear optimization techniques. Alternative methods for imaging have
been developed to avoid incorrect model assumptions inherent in weak scattering
approximations and the requirement of a priori information on the topological
and physical properties of the unknown object. Such methods come under the
general title of qualitative methods in inverse scattering theory, otherwise
referred to as non-iterative methods. Roughly speaking, these methods explore
the properties of a linear compact operator determined by the scattering data,
which encodes nonlinear information about the scattering object and provides
easily implementable reconstruction algorithms. Inherent to the methods appears
a new eigenvalue problem, known as the transmission eigenvalue problem. The
practical importance of transmission eigenvalues is that they can be determined
from the measured scattering data and they carry information about the material
properties of the scatterer. This proposal concerns broadening the applicability
of the qualitative approach for solving inverse scattering problems with
particular emphasis on inhomogeneous media. Of main concern are potential
applications to nondestructive testing and target identification. The
investigation will take two directions: 1) develop qualitative inversion
approaches for inhomogeneous media containing small parameter features that are
not in the Born approximation regime, 2) reduce the amount of spatial data
needed for the qualitative approach by using only quasi-backscattering and time
domain data. To accomplish the above objectives, the investigator and her
graduate students will need to investigate new theoretical questions related to
the (non-selfadjoint and non-linear) transmission eigenvalue problems that arise
in the investigation of the above two parts.