* 1602435
* NSFGEO-NERC: Paleoclimate Signatures of the Climate Response to West Antarctic Ice Sheet Collapse
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2023
* Eric Steig, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 06/30/2023
* USD 371,821.00

Steig/1602435&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a project to examine the
response of the climate system to changes in the Antarctic ice sheet. The
Antarctic ice sheet rises into the atmosphere more than 2 kilometers above sea
level, affecting atmospheric circulation in the same way a large mountain range
does. Changes in ice sheet size in the past would have caused changes in
atmospheric circulation, and hence climate, that should be detectable in
paleoclimate data from ice and sediment cores. The project will examine the
evidence for past ice sheet changes using a comparison of such data with results
from numerical climate model experiments. The intellectual merit of this project
is that knowing how the Antarctic ice sheet may have changed during previous
warm periods is fundamental to understanding the response of ice sheets to
climate change. There is evidence that West Antarctic ice sheet (WAIS) may
already be in the beginning stages of collapse. The broader impact is that the
outcomes of this research will inform projections of how much, and how fast, the
WAIS may change in the future. The project is a joint effort between the
University of Washington (Seattle, USA) and the British Antarctic Survey
(Cambridge, U.K.), and is the result of independent and complementary efforts by
groups from both institutions. The project will support two postdocs, and will
help to encourage further international cooperative and multi-disciplinary
research in this area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project, submitted under the
NSF/GEO-UK NERC lead agency opportunity (NSF 14-118) and the Paleo Perspectives
on Climate Change (P2C2) solicitation, will use a combination of existing
paleoclimate data and new model simulations to examine the influence of a
changing Antarctic ice sheet on climate. Model-data comparisons will be used to
test the hypothesis that a collapse of the WAIS occurred during the last
interglacial period, and to evaluate whether the timing and rate of WAIS
collapse can be constrained through the acquisition of new ice core records from
Antarctica. Multiple, high-resolution, fully-coupled atmosphere-ocean general
circulation models (GCMs) will be used to create an ensemble of simulations that
include varying scenarios for Antarctic ice sheet change. The project will use
the Community Earth System Model version 1 (CESM1), the Hadley Centre Couple
Model version 3 (HadCM3), and the Max Planck institute model, ECHAM5. Using
multiple models improves understanding of the key processes and provides a
critical measure of the influence of model biases on the model-data comparison.