* 1602333
* SCH: EXP: A Quantitative Platform for CT Colonography
* CSE,IIS
* 02/15/2017,01/31/2021
* Aly Farag, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 01/31/2021
* USD 757,797.00

Computed-Tomography Colonoscopy (CTC) refers to visualization of the colon
surface (lumen) by radiologists following an abdominal CT scan of prepped
patients. Removal of colonic polyps is performed by a minimally-invasive
procedure known as Optical Colonoscopy. A proper synchronization between CTC for
early detection of polyps and OC for their removal is the most effective and
economical approach to prevent colon cancer, which has over 97% rate of recovery
with early detection. Through a sequence of image analysis steps, a three-
dimensional (3D) representation of the colon can be constructed, which is then
visualized by radiologists, using a virtual camera, in order to examine the
colon surface for abnormalities and polyps. Visualization involves extraction of
the centerline of the 3D colon representation, which is the optimum datum for
the virtual camera. In this project, a quantitative platform for CTC, based on
modern computer vision and graphics, is proposed to quantify and improve the
visualization process with respect to image resolution, imaging artifacts, colon
topology and polyps' locations. Enhancing the detection and classification of
polyps in terms of sensitivity and specificity will improve early detection of
colon cancer, a major national healthcare concern in terms of mortality and
cost. The proposed simulation platform will have applications in biomedical
education and training, and in industrial applications for surface inspection
and image-based visualization of hidden tubular objects, in addition to
computer-aided manufacturing and digital
printing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Visualization in CTC consist of four sequential
steps: i) filtering the CT scan for removal of scanner noise and resolving
partial volume effects; ii) segmentation of the resulting images to isolate the
colon surface from other structures in the abdomen, which appear in the
abdominal CT scan (e.g., the liver, pancreas and small intestines); iii)
generation of a 3D colon representation using computational geometry and
graphics; and iv) visualization of the 3D representation, by radiologists, using
virtual cameras to examine the lumen surface and detect colonic polyps. Each of
these steps are based on solid mathematical foundation developed in the image
analysis and computer graphics literature in the past two decades. Filtering may
be achieved using anisotropic diffusion filtering, whereas segmentation can be
achieved by fusion of statistical and variational methods, which separates the
colon tissues from the other anatomies and provides a continuous/connected
representation of the segmented colon. 3D reconstruction of the segmented colon
is performed by common methodologies in graphics such the marching-cube
algorithm. Visualization is an elaborate step, which involves generating the
centerline of the 3D reconstruction, and a proper allocation of the virtual
camera. The centerline may be generated by variational calculus and the level
sets method. Common errors in visualization are due to the uncertainties in
imaging (e.g., scanner-induced noise, partial volume effects, prep residuals and
patient motion) and patient-specific circumstances which may lead to distorted
or disconnected colon reconstructions. These errors may obscure the location,
shape and texture of polyps, leading to erroneous diagnosis. This project aims
at developing a novel simulation for the front-end of CTC, an accurate sensor
planning for the virtual cameras. The proposed simulation will provide unique
understanding of CTC and will lead to discovery of methods for image-guided
interventions to efficiently remove colonic polyps by Optical Colonoscopy and
surgical planning for colectomy. The simulation platform will be applicable in
biomedical education, training of resident radiologists and healthcare
professionals, and will also promote various applications outside the biomedical
domain.