* 1602173
* NeTS: EAGER: Development of a Millimeter Wave Software Defined Radio
* CSE,CNS
* 12/01/2015,11/30/2016
* Sundeep Rangan, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Thyagarajan Nandagopal
* 11/30/2016
* USD 98,094.00

With the severe spectrum shortage in conventional cellular bands, millimeter
wave (mmWave) frequencies between 30 and 300 GHz have been attracting growing
attention as a possible candidate for next-generation micro- and pico-cellular
wireless networks. The mmWave bands offer orders of magnitude greater spectrum
than current cellular allocations and enables very high-dimensional antenna
arrays for further gains via beamforming and spatial multiplexing. However,
mmWave cellular communication is still very much in its infancy, and there is an
urgent need for fully-programmable research platforms to enable the research and
development needed to bring these systems to reality. The project aims to
develop a fully-programmable research platform that allows for flexible
experimentation with millimeter-wave systems dealing with frequencies above 25
GHz. The hardware components of the platform will be made available to
researchers across the United States at deeply discounted rates. The
availability of this hardware, combined with the free and open-source
implementation will enable the larger wireless networking research community to
greatly benefit from this platform.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The platform involves
integrating SiBeam's Sil6342 phased array antenna system with National
Instruments' powerful PXI system, to create a fully programmable and modular
SDR. This platform will support 1 GHz bandwidth, and allow a latched and timed
digital control of the phased array with sub-microsecond accuracy. The entire
implementation will be open-source, and made publically available for free.
There are many projects that will be enabled by this platform: a) dynamic
channel sounding; b) study of beam-forming techniques; c) design and testing of
MAC protocols that rely on beam-forming and intermittency; d) study of new PHY
layer modulation and coding techniques; etc.