* 1602533
* Collaborative Research: Arctic Land Fast Sea Ice Formation in the Presence of Fresh Water Input
* GEO,OPP
* 11/01/2016,10/31/2020
* Ignatius Rigor, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Colene Haffke
* 10/31/2020
* USD 177,489.00

One of the most notable changes in the Arctic during recent years has been the
variability in sea ice extent and timing. Changes in the character and seasonal
cycle of nearshore sea ice is of particular importance to indigenous communities
that use the nearshore sea ice as a platform for subsistence hunting and
transportation. Observations and model projections also suggest increasing
freshwater runoff to the coastal ocean from increased melting of glaciers and
ice sheets, thawing of permafrost, and precipitation over land. This runoff
impacts the sea ice that forms in the fall. Sea ice formed under freshwater
influence reveals differences in salinity, porosity, and permeability, and thus
its optical and mechanical properties. This project will provide unique
observations of sea ice formation and structure under conditions of freshwater
influence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will contribute to STEM workforce
development through provision of support for the training of a graduate student.
It will also entrain undergraduate students from Dartmouth?s Women in Science
Project (WISP). One undergraduate will participate in the spring field work. The
project will also apply for support for a PolarTREC teacher. K-12th grade
outreach activities will be offered and will leverage existing programs at
University of Washington such as participation in the Polar Science Weekend at
the Pacific Science Center. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The freshwater discharge to
the coastal ocean affects thermodynamic processes in sea ice by changing
salinity and temperature of the waters undergoing freezing. This three-year
pilot project is designed to study sea ice formation and structure in the
coastal ocean, while addressing the following important questions:&lt;br/&gt;1.
How do microstructure and the brine pocket network differ in sea ice that forms
and grows where there is significant fresh water input compared to sea ice in
the open ocean?&lt;br/&gt;2. Can we monitor the onset of freezing, freezing rate
and ice type in situ in sensitive nearshore areas, while collecting data
remotely?&lt;br/&gt;3. How does microstructure affect heat transfer along the
length of an ice core?&lt;br/&gt;The project will combine recently developed
observation and sampling technologies, and integrate expertise in field
monitoring, and physical and chemical sea ice characterization. Sea ice
formation, growth rate, and salinity will be monitored in situ at a location of
freshwater input during the course of a growth season using a wire ladder.
Oxygen isotopic ratios and optical thin section stratigraphy will be used to
quantify freshwater influence. X-ray micro-computed tomography will be used to
characterize porosity and brine channel topology at 1 cm intervals along ice
cores and provide quantitative data on microstructural differences in ice
influenced by the freshwater. Laboratory tests and modeling will be used to
examine heat transfer through sea ice cores held at their in situ temperature
gradient, as a function of microstructural stratigraphy.