* 1602839
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Weight-based Discrimination and Group Interactions: An Expansion of Status Characteristics Theory
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2019
* Carla Goar, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 07/31/2019
* USD 12,000.00

SES-1602839 Carla Goar Bobbie Reidinger Kent State University

This research examines the impact of body weight in task-oriented groups by
testing whether weight behaves as a status characteristic; specifically, whether
it serves as a differentiating characteristic that becomes activated, organizes
performance expectations, and impacts task behaviors. Using a standard
experimental setting, the impact of weight on social processes is measured
through an examination of influence. In these experiments, differently weighted
participants will work with their partner, dependent on the experimental
condition, to complete two tasks. After considering their partner?s responses,
each participant will submit a final group report in addition to their
individual answers. How often a participant accepts or rejects their partner?s
answers allows for a measure of influence. It is hypothesized that the weight of
the partner will directly impact measures of influence regardless of the weight
of the participant. The emerging field of fat studies suggests that fatness has
negative social implications within American society which transcend racial,
gender, and class categories; however, weight has not been explored as a status
characteristic in the sociological social psychological literature. An
examination of weight as a diffuse status characteristic will expand the
sociological social psychological literature, specifically expectation states
and status characteristic theories, as well as the emerging field of fat
studies. Greater theoretical understanding will enhance research on weight-based
discrimination and group interactions. As reliance on groups grows, increased
understanding of characteristics which influence group interactions is
necessary. Results from the proposed study may lead to the creation and
implementation of social interventions to reduce weight-based discrimination
within diverse groups.