* 1602882
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Explaining the valuation of non-standard goods in the global economy.
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2016,02/28/2017
* Emma Greeson, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* marie cornwall
* 02/28/2017
* USD 12,000.00

Doctoral Dissertation Research: Explaining the Valuation of Non-Standard Goods
in the Global Economy&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sustainable production and
consumption have become a focus of policy-making as growing scientific evidence
points to the possibility that current economic practices are depleting valuable
resources on a broad scale. Recycling and prevention of waste through reuse are
key aspects of these policies, yet little is known about how these waste
management measures are practiced, especially as goods for reuse are exported
from one country to another. This dissertation focuses on the global value chain
for used clothing to understand what happens to discarded items that are
transformed from waste and diverted from landfill by being given value. Drawing
from economic sociology and waste studies, this project seeks to provide an
account of valuation of these waste flows. This dissertation will develop a
theory of valuation that can account for cases in which goods are highly
unstandardized. Existing sociological explanations of valuation cannot account
for how value is created along the global value chain of used clothing, where
goods are highly variable and supply is unpredictable. Understanding how waste
is transformed into a commodity is important to countries seeking to develop
waste management policies that are nationally and globally effective and
sustainable. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study is a multi-sited, mixed-methods
study that traces the value chain of used clothing from the United Kingdom to
Poland. The central empirical question asks how value is created along the
global value chain of used clothing. This dissertation relies on a comparison of
how used clothing market actors at different points along the global value chain
of used clothing make decisions about value and waste. Data will include in-
depth, semi-structured interviews with actors involved in the collection,
sorting, processing, exporting, importing, or selling of used clothing in the UK
and Poland. Interviews will be informed and supplemented by observation and
participant observation in sites at each of six analytically-identified stages
along the value chain of used clothing between the UK and Poland. Field notes,
interview transcripts, and photographs will be qualitatively coded. Quantitative
data regarding amounts and percentages of clothing sold/discarded will come from
a structured component of interviews and supplemented by existing industry data.
These data, as well as existing business register data, will be analyzed using
tabular and multivariate analysis to help explain variations found in the
qualitative data and to assess the generalizability of the qualitative findings.
This research contributes both to economic sociology and to recycling and waste
policy.