* 1602240
* Photochromic Compounds and Materials:  Photodiffraction, Dynamics, and Photomechanical Effects
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2019
* Jeffrey Rack, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 05/31/2019
* USD 360,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamic &amp; Mechanism B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Jeffrey Rack of the Department of
Chemistry and Chemical Biology at Ohio University will develop new classes of
photochromic transition metal complexes. Photochromic complexes are those that
change their color when exposed to light. The goal of this research is to create
new examples of these complexes, to study their properties, and to discover new
photoactive materials comprised of the photochromic compounds. The project lies
at the interface of inorganic, physical, and materials chemistry, and is well
suited to the education of scientists at all levels. Particular efforts will be
made to train students from groups traditionally underrepresented in science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goals of this project are to increase the
number and types of photochromic transition metal complexes, to discover new
photoactive materials, and to study how these photochromic transformations
occur. Photochromic transition metal complexes efficiently and rapidly convert
photonic energy to potential energy to trigger excited state electronic and
molecular structural rearrangements. The mode of action is an excited state
linkage isomerism of a bonded chelating sulfoxide from S to O and O to S. This
project will examine these systems across three specific aims: 1) synthesis of
new photochromic Cu sulfoxide complexes, 2) creation of new photorefractive
materials comprising ruthenium sulfoxide complexes, 3) investigation of existing
and new complexes by ultrafast pump-probe spectroscopy.