* 1602771
* Collaborative Research:  P2C2--Late Holocene Climate: Natural or Anthropogenic?
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2021
* Christopher Kucharik, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 05/31/2021
* USD 444,971.00

This collaborative project generally aims to address a fundamental and yet
unresolved question about Holocene climate which is: When did humans assume the
"driver's seat" of the global climate system? Did it coincide with the advent of
the Industrial Era, as traditionally believed, or did it instead occur many
millennia ago with the emergence of agriculture?

The scientific community remains divided on whether carbon emissions released by
early farming activities were large enough to explain the unprecedented rise in
atmospheric greenhouse gas (GHG) concentrations during the late Holocene
compared with declines in these climatic drivers during recent previous inter-
glacial periods. This research will test the "Early Anthropogenic Hypothesis,"
which posits that anthropogenic global climate change was initiated by
agriculture in the middle Holocene, by identifying the "fingerprint" of human
influence on global climate during the past 6,000 years.

The project will capitalize on state-of-the-art earth system models to
distinguish between the actual climatic evolution of the late Holocene and the
hypothesized "natural" trajectory that would have been followed in the absence
of human land clearance and greenhouse-gas overprints. To achieve this goal, a
pair of 6,000-year long transient simulations will be run with the Community
Earth System Model (CESM). In one experiment CESM will be driven by historical
variations in orbital parameters, GHG concentrations, and regional land
clearance, whereas the latter two forcings will differ in the counterpart
experiment according to the hypothesized declines in carbon dioxide and methane
and the associated global vegetation patterns compatible with "natural" climate
evolution.

The Broader Impacts involve the potential for a unique and potentially
transformative shift in the scientific understanding of human influence on
global climate.