* 1602521
* Collaborative research:  The WArming and irRadiance Measurement (WARM) buoy:  Assessing the role of solar energy in heating, photosynthesis, and photo-oxidation in the upper Arctic
* GEO,OPP
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2021
* Michael Steele, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Roberto Delgado
* 06/30/2021
* USD 293,324.00

The WARM buoy collects measurements of light, temperature, salinity and
phytoplankton abundance under the Arctic sea ice. The Arctic ice pack has
suffered continued thinning and reduction in seasonal extent, resulting in
changes to the amount of sunlight penetrating through the ice and into the ocean
beneath, having consequences for the physical and biological environment.
Sunlight absorbed by the ocean under the ice causes warming, which can lead to
accelerated ice melt resulting in even more sunlight reaching the ocean. In
addition, warmer water also affects living organisms, influencing the ability of
Arctic adapted species to survive, and possibly promoting the northward
advancement of sub-Arctic species. Thinner ice also increases light available
for photosynthesis, affecting the timing of phytoplankton blooms. If
phytoplankton growth occurs early in the season then zooplankton, the organisms
that feed on them can miss the bloom with consequences for the entire food web
of the Arctic. This project aims to provide observations to help determine how
the under-ice environment is changing by using autonomous buoys which overcome
the limitations of ship-based observations. The buoys have proven to be very
robust and can survive for approximately one year, providing hourly observations
which will be available in near-real time to the research community and
interested public parties. The buoys will be deployed in early spring in the
western Beaufort Sea, with anticipated drift west over the Chukchi Shelf.
&lt;br/&gt;This project will continue the WARM buoy initiative by improving the
existing design to include increased vertical resolution of temperature and
light measurements, the addition of salinity measurement to enable water mass
identification, and a second fluorometer to identify sinking phytoplankton
biomass. The data collected will provide a time series of important physical and
biogeochemical properties over a complete seasonal cycle. It will enable us to
address questions related to the effects of a thinner and more open ice pack on
the absorption of solar radiation, ocean heating, the phenology of pelagic
primary production, and carbon cycling. The buoys have proven to be very robust
and can survive for approximately one year, providing hourly observations which
will be available in near real time to the research community and interested
public parties. The buoys will be deployed in early spring in the western
Beaufort Sea, with anticipated drift west over the Chukchi Shelf. The Arctic ice
pack acts as a barrier controlling the availability of UV and visible light to
the water column. Continued thinning and reduction of seasonal Arctic ice has
resulted in alterations in the timing and magnitude of solar radiation
penetrating the upper Arctic Ocean. Amplification of solar radiation absorption
into the ocean acts to warm and stratify the surface layer, which can induce
further ice retreat and delay fall freeze-up. Resulting thermal stratification
affects the ecosystem by limiting vertical replenishment of nutrients with a
direct consequence on the magnitude of primary production. A warmer water column
can also play a fundamental role in setting thresholds for the abundance and
distribution of plankton communities, affecting trophic efficiency and promoting
the northward advancement of sub-Arctic species. Thinner ice increases the light
available for photosynthesis and net primary production, affecting the timing of
primary production. Small timing mis-match between phytoplankton blooms and
zooplankton reproductive cycles can have consequences for the entire lipid-
driven Arctic marine ecosystem. Changes in the duration of UV exposure through
longer open water periods has the potential to increase photochemical
remineralization of terrestrial and marine organic matter and production of
labile organic material that can be used by microbes. Determining the impact of
solar radiation changes on warming, primary production, and photochemistry are
all critical in assessing and predicting the effects of climate change on the
marine carbon cycle. The measurement of these variables within and beneath the
seasonal ice pack is challenging due to the limitations of ship based
observations, but this can be resolved by using the autonomous WARM buoys
deployed within the ice and designed to survive ice melt.