* 1602772
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Intern Experiences and Pathways to Labor Market Entry
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2016,09/30/2018
* Steven Lopez, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 09/30/2018
* USD 12,000.00

SES-1602772&lt;br/&gt;Steven Lopez&lt;br/&gt;Corey Pech&lt;br/&gt;Ohio State
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Internships have become a ubiquitous component
of job training. Gaining an understanding of when interns are exploited, and
when they are valued, is essential to understanding labor market entry. Previous
studies of internships focus on industry case studies. This dissertation is the
first comparative study of majors and internship sites to address the question
-- under what conditions are internships precarious work and under what
conditions are they a stepping stone to a career? Answering this question has
application to both the social sciences and national discourse about the
economy, speaking to issues salient to policymakers, corporations, and a
concerned citizenry. This project will help individuals and institutions make
better decisions about utilizing internships. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study
makes use of a longitudinal interview research design with two waves of
interviews. Wave one involves interviewing college seniors in four majors about
their internships. These are Business/Operations and Logistics; Industrial
Engineering; English; and Communications. Wave two follows up one year later.
This design links internship to college major and labor market entry. This study
makes contributions to the sociology of work, economic sociology, and the
sociology of education. Precarity and insecurity of work is a much-discussed
topic in the sociology of work. This study will examine how interns are used by
employers and the effects of their labor process on interns' experiences and
outcomes. In theory less precarity should increase chances in the labor market,
but economic sociology suggests other factors might be more important than the
content of the internship. This study will add to knowledge on how non-labor
process factor, such social networks or sociability with coworkers, affect
internship experiences and outcomes. This study can also make contributions to
the sociology of education. Competing theories on labor market entry such as
whether majors build human capital or act as a screening device will be
adjudicated by this research.