* 1602476
* Symmetry Making and Breaking in the Synthesis and Assembly of Stellated and Bimetallic Nanocrystals
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2019
* Sara Skrabalak, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 05/31/2019
* USD 473,989.00

Nature demonstrates symmetry in the beauty of a flower, the precision of a
honeycomb, and the elaborate patterns of snowflakes. Beyond the appeal of
symmetric forms, symmetry can also impart function. For example, orb spiders
weave in a spiral pattern to maximize the strength of their webs and bees
construct honeycombs with close packed hexagons to maximize honey storage. This
correlation between structure and function is also captured in modern
nanomaterial design, where changing the symmetry of a nanocrystal or the
internal order of a superstructure built from nanocrystals can give novel
function. However, the synthesis and assembly of nanomaterials have been limited
to simple compositions and structures until recently. In this research, the
principal investigator, Sara Skrabalak, is developing new synthetic methods to
make metal nanostructures with multiple metals and defined shapes. These
nanostructures are also being used as building blocks to form larger structures,
where the symmetries of the building blocks direct the shapes of the larger
superstructures. The principal investigator and her students also study how the
compositions and structures impart functionality. In particular, studies into
the new light-matter interactions that arise as a function of symmetry are
underway in an effort to achieve multi-functional platforms for chemical sensing
applications. Ultimately, this research has broader impacts in the field by
forging links between multiple disciplines, including nano/inorganic/solid-state
chemistry, condensed matter physics, surface science, and material science. This
project also incorporates outreach and educational efforts that introduce
nanoscale concepts to non-scientists. The project also involves undergraduates
in research activities in ways that emphasize their connection to the
surrounding community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Skrabalak group at Indiana
University is developing seed-mediated co-reduction as a new synthetic strategy
to multimetallic nanostructures, where multiple metals are simultaneously
deposited onto shape-controlled nanocrystals. The symmetry of the nanocrystal
seeds is transferred to the final nanostructures. This research includes
studying how lattice mismatch and deposition kinetics contribute to bimetallic
distribution. This work is coupled with a study of how symmetry can be reduced
along specific crystallographic directions during seed-mediated co-reduction in
order to achieve new stellated nanocrystal symmetries and in turn functional
diversification. Finally, the Skrabalak group is using the stellated metal
nanocrystals to assemble close-packed and low-density lattices to expand
crystallization capabilities to new structural classes. They also characterize
the collective optical properties that emerge. These three aims are coupled with
outreach and educational efforts in which undergraduate researchers are Science
Ambassadors to their former high schools, introducing nanoscale concepts to
students and serving as role models to those interested in science, technology,
engineering and mathematics fields. Advancement in the research expands the
classes of nanocrystals and superstructures possible and identifies the roles of
seed and building block symmetry in the synthesis and assembly of metal
nanocrystals for broader impact in the science.