* 1602137
* Super-Approximation in Number Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2022
* Alireza Golsefidy, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 07/31/2022
* USD 238,249.00

This research project concerns work related to questions in group theory, number
theory, and analysis with application to cyber security. Being able to provide
points that look random, statistically, is extremely important both from applied
and pure points of view. An illustration of the importance of the task is given
by secure communications, such as bank transfers and other electronic commerce,
which start with a scheme that picks a random pair of prime numbers from the
collection of all primes of an appropriate size. Being sufficiently random is
one of the requirements that keeps many such schemes secure. However, providing
a random point from a pool of points is a computational task that is much harder
than it might seem. This research project studies mathematical questions
underpinning the random choice of elements of a set. One of the main aims of
this project is to establish that, if the group of symmetries of a collection of
points is complicated enough, then one can provide a pseudo-random point rather
quickly, compared to the number of points. The main focus of this project is to
develop a very concrete way of measuring how complicated a group is by using
polynomial equations. As part of the project, the investigator plans to explore
some of its applications to pure mathematics, for example, generalizations of
the work on sum and product sets that says: given a finite set of integers, the
collection of all possible pairwise sums, and, the collection of all possible
pairwise products, these collections cannot both be small.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal aim of this project is to prove the main
conjecture of super-approximation and explore its applications to the other
areas of mathematics. Super-approximation roughly says: whether a random walk
(with respect to finitely many elements with algebraic entries) in invertible
matrices over some topological ring, e.g., real numbers, p-adic numbers, or
adeles, has spectral gap depends only on the Zariski closure of the group
generated by the given set of matrices. In the past decade there has been
substantial progress in this subject, and super-approximation has been shown to
be extremely useful in various parts of mathematics, including number theory
(affine sieve; variations of Galois representations) and group theory (sieve in
groups; hyperbolic geometry; orbit equivalence rigidity). Another goal of this
project is to find additional applications of super-approximation.