* 1602438
* I-Corps:  Three-dimensional nanoelectrodes for non-invasive intracellular electrophysiology
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2015,11/30/2016
* Bianxiao Cui, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 11/30/2016
* USD 50,000.00

The drug development pipeline requires that potential drugs pass through a gamut
of tests which demonstrate the drugs' efficacy and safety. The drug safety test
starts from cellular studies before moving into animals and finally humans. As a
drug moves from cellular measurements to animal measurements, the time and money
involved increase dramatically. Therefore, it is essential to detect potential
drug toxicity early on, preferably at the cellular level. The drug toxicity
manifests mostly as non-specific binding to ion channels and therefore affecting
cardiac action potentials. The current golden standard technique to detect
action potential changes is patch clamps. However, the patch clamp has very low
throughput and is challenging to implement, which limit the number of drug
trials or drug candidates that can be screened. The proposed nanoelectrode
device allows these companies to expedite testing and reduce the cost of
cellular tests. In particular, nanoelectrodes can measure electrophysiology in
high throughput and low toxicity and therefore allowing testers to measure more
drugs with greater ease.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current drug toxicology screens
inevitably involve patch clamp electrophysiology to test off-target cardiac
activity. Patch clamp is technically challenging to use and has limited
multiplexing capability. Over the last six years, this group has worked to
develop a new nanotechnology tool for electrophysiology. The proposed tool
measures intracellular recordings of mammalian cells with high throughput and
low requirements on technical capability in the experimenter. Signals recorded
by these nanoelectrodes are carried out from the culture under test on metal
leads and amplified at an external multi-electrode array (MEA) amplifier. This
team expects to have customers in both pharmaceutical toxicology and academic
laboratories who are interested in pursuing electrophysiological questions. This
team also believes that anyone interested in the initial screening of new drugs
for their toxicological side effects would be interested in the proposed
technology that could be integrated into automated cell culture systems and
offers simple handling and experimentation.