* 1603350
* The Impact of the Stratosphere on Arctic Climate
* GEO,OPP
* 07/15/2016,12/31/2021
* Karen Smith, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Rainer Amon
* 12/31/2021
* USD 600,795.00

The Arctic surface climate has warmed dramatically over the past several
decades. This warming, known as Arctic amplification, is associated, most
notably, with extensive loss of sea ice. The Arctic stratosphere has also been
experiencing change, including significant stratospheric ozone depletion. There
is increasing evidence that polar stratospheric variability and change can have
a significant downward impact on the surface climate. The proposed research will
examine the connection between stratospheric circulation and chemistry and past
and future changes in the surface climate of the Arctic region. Understanding
the coupling between the stratosphere and the surface in the Arctic region has
potentially important implications for sea ice and weather forecasting. In
addition, the proposed research will lead to an improved understanding of the
local and remote processes that will determine Arctic stratospheric and
tropospheric ozone concentrations in the future. This is important because (a)
stratospheric ozone protects the earth from harmful ultraviolet radiation and
(b) tropospheric ozone is a toxic pollutant, which may have potential negative
impacts on air quality and vegetation in the region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will contribute to STEM workforce development in two ways. The principal
investigator is a beginning investigator and this project will provide her
support during the formative years of her career. The project will also provide
support for the training of a graduate student. The anticipated science results
have the potential to contribute to improve short-range forecast of sea ice and
weather. The project will enhance collaboration between NCAR and Columbia
University. Outreach to high school students will be enabled through leveraging
of programs at the American Museum of Natural History and in the Inuit village
of Arviat. Finally, research results will be shared with local K-12 teachers
through an ongoing program sponsored by the principal investigator?s home
institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will be carried out by
employing both observationally-based data products and global climate model
integrations to address the question of whether stratospheric circulation and
chemistry has a downward influence of the Arctic surface climate, particularly
sea ice, on seasonal, interannual and multi-decadal time scales. From a modeling
perspective, the approach outlined in the proposal will be to employ the Whole
Atmosphere Community Climate Model (WACCM), with three different configurations
that will allow examination of the interplay between dynamics and chemistry: (i)
the standard WACCM with interactive stratospheric chemistry, (ii) the specified-
chemistry version of WACCM (SC-WACCM) and (iii) the new fully coupled WACCM-
TSMLT with tropospheric and stratospheric chemistry.