* 1603185
* Simons Center for Geometry and Physics Thematic Program for 2016 "Statistical Mechanics and Combinatorics"
* MPS,DMS
* 02/01/2016,07/31/2016
* Pavel Bleher, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 07/31/2016
* USD 15,000.00

The aim of the project is to support junior American mathematicians in the one-
week workshop "Six-vertex model, dimers, shapes, and all that,"
http://scgp.stonybrook.edu/archives/14175, conducted within the framework of the
Thematic Program on "Statistical Mechanics and Combinatorics,"
http://scgp.stonybrook.edu/archives/16247, at the Simons Center for Geometry and
Physics (SCGP) at Stony Brook University. The main topics of the program and
workshop lie on the frontier between physics and mathematics with emphasis on
interconnections and cross fertilization of ideas between these fields. The
project will promote progress in the areas in mathematical and theoretical
physics by training of junior US researchers (postdocs, junior faculty, and
advanced graduate students). &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The Thematic Program on
"Statistical Mechanics and Combinatorics" from February 15-April 15, 2016 will
include preparatory courses and regular lectures and seminars by the long-term
and short-term visitors of the program and the one-week-long workshop "Six-
vertex model, dimers, shapes, and all that," March 14-18, 2016. The preparatory
courses, related to the themes of the workshops, will be aimed at graduate
students, postdoctoral fellows, and young researchers. The project will support
participation of young researchers at preparatory lecture courses, as well as in
the program and the workshop. The SCGP program will cover a broad spectrum of
interrelated topics which include mathematical aspects of solvable models of
statistical physics, combinatorics, representation theory, and related topics.
This will be an interdisciplinary activity with participation of distinguished
mathematicians, physicists and mathematical physicists. For junior researchers
it will be an opportunity to learn modern mathematical physics and discuss their
own projects with established experts in the field.