* 1603076
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Social ties, relational obligations and socio-economic outcomes
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2017
* Ann Swidler, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* marie cornwall
* 02/28/2017
* USD 11,340.00

This dissertation examines the relationship between personal relationships,
financial obligations, and socio-economic outcomes in sub-Saharan Africa.
Although many have written about Africa's rising middle class in recent years,
they ignore the continued importance of Africans' obligations to financially
support family members and friends in the absence of strong government welfare
systems. These financial obligations create a paradox: as individuals rise
economically, they must spend more money supporting dependent family and
friends. Focusing on Ghana, a country with both a growing middle class and a
growing commercial finance sector, this research seeks to answer two questions:
how do individuals from different socio-economic backgrounds interpret and
fulfill their obligations differently? Second, how do Ghanaians' obligation
management strategies affect their socio-economic outcomes? The research draws
together insights from history, anthropology, and sociology to contribute to
scholars' understanding of the economic dimensions of personal relationships in
different cultures, as well as social stratification in contemporary sub-Saharan
Africa, an area of the world often overlooked by sociologists. This research has
implications for development policy and planning in other developing countries,
where efforts to provide formal financial services for "unbanked" residents are
growing, and where economic opportunities are multiplying but unevenly
distributed.

This dissertation examines the relationship between personal relationships,
financial obligations, and socio-economic outcomes in countries where the
government welfare system is limited and patronage relationships still serve as
a primary means of resource distribution. Focusing on Ghana, an African country
with both a growing middle class and a growing commercial finance sector, the
study asks two questions: how do individuals from different socio-economic
backgrounds interpret and fulfill their obligations differently?that is, how do
Ghanaians of various economic means practice different obligation management
strategies? Second, how might different obligation management strategies affect
Ghanaians' socio-economic outcomes? The research employs two primary methods.
First, a 300-person vignette survey of urban Ghanaians will examine the
diversity of norms surrounding financial obligations and obligation management
strategies among Ghanaians from different socio-economic backgrounds. Second, 60
in-depth follow-up interviews with low-, middle-, and high-income respondents
will provide more detailed data on respondents' social networks and economic
strategies. The research extends knowledge of how contemporary Africans both
exploit and/or resist the demands of patrons and clients in a patronage-based
society. Additionally, it highlights the role of institutional context in
mediating the connection between personal relations and economic outcomes.
Understanding how relational obligations affect individuals' and families' own
economic advancement will illustrate the difficulties of managing relations and
resources in a developing society where economic opportunities are multiplying
but unevenly distributed.