* 1603491
* Collaborative Research: Dynamics of Chalcogenide-doped High Capacity Lithium-ion Battery Anode Materilas during Cycling Using in situ Imaging
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Charles Mullins, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2019
* USD 150,000.00

Rechargeable lithium ion batteries help to enable sustainable energy systems by
storing electricity generated by intermittent renewable resources such as wind
and solar energy, or by powering zero-emission electric vehicles charged by
electricity from renewable resources. The two key performance measures of
lithium ion batteries are capacity and recharge rate, which determine how much
energy a battery can store and how long it takes to fully recharge. One approach
to significantly improve capacity is to replace conventional graphite anodes
with alloy-type anode materials that include the elements silicon (Si),
germanium (Ge), and tin (Sn). However, these alloy materials swell up after
charging, which promotes mechanical failure. This project will address this
issue by adding the element selenium (Se) to alloy-type anodes made from
micrometer sized particles. The resulting Se-doped microparticles may be able to
reduce swelling of the anode. Advanced imaging and computational studies will
gain a fundamental scientific understanding of these processes, with the long-
term goal of developing commercially affordable, high-performance anode
materials for better batteries. The research will be a collaborative effort
between researchers at three universities - Indiana University, Mississippi
State University, and the University of Texas at Austin. Furthermore, the
educational activities associated with this project will be coordinated between
these three institutions, and will include integration of the research into
undergraduate and graduate course lectures, involvement of undergraduate
students and K-12 teachers in research, and outreach to pre-college students
through development of short, energy-related animated
videos.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of the research is to develop a
fundamental understanding of the electrochemical, material phase, and
morphological dynamics of Se-doped Ge and Sn microparticles during lithiation
and de-lithiation reactions with lithium ion battery alloy-type anodes. The
research plan has two objectives. The first objective is to investigate the
dynamics of Se-doped materials during lithiation and de-lithiation, focusing on
in situ measurement of phase and morphology change via in situ X-ray powder
diffraction (XRD), transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and transmission X-ray
microscopy (TXM). Concurrently, the composition of the Se-containing inactive
phase will be identified and its ionic conductivity will be determined.
Furthermore, the effect of the active/inactive mixed phases on cycling
performance for both Ge- and Sn-based electrodes will be studied. The second
objective is to develop correlations between lithium ion battery cell
performance and changes in Se-Ge and Se-Sn electrode microstructure through the
afore-mentioned experiments and theoretical modeling. A phase field model that
integrates the processes of electrochemical reaction, species diffusion,
interfacial effects, as well as large elastoplastic deformation will be
developed to simulate the concurrent evolution of phases, morphologies and
stress within a Ge-Se or Sn-Se particle during lithiation and de-lithiation.
Since it is likely that future high-capacity electrode materials will have large
volume changes, the outcomes from the research may enable development of these
new battery systems.