* 1603630
* Midisuperspace laboratories for the dynamics of loop quantum gravity
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Jorge Pullin, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 06/30/2020
* USD 396,000.00

The study of how black holes evaporate is perhaps the most important outstanding
problem in theoretical physics today. Its solution requires understanding the
behavior of two of the pillars of modern physics, gravity and quantum field
theory, in their most extreme regimes. Understanding how physical theories fit
together in challenging regimes has in the past led to insights of spectacular
consequences. An example of this could be Maxwell's understanding of how
electricity and magnetism fit together, a synthesis that led to the discovery of
radio waves, with the ensuing transformational changes they induced in our
society. A second very important objective of this type of work is the formation
of human resources of very high quality. Physicists trained in these disciplines
have moved on to make contributions leading to rewarding careers in industry and
in finance, as well as science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The group will study the
application of techniques of loop quantum gravity in spherically symmetric
contexts with the ultimate goal of understanding black hole evaporation. They
will study the back-reaction of quantum fields living on spherically symmetric
quantum space-times that they developed in a previous project. The discreteness
of the quantum space-time naturally regularizes the infinities of quantum field
theory yielding all results finite. To study the back reaction will require
quantum space-times more realistic than the ones we have up to now, including
dynamical evolution. They propose to find the quantum space-time of a collapsing
shell and compute the back reaction of fields living on it. In addition to this
they propose studying the structure of the quantum space-times we have up to
now, in particular their singularity structure in the case of extremal and super
extremal charged black holes and the Cauchy horizons that appear in the
solutions. They also propose to continue the study of uniform discretizations as
a quantization approach, in particular comparing with the exact quantization
that was used to construct the spherical quantum space-times, which relied on
the Abelianization of the algebra of constraints, a condition that one does not
expect to generalize for more complex models. They will also explore a proposal
for the problem of time and an ensuing proposal for solving the measurement
problem in quantum mechanics. They wish to explore more general models than the
ones worked out up to now and to study the issue of strong emergence.