* 1603445
* Fluid-Mediated Assembly of Nanocrystalline Silicon
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2021
* Alan Denton, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 07/31/2021
* USD 325,571.00

CBET - 1603445&lt;br/&gt;PI: Hobbie, Erik K.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many
electronic devices such as color displays and solar cells are produced using
semiconductor nanocrystals that are composed of elements with potential
toxicity. It may be possible instead to produce these and other devices using
silicon nanocrystals (SiNCs). However, for SiNCs to be useful they must form
structures called superlattices where the distance between the crystals is
carefully controlled to yield desired material properties. SiNCs tend to pack
too tightly owing to the forces between the crystals, which diminishes the
performance of the resulting superlattice. The investigators will explore the
possibility of using polymers to alter the packing of SiNCs, increasing the
distance between crystals without making the distance so large that the unique
properties of the material are lost. Experiments will be conducted to explore
effects of several parameters on superlattice formation, and data will be
interpreted using theoretical models and numerical simulations. The project has
the potential to demonstrate that useful silicon-based superlattices can be
formed, which would provide an earth-abundant, non-toxic alternative material
for electronic devices. The research team will participate as mentors in NATURE,
Nurturing American Tribal Undergraduate Research and Education, which engages
tribal high school and college students throughout North Dakota in science and
engineering projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first objective of the project
is to form superlattices of SiNCs by evaporative drying and controlling the
spacing of nanocrystals by adding polymers of various molecular weights. In
evaporative assembly, SiNCs of known size are suspended in an organic solvent,
and droplets of the suspension are deposited on glass and allowed to dry. During
drying, nanocrystals accumulate at the edge of the droplet and the polymer may
phase separate from the SiNCs. Parameters that influence the resulting
structures include polymer molecular weight, processing temperature, SiNC
concentration, geometry, solvent vapor pressure and shear rate. The influence of
long-range order on the luminescent properties of the assemblies will then be
investigated. The second objective is to develop modified equilibrium theories
of the phase behavior of nanocrystal suspensions using effective interparticle
potentials tested in molecular simulations of colloidal crystallization.
Lattice-Boltzmann simulations will also be generated to help analyze and control
the multiphase flow associated with slow evaporation.