* 1603318
* Collaborative Research:  An Experimental Study of the Dynamics of Heated Contact Lines Using Combined High Resolution Thermography and Interfermometry
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Joel Plawsky, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 08/31/2021
* USD 214,975.00

An Experimental Study of the Dynamics of Heated Contact Lines Using Combined
High Resolution&lt;br/&gt;Thermography and
Interferometry&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding of evaporating thin films is
essential to the development of devices used in a wide variety of industries
including those involved in coating, microelectronics fabrication and packaging,
chemical processing, and materials development. Although there is a good
theoretical understanding of how these films behave, direct measurements of both
the heat transfer and the thin film thickness to verify the theoretical
predictions have never been made due to the very small length scales involved.
This investigation will simultaneously employ, for the first time, two very
powerful and complementary experimental techniques: 1) Fluorescence techniques
to measure the temperature and heat flux in the vicinity of the contact line;
and 2) Multi-wavelength, image analyzing interferometry/reflectometry that
enables us to determine the shape of the vapor-liquid interface, the curvature
and curvature gradient of that surface, and the adsorbed film thickness ahead of
the contact line. The results will contribute to making these processes more
efficient, ultimately saving energy, materials, and labor costs, and will affect
the design and development of many technologies that operate by controlling
contact line dynamics using interfacial energy gradients (e.g., heat pipes,
boiling, spreading and wetting on unheated and heated surfaces, fuel cells,
evaporation induced self-assembly, micro-chemical laboratories, etc.).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many fundamental questions remain regarding the mechanisms
by which energy is transferred in the interfacial region. With a completely
wetting fluid, this region is characterized by a very thin adsorbed layer ahead
of the contact line, by a region behind the contact line where the curvature of
the vapor-liquid interface rapidly changes, and by a primary meniscus region
where the curvature of the vapor-liquid interface is relatively constant. A
partially wetting fluid may or may not have the adsorbed film. In addition,
oscillations of the contact line have been observed in thin films on heated
surfaces. The research will address fundamental phase-change heat and mass
transfer questions by using interfacial energy gradients due to capillarity and
disjoining pressure to naturally control the flow of simple fluids or dilute,
ideal fluid mixtures. The validity of theoretical predictions regarding the
structure and dynamics of the processes at the three-phase contact line will be
investigated. The objectives of this work are: 1) To measure the shape of
isothermal menisci using pure fluids and compare intermolecular forces obtained
from those measurements with predicted values for various fluids on dielectric
substrates; 2) To design, build, and operate an experiment to measure both the
heat flux distribution and curvature as a function of position within the heated
meniscus of pure fluids and to test current theories of interfacial transport in
thin films; 3) To expand on the experiments with a pure fluid to include dilute,
ideal mixtures and to test current theories of interfacial transport in thin
films of mixtures; 4) To use these techniques to characterize contact line
instability and oscillations for both the pure fluid and mixtures; and 5) To
evaluate the degree to which molecular shape affects slip at the solid liquid
interface and hence also affects transport processes in the contact line region.
The fluorescence technique will allow direct measurement of the local heat flux
and temperature. The interferometry/reflectometry technique will allow us to
record what happens to the shape of the extended meniscus and the contact line
as that energy gradient is perturbed, or to infer the local heat transfer from
surface curvature measurements as the meniscus moves over the surface. Both
techniques must be combined to obtain the data required to assess the current
theories &lt;br/&gt;of interfacial transport.