* 1603043
* Assembling Nanoparticle Arrays at Fluid Interfaces
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2021
* Irving Herman, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 07/31/2021
* USD 418,373.00

CBET - 1603043 PI: Herman, Irving P.

One route to making new materials for electronics, sensors, solar cells and
other devices is to assemble nanoparticles into ordered structures. This project
will develop new ways of assembling nanoparticles into two-dimensional
monolayers at interfaces between liquid and air. The project will use iron oxide
nanoparticles and semiconductor nanocrystals, which are often used in important
technological applications. To control and tune the assembly process, the
nanoparticles will be coated with chemical compounds that influence interactions
among the particles. The effect of the compounds on the formation of a particle
monolayer, the distances between particles within the monolayer, and
characteristics of the resulting monolayer will be investigated using a variety
of methods. The approaches in the project are general, so results should apply
to the formation of a wide range of two-dimensional assemblies on liquid
surfaces, which can then be transferred to solid surfaces. The resulting
materials can be used in technologies involving light and electrical conduction.
The project will provide opportunities for students at all academic levels to
participate in research, and participants in the project will host materials and
engineering demonstrations for children and adults in the Harlem STM Expo.

This goal of this project is to use a combination of modeling and new
experimental approaches to enable the rational design of ordered two-dimensional
nanoparticle monolayers that takes full advantage of the unique and tunable
properties of nanoparticles. A new route to monolayer formation using miscible
liquids will be explored to determine if structures can be formed that cannot be
obtained with standard methods. Nanoparticles capped with ligands will be
synthesized and characterized by x-ray diffraction, absorption spectra and
transmission electron microscopy. The size of the nanoparticle core,
polydispersity, and ligand composition will be determined. Real time microscopy
will be used to track the formation of the nanoparticles into monolayers at
interfaces. Since physical coupling of nanoparticles can be linked to their
electronic coupling, electrical and optical measurements of the fabricated
structures will be conducted and correlated with details of the fabrication
procedures. Modeling will be used to examine the evolution of nanoparticle
ordering at interfaces and the dynamics and properties of the resulting
structures as surrounding liquid evaporates. Finally, methods of transferring
the resulting nanoparticle layer to a solid substrate, while monitoring
monolayer properties, will be developed.