* 1603377
* RAPID: Characterizing the Chemical and Physical Signature of the 2015-16 El Nino in the Quelccaya Ice Cap Snow and Ice to Calibrate Past ENSO Reconstructions
* GEO,AGS
* 12/01/2015,11/30/2017
* Lonnie Thompson, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 11/30/2017
* USD 96,299.00

This award uses funds, under the auspices of the Rapid Response Research (RAPID)
concept, to dig three new snow pits and collect two new ten-meter long cores
from the Quelccaya ice cap (QIC) in southern Peru. Samples from these pits and
cores will be physically and chemically analyzed to address the hypotheses that
post-depositional features (e.g., melt features) and elevated concentrations of
dry deposited trace species (e.g., black carbon, dust, ammonium) provide new and
reliable markers of past El Niño-Southern Oscillation (ENSO) events and also
help facilitate the quantification of the event's intensity. These new markers
will be also applied to other ice cores from the southern Andes that exist from
extended tropical ice core archives collected over the last forty years.

The chemical and physical fingerprints of past El Niño events are preserved in
ice cores from Andean glaciers, particularly the QIC, and offer the potential to
quantify past regional ENSO variability. Previous isotopic (delta 18-Oxygen)
records from the QIC provided a long annually resolved history (1,800 years) of
Pacific sea surface temperature (SST) variations. However, delta 18-O on the QIC
is also influenced by other internally varying climate system processes (e.g.,
South American Monsoon, ITCZ position). Consequently, additional El Niño proxies
are needed to reduce the uncertainties inherent in past El Niño reconstructions
and to help facilitate more accurate projections of intensity and frequency.

The new data that could result from the research is aimed at testing two
hypotheses: 1) the snow melt and percolation induced by El Niño is identifiable
in the prior year's snow layer and can be calibrated to the El Niño's strength
in terms of temperature and radiative forcing; and 2) the concentration and co-
association of biogenic and evaporitic species will be enhanced and detectable
deeper in the ice and thereby reveal past El Niño frequency.

The potential broader impacts include capturing the chemical and physical
signatures of a modern El Niño event in real time that could help evaluate past
ENSO variability preserved in ice cores as well as assessing the role of solar
forcing in climate. The research will help support an early career female
scientist and the research results will be disseminated in short video segments
appropriate for the public.