* 1603331
* Collaborative Research: Refreezing in the firn of the Greenland ice  sheet: Spatiotemporal variability and implications for ice sheet mass  balance
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Marco Tedesco, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Colene Haffke
* 08/31/2021
* USD 318,650.00

The Arctic is warming and the Greenland ice sheet is melting. In total, the ice
sheet stores enough water to raise sea level by approximately 6 meters. However,
how surface meltwater generated in the summer makes its way from its location on
the ice sheet to the ocean is not well understood. Two competing but not
mutually exclusive theories are 1) the meltwater percolates into the ice sheet
pores and is stored for a relatively long time. 2) The initial infiltrating
meltwater refreezes at shallow depth in the firm, forming a hard pan that
prohibits further infiltration. In this latter case, the meltwater quickly moves
downslope along the surface of the ice sheet until it drains into the ocean.
Rennermalm will test these hypotheses through a combination of field work,
remote sensing from satellites, and modeling. Moreover, Rennermalm believes that
during the most recent warming, the shallow refreezing mechanism has been
playing a lesser role in the delivery of meltwater to the ocean than in previous
times. To explore this hypothesis Rennermalm will compare the physical
characteristics of modern cores with those extracted from earlier
expeditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will involve graduate and
undergraduate student training. The PI?s will collaborate with the Rutgers Film
Bureau to ensure effective communication with the public. The PI?s expect that
the Rutgers Film Bureau director will seek to showcase the documentary at film
festivals and other venues. In year one, two Rutgers Film Bureau members (the
director and one student) will travel to Greenland to capture the day-to-day
choices of scientific research in an extreme environment and produce a short
multimedia narrative. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sea level is expected to
rise in the decades to come, partially due to the melting of the Greenland ice
sheet. However, we do not fully understand how meltwater generated on the
surface of the ice sheet makes its way to the ocean. One line of thinking is
that surface meltwater makes its way into the porous ice sheet where it is
stored, either refrozen or in a liquid state, for relatively long times.
Alternatively, as proposed by these investigators, the first seasonal meltwater
that makes its way into the shallow ice, refreezes and blocks further
infiltration, resulting in water that quickly moves down the surface ice sheet
until it enters the ocean. Knowing the fate of meltwater is imperative if we are
to understand how fast sea level will rise in the future. These investigators
will integrate field work, computer modeling, and analyze data from satellites.