* 1603450
* A Novel Diamond Nanode Technology for Highly Multiplexed, Multimodal Biosensing of Brain Chemicals
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2020
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 05/31/2020
* USD 299,806.00

PI: Prabhu Arumugam&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A practical understanding of the human
brain is one of the the greatest scientific challenges of the 21st century.
Current neural probes to elucidate the chemical mechanisms underlying brain
function lack the multiplexing and multimodal capabilities necessary for
detecting multiple classes of brain analytes that have been implicated in
various brain disorders. This project will advance basic neuroscience research
by the development of highly sensitive, and highly reliable diamond-platinum
nanoelectrodes capable of sensing local concentration changes of brain
chemicals. The nanoelectrodes will also facilitate fundamental advances in
emerging analytical measurements within cellular and sub-cellular
domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An understanding of the human brain is one of the
greatest scientific challenge of the 21st century. Previous research in this
highly topical field has demonstrated the importance of neurochemicals, toxins
and field potentials for neuronal communication in healthy and diseased states.
The dynamics of interaction between these key functions, in all areas of the
brain, is clearly of critical clinical importance to the development of a useful
brain chemical model. The proposed research will result in the development of a
novel multi-purpose biosensing nanoprobe capable of near simultaneous in vivo
sensing of multiple brain analytes in body fluids. The proposed probe will
utilize new carbon nanostructures, advanced nanoelectrode geometries and
fabrication processes and redox cycling methods to demonstrate at least a
10-fold increase in the key sensor metrics, i.e. the sensitivity, selectivity
and limits of detection as compared to current neural sensing electrodes.
Specifically, and for the first time, a concentric three-dimensional nanoprobe
for brain analyte testing will be microfabricated with several individually
addressable BDUNCD (Boron-Doped Ultrananocrystalline Diamond) and Pt nanoring
nanoelectrodes ?nanodes?. One of the potential applications of the nanodes is
the localized sensing of changes in the levels of different brain analytes, e.g.
dopamine, lead and electrical field potentials as affected by external stimuli
such as neuromodulation. This will fundamentally improve understanding of
neurostimulation mechanisms, which is a promising technique now being employed
for patients with brain disorders. The creation of new nanodes, the central goal
of this project, would also allow progress in emerging analytical measurements
within cellular and sub-cellular domains. This project will deliver innovative
nanoprobes to advance basic science that is expected to be transformative in
terms of its unique multifunctional, multimodal and multiplexing capability. The
proposed research will contribute new advanced materials and fabrication science
to the general nanobiosensing field including nanodes for high sensitivity and
high selectivity chemical sensing.