* 1603249
* Deposition of ash and its effect on heat transfer during the oxy-combustion of biomass and biomass-coal blends.
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Wayne Seames, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 06/30/2020
* USD 500,000.00

1603249 &lt;br/&gt;Wendt, Jost &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall objective of
this project is to provide information that will enable implementation of oxy-
combustion of biomass and biomass-coal blends for power generation. This
technology, when followed by carbon sequestration, has the potential to have
significant impact because it can simultaneously produce electricity and
decrease CO2 emissions, using essentially conventional equipment. This process
requires a knowledge of ash deposition and heat transfer under biomass oxy-
combustion conditions, which are the twin thrusts of this research. The
international team assembled consists of the Universities of Utah (UU) and North
Dakota (UND) in the US and Huazhong University of Science and Technology (HUST),
and Southeastern University (SEU) in China. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scientific
objectives are to: 1) validate predictions of ash deposition rates during the
oxy-combustion of biomass-coal blends; and 2) understand how these impact boiler
chamber radiation. The hypothesis, based on limited preliminary experimental
work, is that ash deposition rates are linearly dependent on the concentration
of sub-micron particles (PM1) in the flue gas. In extending the work to oxy-
biomass combustion, it is sought to understand formation of both the inner
binding layer and bulk layer of controlled ash deposits, and to develop and
apply experimental information to refine existing models for predicting the ash
layer build up and submicron aerosol formation. These models will be employed in
conjunction with high fidelity radiative property models in computational fluid
dynamic simulations of the combustion scenarios. The simulations will be
validated through coordinated experiments in both the US and China, at various
scales, for various fuels, covering a range of combustion conditions, including
experimental validation at both atmospheric and pressurized oxy-combustion
conditions. This international collaborative project is expressly designed to
provide the fundamental knowledge that will help bring this technology into
practice, for both first generation (atmospheric pressure) and second generation
(elevated pressure) oxy-combustion technologies. A US graduate student will
assist in some of the experiments in China while Chinese students will
participate in US activities.