* 1603866
* Surface Coating for High-Capacity Electrodes in Li-ion Batteries: in-situ TEM Characterization and First-Principles Modeling
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Kejie Zhao, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 06/30/2020
* USD 260,661.00

Rechargeable lithium ion batteries help to enable sustainable energy systems by
storing electricity generated by intermittent renewable resources such as wind
and solar energy, or by powering zero-emission electric vehicles charged by
electricity from renewable resources. However, lithium ion batteries designed
for high energy storage capacity suffer from rapid power capacity loss over
repeated charge and discharge cycles. This project seeks to elucidate of the
underlying mechanisms of capacity loss through microscopic investigation of the
changes in battery electrode structure during charging and recharging using
transmission electron microscopy (TEM), which enables visualization at the
nanometer scale. The microscopic study will be complimented by mathematical
modeling studies that seek to predict the observed behavior. The educational
activities associated with this project focus on hands-on outreach activities
for middle school students on battery technology, coordinated through the Women
in Engineering program at Purdue University.

The overall goal of this research is to investigate how metal oxide coatings on
high-capacity, lithium ion battery electrodes affect charge capacity fade
through in-situ transmission electron microcopy (TEM) experiments and first-
principles modeling. Surface coatings can potentially mitigate the degradation
of electrodes through regulation of the electrochemical process of lithiation
and the remediation of deformation dynamics. However, the electro-chemo-
mechanical behavior of the coating materials is poorly understood. To develop a
fundamental understanding of these processes, the research plan has two major
objectives. The first objective is to synthesize core-shell structures of metal
oxide-coated nanowires to directly observe the lithiation reaction and the
morphological evolution and phase transitions associated with it using real-
time, in situ TEM. The second objective is to perform first-principles atomistic
modeling to develop a complimentary fundamental understanding of the effects of
lithium ion insertion and extraction on electronic structure, crystal lattice
structure, and structural stability. Through these objectives, the proposed
research will determine the thermodynamics of diffusive reactions and phase
transitions, the kinetics of structural evolution, ionic transport, and
interfacial reactions, as well as the mechanical properties of the lithiated
phases in the coating materials. The knowledge gained from this work will
facilitate the selection of coating materials for high-capacity lithium ion
batteries, and advance fundamental understanding of the intrinsic mechanisms
underlying the cyclic performance of Li-ion batteries.