* 1603023
* ENSO Variability and Mean State during the Late Holocene and Last Glacial Maximum Based on Mg/Ca of Individual Foraminifera
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2019
* Thomas Marchitto, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 07/31/2019
* USD 299,986.00

Over large parts of the globe including the United States, El Niño-Southern
Oscillation (ENSO) is a leading cause of climate variations from one year to the
next. Regional impacts can be catastrophic, including drought, wildfires,
flooding, mudslides, and fisheries collapse. Furthermore, ENSO has a significant
influence on global mean air temperature, and a strong El Niño event contributed
to the record warmth experienced during 2015-2016. Despite the clear importance
of ENSO to modern climate variability, the computer models used to make climate
projections offer no clear consensus on ENSO's future behavior. The various
computer models can be improved, with broad benefit to society, by evaluating
their ability to simulate past time periods when ENSO behaved differently.
However, that approach requires more and better paleo-ENSO observations from
geologic archives like ocean sediment cores. This project aims to ground-truth a
new method to reconstruct ENSO variability during the geologic past. It relies
on the fact that the chemistry of microscopic seashells (foraminifera) reflects
the temperature at which the shell formed. By measuring the chemistry of
numerous individual shells, researchers will be able to reconstruct the
variability of sea surface temperature in regions where temperature is dominated
by the ENSO phenomenon. This project will also provide extensive learning and
training experiences for a female PhD student and two
undergraduates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, the work proposed here
will develop a new proxy for sea surface temperature variability, "wet
chemistry" Mg/Ca ratios in individual planktic foraminifera, for probing ENSO
variance during the past. Preliminary measurements and Monte Carlo simulations
show that individual foraminifera from well-preserved sediments are reliable
recorders of calcification temperature. Past changes in ENSO variance should
therefore leave imprints on the distributions of individuals' Mg/Ca at carefully
chosen core sites. In the tropical Pacific however, seafloor dissolution of
CaCO3 and low sedimentation rates present dual challenges to this method, so it
will be important to ground-truth the approach using late Holocene sediments.
This work will use single-specimen Mg/Ca in two species of planktic foraminifera
to test two main hypotheses: (1) The observed lowering of planktic foraminiferal
Mg/Ca in partially dissolved samples is caused by a percentage Mg loss from each
shell, and not by a molar amount lost, nor by breakup and loss of higher-Mg
individuals formed in warmer waters; (2) Regardless of the exact nature of the
dissolution artifact, information about temperature variability (including ENSO)
is retained in single-specimen Mg/Ca distributions from tropical Pacific core
top sediments above the lysocline. Hypothesis 1 will be tested using four core
tops from a depth transect on Ontong Java Plateau in the western tropical
Pacific, and Hypothesis 2 will be tested using 10 additional core tops spanning
a range of annual and interannual temperature variability regimes across the
tropical Pacific.