* 1603215
* Collaborative Research: Enhanced Adsorption Cooling with Monolithic Nanoporous Adsorbents
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Louis Chow, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Ying Sun
* 08/31/2019
* USD 149,775.00

High Performance Adsorption Cooling Systems Using Monolithic Nanoporous
Adsorbents&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Adsorption cooling is an alternative technology
to vapor compression air conditioning. It is powered by low-grade heat, solar
energy, or waste heat from industrial processes or automotive engines. It uses
environmentally friendly refrigerants like water as the working fluid. The
sorption bed is the core of an adsorption cooling system in which the working
fluid is adsorbed/desorbed to compensate for the work needed in a conventional
vapor compression cycle. To produce cooling, adsorption cycle undergoes two main
processes: heating-desorption-condensation and cooling-adsorption-evaporation.
The refrigerant is desorbed by heating the adsorbent material and condensing in
the condenser while it vaporizes in the evaporator and is adsorbed by cooling
the adsorbent material. Fast thermal response of the bed is the key factor that
leads to high performance. Packed beds, which suffer from low thermal
conductivity due to the poor particle-to-particle contact and poor particle-to-
cooling surface contact, are regularly used in such systems. In this research,
an innovative bed will be constructed by growing a monolithic nanoporous
adsorbent layer with considerable thickness on copper fins of heat exchangers.
The monolith has internal vapor channels to reduce vapor diffusion resistance
and its thermal conductivity is expected to be many folds higher than those in
packed beds. The proposed monoliths can be used in highly efficient and compact
adsorption cooling units. In parallel to the research, senior students will be
trained in designing environmental friendly cooling systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A radically different and potentially transformative
adsorption cooling system will be developed. The system is based on monolithic
nanoporous silica or copper. Our research plan will include: preparing
monoliths, building an experimental set-up, modeling the heat and mass transfer
processes, designing and building new bed using nanoporous monoliths, and
measuring surface stresses. First, monoliths will be prepared via complete
removal of residue solvent of nanostructured silica gel. The surface of the
silica gel will be covered with a layer of liquid paraffin so that the process
will be carried out at high temperature and in a mild way to prevent the
monolith from cracking. Vertical pillars will be placed to form the vapor paths.
After forming the monoliths, the pillars can be removed. Second, an experimental
measurement set-up will be built to monitor the change of the adsorbent mass as
a function of time at a desired pressure and temperature. The measured data will
be used to determine mass diffusion coefficient, activation energy, and heat of
adsorption. In the modeling part, the heat and mass transfer processes will be
solved in the micropores generated in the nano-monoliths. The model will rely on
solving the flow in the pores as well as the adsorption and diffusion processes
of vapor in the solid phase. At the interface between the two phases mass and
energy balances will be applied. Next, to monitor the performance of the
developed monoliths in adsorption cooling system, a new adsorbing bed will be
constructed by growing a thick monolith layer on a heat exchanger, which
increases adsorption uptake. Different design configurations will be tested to
come up with the best design. Specific cooling power (SCP) and coefficient of
performance (COP) will be calculated to evaluate the new bed performance. During
the operation of the cooling system, the monolithic nanoporous material may
experience large surface tension from liquid that may damage the nano
structures. So the mechanical stability of the developed material will be tested
by measuring the surface stresses of a layer of the material coated on a micro
cantilever of Atomic Force Microscope (AFM).