* 1603957
* RAPID - Plume Dynamics under Increased Sediment Discharge following Floods
* GEO,OCE
* 11/15/2015,10/31/2017
* Alexander Yankovsky, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 10/31/2017
* USD 70,129.00

South Carolina suffered from record rainfalls on 2-4 October 2015 resulting in
massive erosion and flooding, dam breaching and overtopping of lakes and ponds.
The floodwaters spread in the coastal ocean as a buoyant plume. The objective of
this RAPID study is to examine the plume dynamics under increased sediment
discharge but otherwise close to normal oceanic conditions on the shelf.
Repeated shipboard surveys of salinity, temperature, sediment concentration and
flow velocity will be conducted within the freshwater plume originating from
Winyah Bay, SC, where the Pee Dee River and the Waccamaw River discharge. The
surveys will be repeated over the course of a few weeks as the sediment
discharge subsides. These floods will affect coastal sediment budget, beach and
inner shelf morphology, and should be accounted for by coastal developers,
managers and other stakeholders. The observed flood was extremely "flashy" and
the resulting freshwater pulse carried an increased concentration of pollutants
due to multiple failures of sewage treatment plants and other leaks. Better
understanding of the freshwater discharge dispersal and mixing in the coastal
ocean will help to mitigate similar events in the future and ultimately to
better protect a fragile coastal ecosystem. This project will provide the
required field research experience for several undergraduate students from the
USC Marine Science Program.

This event is an opportunity to investigate a new element to the dynamics of
freshwater discharge-driven coastal buoyant plumes: density variations
associated with deposition of heavy sediment load prior to the dispersal and
mixing of the low saline water. These density variations might have important
consequences for the plume dynamics: enhancement of currents further offshore,
formation of secondary bulges and the eddy-driven offshore mass and tracer
fluxes. Record-breaking flashy rainfalls in SC in early October in combination
with light to moderate wind forcing conditions on the coast allow the study to
capture two regimes of the sediment-laden discharge adjustment: (i) rapid mixing
of the discharge due to its initial lack of buoyancy, and (ii) "re-energizing"
of the plume once sediments are deposited and the discharge regains its
buoyancy.