* 1603941
* Collaborative Research: The Importance of Shelf Break Upwelling to Upper Trophic Level Ecology in the Western Beaufort Sea
* GEO,OPP
* 10/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Joel Llopiz, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Colleen Strawhacker
* 08/31/2022
* USD 1,049,523.00

The edge of the shallow continental shelf (called the 'shelf break') in the
Beaufort Sea is vulnerable both to direct impacts of ongoing climate
change&amp;#8232;and to indirect impacts that may result from increased human
activity in response to new opportunities associated with ocean warming and sea
ice reduction. Beaufort Sea shelf break upwelling may be increasing in frequency
in response to recent large-scale atmospheric changes, potentially increasing
the importance of the shelf-break environment for a range of upper trophic level
animals. This grant will support research to increase our understanding of the
importance of&amp;#8232;the region to upper trophic levels such as
beluga&amp;#8232;whales, seabirds, and seals, provide a mechanistic
understanding of the linked atmosphere-ocean- plankton-predator system, and
predict future consequences and impacts of environmental change&amp;#8232;on
this system. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A substantial communications program built
upon long-standing, well-established relationships&amp;#8232;between the
researchers and Alaska North Slope communities and subsistence organizations is
planned both to coordinate the planned sampling and to convey the results of the
research back to the communities. Information will be disseminated locally
before and during two research cruises using a range of media including daily
email reports, Facebook pages, blogs, interviews on local radio stations, and
flyers. A comprehensive project&amp;#8232;report, a summary report written in
straightforward English, and a poster describing results&amp;#8232;will be
disseminated to the North Slope communities. Project members will also present
results&amp;#8232;of the research in local lecture series or to interested local
organizations. Involvement&amp;#8232;of a K-12 teacher in at least one of the
cruises is planned. Both cruises will have&amp;#8232;the participation of a
local community observer who will communicate directly with local communities
during the cruise and share local knowledge with the science party.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Beaufort Sea shelf break experiences frequent
upwelling of deep, nutrient rich basin water&amp;#8232;onto the shelf. Such
upwelling is not only a short-term source of heat, salt, and nutrients, and a
mechanism promoting elevated primary production (production response), but it
also transports populations between ocean regions and depth strata or regimes
(physical response), potentially modifying ecosystem structure and availability
of zooplankton and fish prey to upper trophic&amp;#8232;level consumers. The
Beaufort Sea shelf break is a domain of enhanced abundance of
upper&amp;#8232;trophic level animals, presumably in response to elevated
availability of their prey. Here&amp;#8232;we propose to explore and identify
the mechanisms linking broad-scale atmospheric forcing, ocean physical response,
prey-base condition and distribution, upper trophic level animal aggregations,
and climate change along the Beaufort Shelf break. Our overarching
hypothesis&amp;#8232;is that atmospherically-forced (wind-induced) upwelling
along this shelf break leads to enhanced feeding opportunities for intermediate
links in the pelagic ecosystem (zooplankton, forage&amp;#8232;fish) that in turn
sustain the exploitation of this environment by animals such as
beluga&amp;#8232;whales, seabirds, and seals. This hypothesis will be addressed
using a combination of ship-based fieldwork, long-term moorings equipped with
physical and biological sensors, and syntheses of retrospective and projected
model output and longer-term data. The distributions, abundances, condition, and
biology of multiple trophic levels will&amp;#8232;be described within the
context of the dynamics of the physical environment to expand our understanding
of trophic linkages and the importance of shelf-break upwelling to that system.
Physical and biological model output and retrospective data will be synthesized
with the mechanistic understanding gained during the field program to
retrospectively characterize wind-driven&amp;#8232;upper trophic level ecosystem
variability and predict how the ecosystem may respond to future projections of
these atmospheric drivers and ice-ocean conditions.