* 1603943
* Collaborative Research: Dynamics of Circular Macromolecules (DNA): From Single Molecules to Highly Entangled States
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2019
* Michael San Francisco, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 07/31/2019
* USD 173,712.00

PI: McKenna, Gregory B. / Schroeder, Charles / Anderson, Rae&lt;br/&gt;Proposal
Number: 1603943/ 1604038 / 1603925 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
proposal is to explore the behavior of polymer molecules that form large rings,
instead of the usual linear polymer molecules. Such polymers, an example of
which can be the DNA molecule, behave in a different way than linear molecules
when processed or when they flow in a solution, because there are no ends in the
chains. Results of this work can lead to improved polymer materials, to
understanding in detail the behavior of bio-molecules, and to new technologies
for DNA sequencing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Circular polymers are fascinating
materials that have inspired polymer theorists and experimentalists for decades.
The dynamics of circular chains differ fundamentally from their linear
counterparts due to the absence of chain ends. Despite recent progress, however,
the effects of circular topology on polymer dynamics remain a key unresolved
problem in the field. In this proposal, the PIs are poised to make major
progress in our understanding by preparing circular and linear DNA molecules
that are monodisperse and of high topological purity. The assembled team has the
expertise to synthesize and characterize circular and linear DNA, and will study
the rheological behavior of these materials over a wider range of concentrations
and molecular weights than previously achieved. A comprehensive approach is
proposed that will include macroscopic and micro-rheology, single molecule
polymer dynamics, and DNA synthesis, to provide new information regarding the
dynamics of linear and circular DNA. Beyond providing a point of departure for
understanding their circular counterparts, the parallel study of linear
entangled DNA will provide unprecedented data using perfectly monodisperse DNA
samples to directly test predictions from reptation theory, such as the cross-
over to reptative behavior at extremely high entanglement densities. In addition
to graduate student participation, educational activities are proposed in all
three collaborating institutions, ranging from underrepresented minority student
involvement at Texas Tech, to high school teacher engagement at Illinois and
undergraduate student participation at the U of San Diego, a mainly
undergraduate institution.