* 1603907
* Multi-scale models of thermo-mechanical feedbacks on a soft,  wet bed
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Alan Rempel, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Marc Stieglitz
* 06/30/2020
* USD 426,663.00

Sea level is observed to be rising at an accelerating rate. A significant
portion of this rise is derived from glaciers. Glacier sliding speeds and the
discharge rates of the ice streams and outlet glaciers that drain Earth?s major
ice sheets are primarily controlled by conditions at their beds. This project
will use models to explore constraints on the bed conditions that control
sliding. This will begin at small scales where the physics are understood from
experiments and the results will be used to rigorously account for the effects
of heterogeneities across the larger scales of observed glacier flow and
associated landscape development.

The project will improve glacier modeling and, ultimately, contribute to
improved scenarios of future sea level rise. It will contribute to STEM
workforce development by providing support for the training of a post-doctoral
associate. Five undergraduate students will be entrained effectively into the
research program. Outreach to middle schools will be achieved through the PI?s
participation in summer teacher workshops, followed by co-development and co-
teaching of a project on glaciers and sea level rise. This will include the
development of a hands-on demonstration.

The principal investigator proposes to develop a hierarchy of models aimed at
exploring the consequences of thermo-mechanical coupling between ice, water, and
till. His studies will span a very wide range of time scales: from the elastic
response to tidal forcing at transiently locked portions of the bed, to the
decadal periods over which significant topographic modifications take place. He
will also examine a broad range of length scales, including the transitional
regions accessed by seepage flows between conduits, and basin-wide responses to
modeled and observed topographic roughness. Water pressures close to flotation
reduce the resistance to frictional sliding and bring the effective stress
supported by sediment particle contacts to within the range typical of the upper
few meters of soil in subaerial environments. Long-established, experimentally
supported thermo-mechanical treatments of ice-water-sediment interactions under
such conditions have only recently been applied to the subglacial environment.
Further work is needed to fully integrate this understanding and its
implications for glacier sliding and landscape development. This proposal
targets a selection of model problems aimed at elucidating the thermo-mechanical
constraints on behavior near transitions in basal properties, rigorously
accounting for the effects of heterogeneities across the range of scales
relevant to modern observations. With the intuition gained from focused studies
on carefully selected systems, the principal investigator will develop
strategies for parameterizing the model predictions so that they can be
incorporated in large-scale simulations of glacier and ice sheet dynamics.