* 1603892
* Fostering Innovation and Creativity: Coupling an Inter-disciplinary Design Class with a National Design Competition in Rehabilitation and Assistive Devices
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2020
* T. Reid Bush, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Grace Hwang
* 06/30/2020
* USD 120,722.00

Students who have embraced, learned, and experienced the innovation process will
be well prepared to become leading innovators. As part of this project, the PIs
will expose students to the new product development process, implement
activities to foster creativity, and apply these principles to designs of
devices that support persons with disabilities. Further, to broaden the
experiences of undergraduates across the nation, the PIs will sponsor a national
design competition for the next three years at the annual Summer Biomechanics,
Biotransport and Bioengineering Conference (SB3C) where projects from the design
class will also be submitted. Companies like AT&T and American Express sponsor
online creativity contests to inspire innovation, additionally, crowdfund
platforms like Kickstarter have ideas compete to win funding. Organizations are
using competitions to drive innovation and foster creativity within their own
workforces; a similar approach is proposed here for undergraduate students.
There are two primary goals for this work: 1) to foster innovation and
creativity in an undergraduate design course at the PI's university through a
new educational model, and 2) to provide three-years of support for a national
design competition in the area of rehabilitation and assistive devices for
undergraduates. The competition will help drive innovation in classes across the
nation and then allow students and their mentors to showcase their products. The
intellectual merits of this proposal are in the implementation of a new approach
for teaching design innovation through fostering creativity by implementing
independent discovery, creative thinking skills, a motivational component in the
form of a competition, and demonstrating the need and benefit of having an
inter-disciplinary team. The motivational component is tied both to the design
class and to the national undergraduate competition presented in this proposal.

The PIs will implement a new teaching model in an existing Biomechanical Design
class with the goal of fostering creativity. This will occur through a four
component approach including: 1) expertise through discovery, 2) creative
thinking, 3) motivation and 4) an appreciation for team diversity. As part of
the motivation component, we will hold an in-class competition, and also enter
student teams into the national undergraduate design competition held at SB3C.
In addition, the Undergraduate Design Competition in Rehabilitation and
Assistive Devices is a national competition, open to all undergraduate design
teams who have developed devices to support rehabilitation or provide assistance
to individuals with disabilities. With support for this competition,
undergraduate student teams and their advisors from across the nation will have
a component of motivation for their course innovations. A cohort of faculty,
selected by the PI, who have design experience, will review and score the
abstract submissions. Based on these scores, the top six teams (approximately 30
students and their mentors) will be invited to attend the conference and present
their device, design, and business case at a special podium session. All other
entries will be invited to the conference as poster presentations. By promoting
innovation and creativity in the classroom, students will be better positioned
for the highly competitive job market; the students exposed to this class and
the national competition will not only have an additional set of skills, but
they will have a project with a functional prototype to demonstrate as an
outcome. Also, societal benefits will occur through the production of a cohort
of students who are mindful of the need for diversity in the innovation process,
and who are aware of the needs for persons with disabilities.