* 1603520
* SusChEM: Hybrid and Double Network Solid Polymer Electrolytes
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2020
* Christopher Li, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 05/31/2020
* USD 325,179.00

Rechargeable lithium ion batteries support the development of sustainable energy
systems by storing electricity generated by renewable resources such as wind and
solar energy, or by powering zero-emission electric vehicles charged by
electricity from renewable resources. Lithium ion batteries that use lithium
metal as the anode have much higher energy storage capacity than conventional
carbon anodes. A fundamental reliability issue with experimental lithium ion
batteries that use lithium metal electrodes is the formation of lithium metal
whiskers within the battery during recharging, which ultimately shorts out the
battery, creating a potential fire hazard and reducing battery life. This
project will develop new solid polymer electrolytes to address this problem. The
key innovation is that a hybrid mixture of organic and silicon- based polymer
materials will be developed to impede lithium metal whisker formation while
providing high conductivity for movement of lithium metal ions across the
battery. The educational activities associated with this project include new
modules for a polymer science course at Drexel University that focus on polymer
materials for sustainable energy applications, and hands-on outreach on battery
topics to high school students from diverse backgrounds in the Philadelphia
area, coordinated through The Summer Engineering Experience @ Drexel program.

Rechargeable lithium ion batteries that use lithium metal as the anode have much
higher electrochemical energy storage capacity than carbon-based anodes
currently in use. However, imperfections on the metal surface serve as
nucleation sites for the deposition of lithium metal dendrites. These
microscopic projections grow upon repeated cycling and ultimately pierce the
separator, touch the cathode, and short out the device. The goal of this
research is to develop a new class of cross-linked hybrid network of solid
polymer electrolytes with inorganic polyhedral oligomeric silsesquioxane as the
cross-linker, and polyethylene glycol as the lithium ion solvating polymer. The
hypothesis is that the hybrid network structure of two intertwined crosslinked
polymers will resist dendrite growth and provide both high mechanical strength
and lithium ion conductivity. The research plan will design, synthesize and test
a series of solid polymer electrolyte network structures through four
objectives. The first objective is to understand the fundamental mechanisms of
lithium dendrite growth within solid polymer electrolyte hybrid networks. The
second objective is to improve the lithium dendrite resistance of the hybrid
network by introducing a series of double network structures. The third
objective is to correlate the electrochemical performance to the nanostructure
and morphology of the hybrid network, and the fourth objective is to fabricate
and test the stability and performance of lithium metal batteries which contain
the solid polymer electrolyte polymer networks. The fabrication will be made
compatible with scalable roll-to-roll battery manufacturing processes.