* 1603524
* Identification and Characterization of Matrikines for Cardiac Differentiation and Regeneration
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Emmanouhl Tzanakakis, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 06/30/2019
* USD 424,607.00

PI: Black, Lauren D. Proposal #: 1603524

There is great need for improved materials and techniques that can be used for
the treatment of cardiac injury or disease. Investigators have shown that a
variety of singular proteins derived from the cardiac extracellular matrix
(cECM) promote cardiomyocyte (CM) proliferation or cardiac differentiation of
stem cells, but little work has been done to identify the short peptide
sequences on those proteins, termed matrikines, that are the active ingredients
leading to the altered cellular responses. Based on preliminary data that
indicates that cardiac cells respond differently to cECM obtained from fetal
compared to adult hearts, the investigators of this 3 year project are going to
test the hypothesis that there exists a number of matrikines in the developing
heart ECM that could be useful in strategies for cardiac regeneration and
repair, via enhancement of CM proliferation and survival and the cardiac
differentiation of stem cells. Identification of these matrikines would be
significant for understanding the importance of cECM remodeling during cardiac
growth as well as for the potential development of therapeutics for the
treatment of cardiac injury or disease. Educational impact will be made at the
undergraduate and graduate levels through integration of techniques and results
in courses and laboratories; impact at the high school level will be made
through seminars at local high schools and as part of the Biomedical Engineering
department's summer research program for high school students.

The composition of the extracellular matrix (ECM) is a powerful regulator of a
number of cellular processes. In the heart, a variety of singular proteins
derived from the cardiac ECM (cECM) promote cardiomyocyte (CM) proliferation or
cardiac differentiation of stem cells. Most investigations to date have examined
only singular ECM proteins as binding sites for the cells, even though the ECM
in vivo is a complex mixture of proteins that is organ/ tissue and life stage
specific. Furthermore, the emphasis has been on singular proteins rather than on
the short peptide segments/matrkines that are likely to be the bioactive region
leading to altered cellular responses. The investigators' lab has shown that
cECM derived from fetal hearts promotes cardiomyocyte proliferation as compared
to ECM derived from adult hearts and that cardiac progenitor cells have altered
differentiation responses to cECM derived from different developmental stages.
Thus, the goal of this project is to test the hypothesis that there exists a
number of matrikines in the developing heart ECM that could be useful in
strategies for cardiac regeneration and repair, via enhancement of CM
proliferation and survival and the cardiac differentiation of stem cells. The
hypothesis will be tested by carrying out two aims: 1) Identify and characterize
matrikines derived from fetal and adult cECM (pigs at 3rd trimester and 3-6
months) that promote induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC) differentiation to
cardiac cells and/or enhance proliferation or maturation of iPSC-derived CMs
(iPSC-CMs) and 2) Assess the efficacy of the matrikines derived from cECM in
promoting human iPSC-CM survival, proliferation and function in 3-D engineered
cardiac tissue models of healthy and diseased myocardium. Identification of
these matrikines would be significant for understanding the importance of cECM
remodeling during cardiac growth as well as for the potential development of
therapeutics for the treatment of cardiac injury or disease. Educational impact
will be made at the undergraduate and graduate levels through integration of
techniques and results in courses and laboratories; impact at the high school
level will be made through seminars at local high schools and as part of the BME
department's summer research program for high school students.