* 1603075
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Homeless service systems and the homeless
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2016,02/28/2017
* Loic Wacquant, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* marie cornwall
* 02/28/2017
* USD 11,925.00

Homeless Service Systems and the Homeless Christopher Herring

Homeless management in the US city relies on the street, shelter, and state
supported housing programs. Social scientists do not have a clear understanding
of how these institutions relate to one another within an internal economy of
homeless management and how these relationships shape the survival of the
houseless. Further, every city in the United has an insufficient supply of
shelter beds and homeless housing units. There is, then, an important empirical
puzzle as to how, why, and when, in this context of housing scarcity, certain
individuals and groups end up in one institution rather than another. Rather
than just view homelessness as an outcome of poverty, this dissertation seeks to
explain the role institutions of homeless management play in sorting and
stratifying the poor and possibly deepening the poverty of the precariously
housed through policy toward the homeless. This dissertation research will
integrate several fields of study in sociology, social welfare and public health
and help understand the ways in which policy affects marginalized groups.

To answer the empirical puzzle of who gets what and when within a homeless
services system, the dissertation will provide a comparative study of the
streets, shelters, and permanent supportive housing programs in the city of San
Francisco; a city considered a national model for its multi-service shelters and
"housing first" approach. The study will adjudicate among three common
explanations of institutional entry, restriction, and preference: (a)
institutional factors (b) discretionary factors and (c) individual factors that
affect their entry, exit, restriction, and circulation between street, shelter,
and homeless housing. The dissertation will also assess how residing within one
institution or another affects health, work, welfare, criminalization, and
social ties. These processes will be studied through a "multi-sided
ethnography," working alongside social workers on the streets, shelters, and
permanent supportive housing on the one hand, and navigating alongside homeless
people through these same spaces. This research contributes to the sociology of
the homeless, social welfare, sociology of poverty and has strong broader
impacts in its potential contribution to homeless and housing policy.