* 1603566
* Collaborative Research: Formation and Persistence of Benthic Biological Hotspots in the Pacific Arctic
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Jacqueline Grebmeier, University of Maryland Center for Environmental Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Anderson
* 07/31/2021
* USD 107,340.00

Persistently high macrofaunal benthic biomass has been observed at four major
benthic hotspots in the Northern Bering and Chukchi Seas. These highly
productive benthic communities are ecologically important and provide abundant
prey for benthic-feeding marine mammals and seabirds. This grant supports the
exploration of the physical and biological processes that contribute to the
formation of these benthic hotspots, and a determination of how changes in the
Arctic system (including ice, ocean, and atmospheric forcing) will affect their
formation and persistence. A better understanding of the mechanisms for the
formation and persistence of these benthic hotspots is important and requires
the atmosphere-ice-ocean system approach taken in this study, since these
formation mechanisms involve multiple components of the Arctic system, including
both biological and physical components of sea ice and ocean processes and
atmospheric forcing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The group will integrate a suite of
models, including an ice-ocean-ecosystem coupled model and a Lagrangian
particle-tracking model, to evaluate source, transport pathway, and supply of
organic matter to the benthic community. The modeling will span the entire
system from atmospheric forcing down to particle export flux. Explicitly
modeling benthic-pelagic coupling is needed for a mechanistic understanding of
the ecosystem structure in the Pacific Arctic region and will provide baseline
information to better predict future ecosystem shifts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Once the model validation and synthesis with observations
are accomplished, the project will have a broad-scale description of the
existing and potential locations of benthic hotspots and carbon sources for
benthic hotspots across the entire northern Bering and Chukchi Seas, including
regions that are presently under-sampled, and their vulnerabilities to ongoing
climate and environmental changes. It will also have a better understanding of
the mechanisms contributing to benthic hotspot formation (e.g., zooplankton
grazing, seasonal and inter-annual variability in advected inputs of production
and/or nutrients, role of currents, convergences, turbulence, and particle
aggregation in hotspot formation, timing of sea ice formation, cover, and
retreat, inter-annual or long-term differences in atmospheric forcing). Both can
contribute to the design of future field efforts, since the comprehensive
spatial distribution of hotspot location can guide place-based field efforts and
the relative importance of modeled ecosystem processes and transformations will
inform needs for process studies and distributional studies. With ongoing
climate change, atmospheric forcing and ocean currents are likely to change in
strength and direction, potentially modifying the locations where the
convergence of these mechanisms promotes enhanced carbon export and benthic
hotspot formation. Understanding of how these linked mechanisms operate to
produce the existing benthic hotspots will permit us to predict empirically
their future persistence or relocation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of the
modeling effort can be used both by the scientific community in guiding future
fieldwork and modeling efforts and more broadly by managers and policy makers in
guiding the development and implementation of management and commercial
strategies and guidelines. This work will include outreach activities primarily
focused on K-12 education, focusing on the importance of atmospheric forcing,
sea ice, currents, and benthic-pelagic coupling to the Bering/Chukchi Sea system
and the impacts of ongoing climate change on that system.