* 1603710
* Collaborative Research: Testing the Drivers and Scale-dependency of Plant-fungal Bacterial Community Co-assembly Across the Arctic
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Donald Walker, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Rainer Amon
* 08/31/2021
* USD 199,010.00

Proposed Award Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Arctic vegetation is rapidly
changing in response to broad-scale Arctic warming. The investigators of this
proposal argue that only by exploring how plants, soil microbes, and soil fungal
communities interact and evolve together can we truly understand how vegetation
may change in the future. Using over 3500 soil samples that have been collected
across the arctic, along with environmental and plant data at the same sites,
the investigators will employ new genetic and statistical techniques to
understand the complex plant-microbe-fungal relations. While the work tackles a
number of basic ecological questions, it will also provide insights into the
controls determining how vegetation may change in the near
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of New Mexico is a certified
Hispanic Serving Institution and of the 1600 undergraduate Biology majors, over
30% are Hispanic. Taylor and Takacs-Vesbach will provide project related
research experience to these and other under-represented students. Taylor and
Takacs-Vesbach are currently mentor students through three STEM programs based
in the Biology department. A letter of support is provided by the Director of
the UNM Minority Access to Research Careers (MARC) Program, which commits him to
helping the program recruit MARC Program Scholars for training in microbiome
methods. The proposal includes for the training of a female post-doctoral
scientist at the University of Alaska, Fairbanks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
investigators pose a series of hypotheses that focus on the ecological drivers
of community assembly (dispersal, environmental filtering, competition,
facilitation, niche partitioning, neutral processes) across five Arctic biomes.
They will use over 3500 soil samples that have been collected along two
latitudinal transects, each of which includes all five Arctic bioclimatic
subzones and&amp;#8232;spans 1700 kilometers north to south. Using their
extensive sampling and next-generation-sequencing-derived data on community
composition of soil fungi and bacteria that are already in hand, combined with
data on plant communities at the same sites (which will be augmented with
limited sequencing of plant phylogenetic markers), the investigators seek to
examine the fundamental patterns of community assembly in each of the three
Kingdoms at hierarchical spatial and ecological scales.