* 1603086
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:   Language Standardization and Modern State-Building
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2017
* John Lie, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 04/30/2017
* USD 11,957.00

SES-1603086 John Lie Jeffrey Weng University of California, Berkeley

This dissertation project examines how states shape societal language practices.
The past few decades have witnessed steady growth in studies of state-formation,
particularly research on the state's increasing influence on the lives of
ordinary people. This research, and much of sociology in general, has tended to
neglect questions of language, in spite of language's foundational role in
social life. This project addresses this gap in the literature by asking: What
strategies does the state employ to accumulate symbolic power in the realm of
language? This project will answer this question by focusing on the case of the
Chinese transition from Classical to Modern Chinese, which occurred between the
1910s and 1930s. Previously, Classical Chinese had, much like Latin in Europe,
functioned as a supranational language of scholarship and government.
Nationalist movements in the latter half of the 19th century spurred the rise of
national vernaculars in Korea, Japan, Vietnam, as well as in China. This
project's closer examination of the Chinese case will clarify the social theory
of language by looking at a state that in three decades accomplished what took
place in Europe over several centuries.

To answer the question about how states shape language practices, this
dissertation will examine Chinese government archival material located in the
United States, Taiwan, and mainland China. The state-formation literature has
largely been grounded in Western European cases, in which language change took
place over centuries, and tends to treat non-European or postcolonial cases
separately, as instances of state-led development or modernization. On the other
hand, historical scholarship on China tends to look at changes in language
practices as the result of various intellectual "movements," which places
intellectuals in an ambivalent relationship with the state. Relying on archival
documents, including bureaucratic memoranda, statutes, regulations, meeting
minutes, as well as official and personal correspondence, this project seeks to
clarify the relationship between language-reforming intellectuals and the state,
and thus clarify the state's role in influencing language practices. In so
doing, this project will contribute to contemporary debates on the social
implications of government policies on language and education, particularly
social stratification stemming from unequal access to cultural capital.