* 1603007
* Collaborative Research: Acoustic micro-streaming in the aqueous core of bubble-containing liposomes for controlled release via shear-induced bilayer reorganization
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Steven Wrenn, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 06/30/2020
* USD 224,274.00

PI: Wrenn, Steven / Sarkar, Kausik Proposal Number: 1603007 / 1602884

The proposed research is focused on the study of the behavior of microbubbles
inside a liquid drop. The microbubbles become stable when coated with lipids and
then nested in a cell that is filled with water. This arrangement can have
applications with biological interest, such as drug delivery techniques and
diagnostics through imaging of the acoustic response of the bubbles.

Coated microbubbles are already useful for contrast enhanced ultrasound imaging.
Nesting them inside a drug bearing vesicle confers great potential as
"theranostic" vehicles, meaning they can be used for both therapeutic and
diagnostic applications. At the same time, nesting can protect microbubbles
against gas diffusion, enhancing their life time from minutes to hours. However,
nesting a microbubble leads to dramatic changes in microbubble acoustical
activity and the resulting fluid dynamics, including acoustic microstreaming.
The nesting concept was demonstrated experimentally for the first time just a
few years ago, and the mechanism by which nesting impacts acoustic
microstreaming is not yet known in detail; both experimental and theoretical
studies involving nested microbubbles are scant. This is the objective of this
collaborative proposal. The research team will perform a systematic and
exhaustive series of acoustic and physicochemical tests of various nested
formulations, while simultaneously deriving mathematical and computational fluid
dynamics models that account for the nesting shell and agree with the
experimental results. There are three specific aims: 1) compute the streamlines
in a nested configuration and calculate the resulting shear stress profile along
the inner leaflet of the nesting phospholipid bilayer; 2) identify the
mechanism(s) by which the bilayer restructures itself in response to the
stresses produced by microstreaming; and 3) quantify the sensitivity of
microstreaming and the bilayer response to ultrasonic input parameters and
chemically derived nesting membrane properties. The broader impact of the
proposed work is to develop a theranostic vehicle that can be used for
ultrasound imaging and/or drug delivery. The end application could be the use of
nested micro-bubbles in actual clinical environments. The proposal also includes
a plan to actively recruit underrepresented minority students from Morgan State,
as well as educational activities for high school, undergraduate and graduate
students.