* 1603243
* Correlated Electron Transport in Mesoscopic Structures
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2020
* Leonid Glazman, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2020
* USD 540,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research and
education to investigate the electronic properties of a new class of insulating
materials. Quantum physics has established the underlying reason that leads to
two broad classes of materials: those which conduct electricity, conductors, and
those that do not, insulators. The distinction comes from the existence in the
insulators of an "energy gap" that charged particles have to overcome in order
to produce an electric current. Quantum mechanics also explains the properties
of semiconductors, the materials from which transistors are made. By strict
classification these are insulators, but with a relatively small energy gap.
Semiconductor physics has developed ways to control the gap, and thus to control
the properties of semiconductors, making them able to conduct electricity or
interrupt the conduction at will. Built on these principles semiconductor
devices have fueled the information technology revolution.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Recently application of quantum mechanics has predicted the existence
of a new kind of insulator called "topological insulators." These materials must
have an energy gap for charge carriers in the bulk of the material; however, the
bulk insulator coexists with conducting channels at the surfaces and edges of
the material. At sufficiently low temperatures the edge channels are predicted
to be ideal conductors for electrons. Yet another remarkable prediction is that
the edge channels at the interface between a topological insulator and a
superconductor must house so-called Majorana states. At sufficiently low
temperature, superconducting materials develop a new quantum state that has no
resistance to electric current. Majorana states are qualitatively new quantum
mechanical states which may be used as the foundation for a quantum computer;
thus carrying a promise to revolutionize the digital technology once again.
However, in reality the electron energy gap in the bulk of any existing
topological insulator is quite small, even by the standards of semiconductor
physics. The smallness of the gap amplifies the adverse effects of materials
imperfections and makes it difficult to control the conduction of topological
insulators and to harvest the unusual properties of the edge channels.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to determine the mechanisms
that obscure the ideal conductance of edge channels in topological insulators,
find ways to detect Majorana states by measuring how well microwaves are
absorbed by systems of topological insulators combined with superconductors, and
to explore ways of increasing the robustness of Majorana
states.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The systems considered in this research hold
promise to be potential elements of a future electronics technology. Therefore
this fundamental science project may have a technological impact. The work on
this project develops understanding of real materials and proficiency in modern
methods of condensed matter theory. It provides a good training ground for
graduate students and post-doctoral research
associates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This
award supports theoretical research and education to investigate the frequency
dependent responses of mesoscopic systems. The emphasis is placed on theory
applicable to experiments involving the edge states in two-dimensional
topological insulators and with superconducting nanocircuits. The motivation
comes from the advances in synthesis of new materials, experimental techniques
enabling the high-precision measurements of static and dynamic responses, and
from the challenges of evaluation of these responses present for the theory. The
search for manifestations of symmetries and non-perturbative interaction effects
in the response functions of the two mesoscopic systems forms the common theme
that unites all parts of the proposal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first part of
the project is devoted to investigation of the finite-temperature resistance and
magnetoresistance of one-dimensional electron channels at the edges of a two-
dimensional topological insulator. Understanding the resistance and
magnetoresistance calls for the development of a theory of charge disorder and
spin correlations mediated by the one-dimensional helical electron
states.&lt;br/&gt;The second part of the project is aimed to develop new methods
in the search for Majorana fermions in condensed matter. The main goal is to
find the signatures of Majorana states in low-frequency response functions and
in microwave spectra of Josephson junctions between semiconductor
nanowires.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The third part of the project addresses the
excitation spectra and dynamic responses of one-dimensional Fermi systems with
strong pairing interactions and spin-orbit coupling. The goal is to develop
theory methods applicable to a variety of novel condensed matter
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All parts of the project are motivated by
experimental mesoscopic physics. Solving the problems formulated in the project
may explain the existing experimental results, help in planning new experiments,
and lead to developing theoretical methods broadly applicable to low-dimensional
quantum condensed matter.