* 1603808
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: GENOMIC DETERMINANTS OF PATHOGENICITY AND SUSCEPTIBILITY IN AN EMERGING FUNGAL PATHOGEN AND ITS VERTEBRATE HOSTS
* BIO,IOS
* 09/30/2015,05/31/2018
* Jamie Voyles, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Continuing Grant
* Purnima Bhanot
* 05/31/2018
* USD 50,976.00

Amphibians around the world are disappearing at an alarming rate. Many recent
declines have been caused by a deadly chytrid fungus called Batrachochytrium
dendrobatidis (Bd). Bd has recently spread around the world and infects hundreds
of amphibian species. This project focuses on understanding the interaction
between the Bd pathogen and its amphibian hosts. Specifically the investigators
will learn 1) why some amphibian species are devastated by Bd while others are
not harmed and 2) why some strains of Bd are more deadly than others. The
investigators will conduct an integrative and worldwide study of numerous Bd
isolates and a diversity of frog species. Results from this project will help
guide conservation efforts be targeted to the most vulnerable species and to
areas where Bd will have the most devastating impact. Further the general
understanding of host-pathogen interactions resulting from this project can be
applied to other systems where wildlife are threatened with new emerging
diseases. The project also provides training opportunities for undergraduate and
graduate students, with a focus on broadening participation of underrepresented
groups. In addition to scientific research, the project will provides education
about biodiversity and conservation to the public and local public elementary
school children through popular press publications, museum exhibits, and an
outreach event called "Save the Frogs Day".

The researchers in this project have taken genetic, genomic, immunological, and
organismal approaches to accomplish their objectives. First, they will use a
comparative approach to identify genomic variations in 60 Bd isolates gathered
from around the world that vary in infectivity towards various amphibian hosts.
Second, they will study variations in in vitro growth phenotypes that they
propose directly relate to infectivity. Last, they will examine in vivo and cell
culture-based phenotypes, in parallel with host tissue profiling. A key aspect
of the third goal is that the applicants have selected 6 congeneric amphibian
host pairs (2 species in each of three different genera) that vary in
susceptibility to Bd. They will utilize Illumina-based sequencing techniques to
obtain genome-wide association studies of the phenotypes of interest. In vivo
infection phenotypes such as Bd burden under the common garden conditions tested
will be coupled with transcriptomic analysis of host gene expression to evaluate
differential responses by susceptible/tolerant hosts. To address this important
problem, the investigators have blended evolutionary, ecological and
physiological perspectives and this integrative approach promises to bring new
insight into this field.