* 1603851
* Enhanced solubility in nanopores and its role in adsorption separations
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2019
* Keith Gubbins, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 05/31/2019
* USD 246,719.00

Proposal Number: 1603851, Gubbins Enhanced solubility in nanoporous media and
its role in adsorption separations

When gases or liquids are adsorbed into porous materials, such as activated
carbon and silica, the fluid confined within the narrow pores often displays
properties that are very different from those in the bulk gas or liquid. These
differences are exploited in many practical applications, including industrial
separation of chemicals, and in daily life in the purification of water and air.
Much research has been reported on the effects of such confinement in a
nanoporous solid on vapor-liquid and liquid-solid phase separations for pure
substances, and the effects are found to be large. However, little is known of
the effects of such confinement on the solubility of sparingly soluble solutes
in liquid solvents. Knowledge of these confinement effects on solubility are
important in many applications, including industrial adsorption separations, oil
and gas exploration, hydraulic fracturing, geological carbon dioxide
sequestration, the behavior of toxic gases and chemicals in soils, dissolved
gases in fuel cells and in drug delivery.

In this project molecular simulation and modeling will be used to investigate
the effects of confinement within porous materials on the solubility of
sparingly soluble substances in water and in liquid hydrocarbons. An important
aspect will be the development and testing of molecular theory for solvents that
exhibit strong molecular association or Coulombic interactions; this will be of
particular significance for water and aqueous electrolytes. The initial work
will involve a broad study for simple systems in which the pores are of simple
geometry and fluid molecules are non-polar, that will provide a fundamental
understanding of the influence of the materials and other variables on the
solubility. This will be carried out using advanced molecular simulation methods
(Monte Carlo and molecular dynamics), and will explore effects of temperature,
pressure, chemical composition, pore size and shape. In addition a density
functional theory will be developed for highly polar and associating molecules
for the first time. This latter part of the work will be carried out in
collaboration with researchers at the East China University of Science and
Technology in Shanghai. In addition, further and more detailed studies will be
made for specific systems of direct interest in industrial adsorption
separations, enhanced oil and gas recovery and carbon dioxide sequestration.
While the research under the grant will be primarily theoretical (molecular
simulation and classical density functional theory studies), the team will also
collaborate with three international research groups in the U.K., Poland and
Germany, carrying out experiments in this area. The development of density
functional theory for water and aqueous solutions is expected to impact many
fields. One graduate student and one undergraduate will be involved in this
research, and will receive training in advanced simulation and theory methods,
and gain experience of international research collaboration.