* 1603692
* Collaborative Research: SusChEM: Designing Catalytic Interfaces to Promote Selective Lignin Depolymerization
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2023
* Marcus Foston, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 07/31/2023
* USD 255,944.00

Lignin is one of the three major components of woody and grassy plant cell
walls, and its chemical make-up is not only carbon-rich but also resembles many
petroleum-based chemical precursors. This project addresses challenges presented
by the catalytic deconstruction of lignin into its constituent units in an
effort to generate renewable and low-cost aromatic chemicals. Specifically, the
aims are to understand how the catalyst interacts with portions of lignin that
are susceptible to cleavage. The catalyst contains copper nanoparticles
dispersed on a porous solid support, and in supercritical methanol (sc-MeOH) it
catalyzes the cleavage of solid lignin to energy-rich organic liquids without
forming char. Two key problems are movement of the bulky, poorly soluble polymer
and access to the internal surfaces of the catalyst. By tuning the reaction
conditions and the properties of the catalytic material, the interactions of the
catalyst with lignin will be optimized to enhance depolymerization and enable
economical production of renewable aromatic chemicals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal is to develop innovative, sustainable, and scalable conversion processes
that generate platform renewable chemicals from lignin economically using porous
solid catalysts made with Earth-abundant materials. This project will test two
overarching hypotheses: 1) that lignin absorption into a porous catalyst and its
adsorption onto catalyst surfaces induce conformational changes that increase
interactions between the lignin and the catalyst; and 2) that porous catalysts
with appropriate internal structure and composition maximize interactions of the
key aryl ether linkages with catalytically active sites. The research will
involve: 1) ordered mesoporous catalysts with controlled and systematically
varied pore architecture and surface functionality (i.e., hydrophobicity); 2)
lignin dimer and oligomer model systems that have controlled and systematically
varied chain length, proportion of linkages that are aryl ethers, and spacers
between aryl ether linkages, and 3) in-situ assessment of adsorption modes and
reaction kinetics. The plan to achieve these objectives and test these
hypotheses involves synthesizing both lignin model systems and templated
mesoporous catalysts with controlled and systematically varied structures and
compositions to probe solvent-lignin, solvent-catalyst, and lignin-catalyst
interactions; and using advanced spectroscopic methods, to probe interfacial
interactions between lignin and catalyst to understand how they promote
selective lignin depolymerization by hydrogenolysis of aryl ether linkages. The
research team will collaborate with the Institute for School Partnership to
develop outreach and education activities for underrepresented and
underprivileged eighth grade students in the St. Louis community. Specifically,
the outreach efforts will include an annual Researcher for a Day program for
local underrepresented minority students through a campus visit, a campus tour,
and lab demonstrations. A similar activity will be offered through the SciTrek
outreach program at UC Santa Barbara.