* 1603336
* "Rossbypalooza", A Student-led Workshop at the Interface of Climate Dynamics and Statistics; Chicago, Illinois; July 25-29, 2016
* GEO,AGS
* 02/15/2016,01/31/2017
* Noboru Nakamura, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Ming Cai
* 01/31/2017
* USD 27,660.00

Climate science has historically progressed through the interweaving of
observation, theory, and experiments/modeling. The discovery of phenomena in
observed data, followed by careful and thoughtful analysis, leads to the
proposal of mechanisms responsible for these phenomena, which are then tested
through experimentation. In turn, the analysis of the observed data must be
guided by theory. The modern explosion in the quantity and accessibility of
observations of climate represents an unprecedented opportunity for enhancing
our understanding of the Earth's climate. This potential will only be realized
if we equip young scientists with the toolkits to both process and explain this
data: theoretical framework of climate dynamics and application of statistics to
various climate data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is to hold a weeklong
workshop in which students will lectures on both climate science and statistical
techniques, and work in small groups on research problems of their own choosing.
It will provide a group of thirty graduate-level scientists with multi-
disciplinary training necessary to analyze and understand climate data. The
workshop will be held from July 25-29, 2016 in the Department of the Geophysical
Sciences at the University of Chicago, drawing from the strengths of faculty in
Climate Dynamics as well as Statistics. Topics covered will include climate
extremes, jet variability, large-scale transport and mixing, monsoons,
turbulence, and geospatial time series analysis. This is a pilot program that
has a potential to becoming an annual or biennial meeting in the subsequent
years.