* 1603806
* Collaborative Research:  Hydrodynamic mechanisms for flow-induced self-assembly in confined complex fluids
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2023
* Michael Loewenberg, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 06/30/2023
* USD 309,472.00

CBET - 1603627; 1603806&lt;br/&gt;PIs: Blawzdziewicz, Jerzy; Loewenberg,
Michael&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this collaborative project is to
explain an interesting phenomenon that is observed when liquid droplets in an
immiscible liquid flow in confined spaces. For certain conditions, the droplets
line up to form chains of drops that persist and sometimes coalesce to form thin
liquid strands. Chain formation is only observed for confined emulsions of
deformable drops. The investigators hypothesize that small changes in the flow,
caused by the deformable drops, induce the drops to align in chains. The
hypothesis will be tested by carrying out numerical simulations that solve the
equations governing the deformation of the drops and their motion in confined
flows. By varying material parameters, the investigators can gradually increase
the extent of drop deformation, which should be correlated with the degree of
chain formation. The research team will collaborate with a researcher at the
National Institute of Standards and Technology who first observed the chaining
phenomenon experimentally. Additional experiments will be carried out to compare
data with the computer simulations developed in this project. The team expects
that understanding the microscale flow patterns leading to drop alignment can be
harnessed to make new microstructured materials. The researchers will engage
local high school students in Yale's Pathway to Science Program by teaching
students to write simple computer programs that simulate motions of particles in
fluids. They will also develop activities for fifth through eleventh grade girls
attending a residential summer camp at Texas Tech called "Science: It's a Girl
Thing."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will verify the hypothesis that
quadrupolar flow-field patterns produced by deformable immiscible drops in a
strongly confined shear flow are responsible for the formation of ordered
structures in confined emulsions. A hierarchy of many-particle, computer
simulation algorithms will be developed to identify key flow patterns that guide
particles into ordered microstructures. Particle-scale phenomena responsible for
the formation of microstructures will be determined by analyzing simulation
results and comparing them with experiments under highly controlled conditions.
Although the project will focus on emulsions of deformable drops, the project?s
results will apply to spontaneous ordering in other systems with nonlinear
particle interactions, such as suspensions of rigid particles in non-Newtonian
fluids. Understanding the fundamental hydrodynamic mechanisms that govern self-
assembling microstructures in confined flows could help practitioners design and
process composite materials.