* 1603461
* SusChEM - Collaborative Research: Universal Understanding of Push-Pull D-A compounds and Prescriptive Materials Design for Optimized Bulk-Heterojunction Photovoltaics
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Francis Spano, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2019
* USD 157,773.00

The sun represents the most abundant potential source of sustainable energy on
earth. Solar cells that use organic conducting polymers to convert light to
electricity ? organic photovoltaic devices - offer a potentially low-cost route
for renewable electricity production. In general, the low cost is offered
through use of potentially inexpensive polymer materials and scalable polymer
film based processing. However, current organic polymer solar cells currently
suffer from low efficiencies combined with high material costs. Since improved
materials are critical to commercial viability, the goal of this project is to
develop and characterize more effective, low cost, sustainable, materials for
organic photovoltaic devices. These new materials will be based on the
squaraines, a class of organic dye materials. The key innovation of this effort
is the development and use of theoretical modeling tools to screen for the best
candidate molecules that optimize device performance characteristics. The
candidate materials will then be synthesized using methods of green chemistry to
enable low cost, sustainable materials that preserve the desired properties. The
educational activities associated with this project will provide research
participation opportunities for hearing-impaired students through the National
Institute for the Deaf at the Rochester Institute of Technology.

Organic polymer-based photovoltaic (OPV) solar cells currently suffer from low
efficiencies and high manufacturing costs, due in part to difficulties
associated with attaining tight polymer morphology control. Higher efficiencies
can be obtained with donor-acceptor type compounds designed to address bandgap
and energy level requirements, if the molecular design rules can be realized
from a first-principles perspective to optimize material properties for best
device performance. Squaraines are class of organic photoconductors that offer
several potential advantages as small band gap organic molecules for OPV
devices, including ease of purification, scalable and consistent synthesis, and
tunable functionality for prescriptive molecular design. This research will
combine theory, materials synthesis, and critical property characterization
studies to develop a fundamental framework for molecular design of donor-
acceptor molecules in OPV devices based on squaraine compounds. The first
objective is to develop and use theoretical models to simulate the morphology-
based spectroscopy for a series of squaraines, compounds representative of the
total set of done-acceptor type OPV targets. The theory will describe how
morphological and molecular structure influences critical processes, including
absorption spectrum, the excited states, and the intermolecular charge transfer
integral. Thus, when the models are experimentally validated through
spectroscopy, a more complete understanding of these processes will lead to a
prescriptive design for idealized materials optimized at all critical properties
needed for OPV, including solar spectrum absorption overlap, exciton diffusion,
exciton dissociation, and charge transport. Based on the findings from the first
objective, under the second objective, squaraines will be modified for
processing in non-toxic solvents to enable low cost, sustainable, and scalable
materials synthesis. Device fabrication and testing will confirm which critical
OPV properties have been improved in these materials. Overall, this research is
expected to lead to a more a comprehensive understanding of the excited state
properties of squaraines, optimization of their critical properties for best OPV
device performance based on rational molecular design, and scalable and
sustainable methods for the synthesis of these materials and their integration
into bulk heterojunction OPV devices.