* 1603021
* GEM: What Determines the Magnetosphere Plasma Entropy Distribution
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2021
* Joachim Raeder, University of New Hampshire
* Continuing Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 08/31/2021
* USD 366,646.00

This project will address compelling questions about the processes that control
the energetics and dynamics of Earth's magnetosphere, a region carved out by the
extension of Earth's magnetic field into space. The matter in the magnetosphere
is in the form of plasma, a fully ionized gas containing approximately equal
numbers of ions and electrons, the motion of which is strongly affected by
magnetic fields. A fundamental quantity that describes the energy state(s) of
this system is called entropy. When a physical process in this system is
adiabatic, meaning no energy or mass is transferred to the surroundings from the
system, then the specific entropy is conserved. For example, when a parcel of
plasma travels through the magnetosphere adiabatically, it's volume will
increase or decrease but it will contain the same number of particles. It's
density and temperature will change in order to keep constant the entropy it had
when it started it's journey. If the entropy of the parcel changes, then the
parcel is being heated or particles are being lost. The methodology for this
investigation is to produce maps of specific entropy throughout the Earth's
magnetosphere using both global magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) simulations and
observations. These maps will then be used to identify the locations where
plasma heating is taking place and to investigate the characteristics of the
processes responsible. The location of these regions and the time history of the
entropy changes provide important clues to the processes involved, and
fundamental insights into the energetics and dynamics of the magnetosphere. The
project has significant broader impacts. The questions addressed are key to
understanding how space weather disturbances originate and evolve in the Earth's
vicinity. These disturbances are capable of damaging or destroying satellites
that underlie critical societal infrastructures, of creating hazardous radiation
for human explorers, and of inducing strong currents in the solid Earth
problematic for power grid operation. In the longer term, advances in
understanding space weather will feed directly into improved space weather
forecast models of value to society. In addition, the project provides training
for a graduate student and early career scientist at the University of New
Hampshire contributing to the future scientific
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Questions addressed in this project focus on the
processes that raise the entropy of the plasma sheet in the magnetosphere
compared to the entropy of the plasma sources that feed it. In the
magnetosphere, entropy can be used to identify the origins of the plasma in a
given region. There are only two sources of plasma supplying the magnetosphere -
the solar wind and the ionosphere. In the source regions, the entropy values of
these populations are very different. If the processes that move these parcels
of plasma into the magnetosphere are adiabatic, then the entropy retains the
value of the sourch region and is like a dye that marks the origin and entry
pathway of the plasma parcel. However, if along these pathways there are regions
where the entropy is changing, then these mark the locations where the plasma in
the parcel is being lost, mixed, heated or cooled. The processes that are
believed to raise the entropy of the plasma sheet include: magnetic
reconnection, Bursty Bulk Flows (BFFs), Dipolarization Fronts (DFs), dual lobe
reconnection, Kelvin-Hemholtz waves, and turbulent heating. Each of these will
be examined to understand their contributions to the increases in entropy in the
plasma sheet under different conditions.