* 1603460
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: What Controls the Transfer of Diatom Organic Matter to age-0 Pollock Prey in the Bering Sea Ecosystem?
* GEO,OPP
* 11/01/2016,10/31/2019
* Michael Lomas, Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 10/31/2019
* USD 108,953.00

The highly productive and economically important Walleye Pollock commercial
fishery of the Bering Sea depends on poorly understood food web pathways.
Primary producers of organic carbon, notably diatoms, are consumed by large
crustacean zooplankton, which, in turn, are consumed by juvenile pollock. The
dominant paradigm for the system suggests that understanding changes in the
biomass of large crustacean zooplankton can help estimate the survival of
juvenile pollock; however, recent data show two orders of magnitude uncertainty
in the carbon demand of large crustacean zooplankton. Such uncertainties impact
the ability to manage the fishery. A revised model for the system has been
proposed that involves consideration of both the quantity and quality of organic
matter produced by diatoms and how this would constrain support for the
commercial fishery. Before investing in a major field effort to test this
approach, this project will assess the expected magnitude of change and
associated errors, for diatom organic matter production, including the
individual terms that are used to estimate it, i.e. abundance, growth rate, and
cell carbon. This effort will be based on laboratory experiments and historical
data analysis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will contribute to STEM
workforce development through partial support for the training of a post-
doctoral associate. Undergraduates would be entrained into the science through
an REU program at Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences and through the Colby
College Semester at Bigelow program. K-12 outreach will be facilitated through
participation in the successful and long-standing Dauphin Island Sea Lab
Discovery Hall program. Outreach to the general public will be accomplished
through a blog, Bigelow?s Caf√© Scientifique, and the Bigelow newsletter. The
long-term goal for the research that this project would initiate is improved
mechanistic and predictive models for commercial fisheries
management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is no consensus on the mechanistic
relationship of where carbon from the lower trophic levels goes in the Bering
Sea ecosystem, hence simple proportionality relationships between primary
production and fisheries are used routinely. Bottom-up control on age-0 walleye
pollock prey, i.e. large crustacean zooplankton (LCZ), could help constrain this
coupling between the primary producers and pollock fishery, but there is a two-
order-of-magnitude uncertainty in the LCZ carbon demand based on estimates from
the Bering Sea Ecosystem Study (BEST). A new conceptual model is required and
this project will begin to refine the issue by focusing on diatoms, which have a
less patchy distribution than LCZ and are a key prey item of LCZ. A major
knowledge gap exists in the understanding of the magnitude of diatom loss
processes; the logical next step to understanding the fundamental linkage
between primary production and fisheries in the eastern Bering Sea is to answer:
what is the proportion of diatom primary production available for supporting
higher trophic organisms and with which biogeochemical variables does this
covary? Before testing this approach in a field setting, the expected magnitude
of change and associated error for diatom organic matter production, including
the individual terms that go into that estimate (i.e. abundance, growth rate,
cell carbon), must be understood. This project will combine culture studies
using diatoms isolated from high-latitude regions with literature and BEST
program data to meet this initial objective.