* 1603930
* Near-natural Amino Acid Mutagenesis for the Engineering and Study of Protein Function
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Alexander Deiters, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 07/31/2020
* USD 450,000.00

1603930 &lt;br/&gt;Deiters, Alexander &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most physiological
processes rely on the function of proteins. In order to elucidate the precise
biochemical mechanisms of protein function, researchers are increasingly turning
to the tool set of unnatural amino acids that contain small structural or
electronic changes which are very similar to Nature's set of common amino acids.
These subtle differences, site-specifically incorporated into proteins, allow
for the precise probing of protein structure and function. Within this project,
new methodologies for the genetic encoding of these 'near-natural' amino acids
will be developed and applied to the investigation of enzymatic mechanism.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to elucidate the precise biochemical mechanisms
of protein function, unnatural amino acids that contain small structural or
electronic changes, e.g., in pKa, polarity, redox potential, H-bonding ability,
nucleophilicity, isotope composition, etc, are versatile molecular probes.
Although these 'near-natural' amino acids are extremely useful to investigate
protein function when located near or in an active site, they are difficult to
apply to the engineering of a biological system for the following reasons: 1)
The chemical synthesis of proteins containing near-natural amino acids is
laborious, expensive, and can routinely only be applied to small proteins. 2)
The semi-synthesis of proteins can be technically challenging. 3) The use of
auxotrophic bacterial or yeast strains in vivo leads to global, non-specific
incorporation of near-natural amino acids into proteins preventing precise
studies. 4) Near-natural amino acids often display toxicity due to global
incorporation into the proteome. Within this project, a robust and general
methodology for protein engineering through site-specific near-natural amino
acid mutagenesis will be developed by temporarily disguising these amino acids
as completely unnatural amino acids. This will be achieved by introducing a
transient structural change into near-natural amino acids, thus 'hiding' them
from the cellular machinery responsible for endogenous protein biosynthesis, but
simultaneously providing a handle for the engineering of an orthogonal
biosynthetic pathway. Specifically, introduction of protecting groups (caging
groups) on near-natural amino acids converts them temporarily into completely
unnatural amino acids, effectively solving the issue of non-specific
incorporation into proteins in vivo. After site-specific incorporation into the
protein of interest, the caging group is removed through an external trigger
providing the original near-natural amino acid and thus near-natural protein.
For the engineering of an orthogonal protein biosynthetic pathway, new tRNA
synthetases for the in vivo incorporation of near-natural amino acids into
proteins in pro- and eukaryotic cells are generated. The developed methodology
will be applied to the precise investigation of enzyme active sites with atomic
resolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award by the Biotechnology and Biochemical
Engineering Program of the CBET Division is co-funded by the Division of
Materials Research through BioMaPS funds.