* 1603452
* Neglected fluxes: Understanding the evolution of weathering as continental ice sheets retreat
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Jonathan Martin, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Rainer Amon
* 08/31/2021
* USD 820,295.00

The Greenland Ice Sheet is the largest ice sheet in the northern hemisphere.
However, as the arctic warms the ice sheet has been retreating, and as a result,
altering the fundamental nature of weathering and the delivery of nutrients and
elements to the ocean. The proposed work is focused on the hydrological,
biological, biogeochemical, and the isotopic signatures of proglacial
watersheds, which are watershed that convey dilute but high volume glacial
meltwater from the top and underneath the ice sheet to the ocean, and deglacial
watersheds, which are watersheds that are no longer physically connected to the
ice sheet and sourced only by annual precipitation and permafrost melt. The PIs
contend that while deglacial watersheds have received less attention,
preliminary work suggests they may be equally or more important than proglacial
watersheds for oceanic and atmospheric fluxes. Moreover, as the ice sheet melts,
the area contributing to meltwater and constituent fluxes will increasingly be
from deglacial watersheds. The understanding gained from this work will provide
a context for the prediction of future land-ocean and land-atmosphere fluxes in
response to continued ice sheet retreat. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results of the
project have the potential to change our understanding of global CO2, nutrient,
and isotope cycling in response to ice sheet collapse and permit predictions of
the future responses to global warming and ice sheet retreat. Results will also
provide a context to interpret past high latitude ice sheet retreat and climate
change based on marine isotope records. The project includes training for
undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral researchers, as well as a
collaboration with students and faculty at a Greenlandic academic
institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed study will test the hypotheses
that (1) deglacial and proglacial watersheds contribute distinct elemental,
isotopic, and nutrient fluxes to the ocean and atmosphere as a result of
evolving weathering patterns, and (2) these reactions and associated fluxes will
change within and between watersheds as the Greenland Ice Sheet retreats. The
project focuses on three field areas: deglacial and proglacial watersheds near
Kangerlussuaq and Narsasuaq and a deglacial watershed near Sisimiut. Each area
has a distinct water balance, exposure age, and weathering characteristics, and
will be sampled three times over two melt seasons to evaluate intra-seasonal and
inter-annual variations. Mass balance models and PHREEQc modeling of solute data
will be used to identify and assess extents of weathering reactions. Weathering
extents will also be estimated based on trends in proportional contributions of
minerals and offsets between dissolved and bedload strontium and lead isotope
ratios, and will be linked to phosphorous fluxes and organic carbon lability and
degradation. This holistic approach will provide a broad view of the relative
elemental, nutrient and isotopic fluxes in proglacial and deglacial
environments. These results will provide magnitudes, time scales, and drivers of
weathering reactions, with a goal of linking fluxes to past records and future
predictions of global climate change associated with continental ice sheet
collapse.