* 1603716
* Active matter transport by non-electrolyte diffusiophoresis
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2019
* Darrell Velegol, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 05/31/2019
* USD 388,909.00

CBET - 1603716 PI: Velegol, Darrell

The goal of this project is to understand the movement of micrometer-size
colloidal particles by a process called diffusiophoresis. Small particles can
move through a liquid when molecules dissolved in the liquid are distributed
unevenly around the particle. The velocity of the particle is affected by
chemical interactions between the solute molecules and the particle, which are
described by an empirical interaction parameter. This project will use computer-
based methods to predict the interaction parameter, and hence the speed of the
particle, for various solutes including salt, polymers, nanoparticles and other
species. The project will focus on non-electrolyte solutes, whether aqueous or
organic, to broaden the range of media in which self-propelled particles can be
designed to deliver cargo or enhance mixing. These media include geological
reservoirs, living systems, and electronic devices. The advantage of using
computer-based models to predict particle speed is that expensive experiments do
not have to be carried out for each distinct system. Instead, the computer
methods, which are based on fundamental descriptions of molecular level forces
between the solute and the particle, can be employed in advance. Then, using
results from computer calculations, the research team will synthesize particles
that can create uneven distributions of solute around their surfaces to generate
self-propelled motion. Results from the project will be used in online course
titled, "Creativity, Innovation, and Change."

The utility of electrolyte diffusiophoresis as a propulsion mechanism is
limited, especially at high-salt concentrations and in dielectric (apolar) media
where many key applications lie. This project explores non-electrolyte
diffusiophoresis, in which a particle generates local concentration gradients of
non-electrolyte species to cause self-propulsion. The critical gap in knowledge
is the connection between system chemistry and the speed of the self-propelled
particle. This project will develop methods to calculate interaction energies
based on rigorous descriptions of van der Waals attractions and hard-sphere
repulsions between the particle and non-electrolyte solutes. Having the energies
then enables the calculation of the chemical interaction parameter and the
particle speed. The project will also construct self-propelled particles that
incorporate appropriate ferrocene-containing polymers, gold nanoparticles,
organometallic catalysts, and other species. The resulting motor chemistries
will include attractive or repulsive moieties with the proper materials, sizes,
and structures, to cause transport in a given set of solution conditions. From
the known reaction kinetics, the concentration gradients will be calculated, and
for the first time, the value of the interaction parameter will be measured. A
measure of success includes observing non-electrolyte diffusiophoresis transport
n three challenging test beds: aqueous with 5 M salt, physiological fluid, and
hexane.