* 1603060
* RAPID: Adaptive Management of Geotechnical Construction in Urban Areas
* ENG,CMMI
* 12/01/2015,11/30/2017
* Richard Finno, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 11/30/2017
* USD 166,659.00

Increased dense urbanization and traffic congestion in the US and many parts of
the world are prompting a significant demand for underground space to make
emerging mega-cities livable by lowering pollution and energy consumption.
Underground construction provides sustainable development benefits in terms of
creating mass transit and commercial space in areas with existing
infrastructure, with the ability to capture emissions, and the opportunity to
preserve green space by relocating transportation systems and other structures
underground. However, planning and construction of underground space is a
lengthy process that requires large budgets (over $100 billion annually in the
U.S.). Cost and schedule delays are common (e.g., Boston Big Dig from initial
estimate of $2 billion to over $13 billion). Most of underground construction is
public, taxpayer-funded projects. Efficiencies that can be developed in design
and construction of underground space thus will have a large financial benefit
to the US. One such development is an adaptive management technique that
provides a means to incorporate recent advances in sensor development,
information technology, and numerical analyses to predict, monitor, and control
ground movements during excavation. The purpose of this research is to employ
for the first time adaptive management techniques for geotechnical construction
to provide real time updates of performance predictions, in this case during the
50 foot deep excavation for a multi-story building in Chicago. The project will
develop tools that will advance the state-of-art and practice in the underground
construction industry so that underground space can be created in urban areas in
such a way that the process will have minimal impact on adjacent structures and
utilities, thereby minimizing construction costs and eliminating expensive
construction claims and lawsuits. While this project focuses on adaptive
management of deep excavations, its results are directly applicable to any
geotechnical construction activity. Industrial collaboration with Hayward Baker,
Inc., the excavation support contractor for the project and a worldwide leader
in geotechnical specialty construction, will ensure that results will have
immediate impact in the underground construction industry.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research builds upon the results of several of NSF-
supported projects in which optimization techniques were developed, automated
monitoring technologies were employed, full-scale field performance was
quantified in detail, sophisticated models of soil behavior were employed, and
parameter identification techniques were quantified at deep excavation sites.
The test bed for this research is the excavation for the Simpson Querrey
Biomedical Research Center building. The work will be conducted by Northwestern
University in collaboration with Hayward Baker, Inc., the excavation support
subcontractor for the project. The Principal Investigator conducted extensive
research during and after construction of the adjacent Lurie Research Center
which included a 40 ft deep excavation. At no cost to the research, Hayward
Baker will install and maintain an automated monitoring system which will
include MEMS-based shape arrays to measure lateral movements, robotic total
stations to measure support system and adjacent building movements. Northwestern
researchers will develop 2D and 3D finite element models of the excavation,
based on constitutive models that account for small strain nonlinearity behavior
of soils, implement an interface between the website, develop an analyses
platform to allow automatic updates of performance predictions based on the
finite element model, and deploy students as field personnel to record the
detailed construction activities which will assure that the proper conditions
have been considered in the update of the field performance. The research
addresses fundamental issues regarding stress-strain behavior of natural clays
at very small strain levels, and the relationships between detailed soil and
structural responses due to construction activities. The tools will include
integrated analyses and information platforms to facilitate communication among
engineers, contractors, owners and the public, and will permit updated
predictions of performance in near real time.