* 1603418
* RUI: Physics of Interacting Quantum Systems with Phase Transitions
* MPS,DMR
* 01/15/2017,05/31/2020
* Lea Ferreira dos Santos, Yeshiva University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 05/31/2020
* USD 285,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical
research and education on quantum systems that have many interacting particles.
The main goal is to identify the conditions for the onset of transitions between
different states of organization of the constituent particles, and to put
forward a set of proposals to detect such transitions experimentally.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In classical physics, a thermal phase transition occurs
when the temperature of a material reaches a critical point and the material
undergoes a change in state, such as the transition from water to ice. At very
low temperatures, classical laws break down and quantum physics takes over. At
that level, different quantum phases can emerge from the competition between
different interactions in the system. Distinct phases are associated with
different macroscopic properties that can be experimentally detected, such as
good or bad conductivity. This topic of research is tightly connected with the
development of new materials. New phases of matter are critical components of
emerging technologies, which may revolutionize how we use and produce energy,
may lead to new types of electronic devices, and may facilitate the scaling up
of quantum computers. The potential economical and social impact of the
discovery of novel phases of matter is immense. Yet, one needs to know where to
look to have a higher chance to find them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
also foster the participation of women in physics and improve the educational
infrastructure at the Stern College for Women of Yeshiva University by offering
new research opportunities and training in core areas of physics and in
computational methods. Female undergraduate students will continue to coauthor
papers with the PI and disseminate their results at conferences. Students from
local high schools will also have the opportunity to experience research at
Stern College for Women. This effort is facilitated by the PI's collaboration
with three of her former students, who are now physics teachers in high schools
for girls. Furthermore, the plan to expand a webpage designed for posting
computer programs from courses and research findings will contribute to the
integration of teaching and research at other undergraduate
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award supports theoretical research and education on computational and
analytical methods to advance our understanding of low-dimensional quantum
systems with short- and long-range interactions. The focus will be on two main
topics that carry potential to open new research avenues. They
are:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Identifying the conditions for the onset of quantum
phase transitions at excited states and putting forward a set of proposals to
detect such transitions experimentally.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Studies of ground
state quantum phase transitions are of crucial importance to fields as diverse
as nuclear physics, condensed matter physics, and cosmology. Progress in this
field may carry the key to unsolved problems in condensed matter physics and may
lead to novel phases of matter. Recently, a new element has been brought to the
picture: the existence of excited-state quantum phase transitions. They have
mainly been examined in models from quantum optics, molecular and nuclear
physics. This project will expand the analysis to also include condensed matter
models. This will bring new perspectives, tools, and approaches to the
understanding of many-body condensed matter systems as well as to the existing
studies of excited-state quantum phase transitions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2.
Exploring the counterintuitive scenario of achieving localization by increasing
the range of the interactions, instead of increasing on-site disorder or the
amplitude of the interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite innumerable studies
about the metal-insulator transition, the subject is still partially understood.
These transitions are usually divided in two categories: disorder-driven
Anderson transitions and interaction-driven Mott transitions. The main current
interest, however, is on the richer and more complicated case where both
interaction and disorder are taken into account simultaneously. The usual
expectation is that in the presence of long-range interactions, localization
should become more difficult. Yet, long-range interactions can also lead to
subspaces inside of which the states are highly localized. This project will
explore new scenarios, such as the latter, which will bring a new viewpoint to
the subject of localization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will also foster
the participation of women in physics and improve the educational infrastructure
at the Stern College for Women of Yeshiva University by offering new research
opportunities and training in core areas of physics and in computational
methods. Female undergraduate students will continue to coauthor papers with the
PI and disseminate their results at conferences. Students from local high
schools will also have the opportunity to experience research at Stern College
for Women. This effort is facilitated by the PI's collaboration with three of
her former students, who are now physics teachers in high schools for girls.
Furthermore, the plan to expand a webpage designed for posting computer programs
from courses and research findings will contribute to the integration of
teaching and research at other undergraduate institutions.