* 1603391
* Development of a Novel Rehabilitation Device for the Improvement of Gait Stability
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2016,09/30/2019
* Jesse Dean, Medical University of South Carolina
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 09/30/2019
* USD 304,896.00

Each year, approximately 800,000 Americans experience a stroke. The majority of
these individuals subsequently exhibit reduced functional mobility, a major
contributor to decreased quality of life. In part, this reduced mobility is due
to gait instability, as reflected by an increased fall risk and an increased
fear of falling. Surprisingly, no existing rehabilitation methods have proven
able to solve this problem. Even therapies successful at improving gait
stability in the elderly have failed in the chronic stroke population. Recent
evidence suggests that this failure may be a result of the rehabilitation
interventions not targeting the underlying deficits specific to post-stroke
gait. In contrast, this project is based on the mechanical requirements of a
stable bipedal gait, and specifically targets deficits in the control of
mediolateral foot placement often observed after a stroke. This project will
develop a novel rehabilitation device that can be used to retrain the typical
control strategy used to maintain a stable gait. The resulting device will be
used in the development of future rehabilitation interventions to improve gait
stability, and thus quality of life, in individuals who have experienced a
stroke. Importantly, this device will have the potential to also be applied to
the treatment of other clinical populations with an increased fall risk,
including individuals with amputations, peripheral neuropathies, or Parkinson's
disease. This research takes place at the Medical University of South Carolina,
a leading institution in stroke recovery. The strong environment increases the
likelihood that the research will be translated into the clinic, as does the
structured collaborative involvement of engineers, clinical researchers, and
clinicians. This cross-disciplinary collaboration, combined with the recruitment
of students from a diverse range of backgrounds, will serve to increase the
quality of clinical care experienced by the citizens of South Carolina and
beyond.

This project focuses on the optimization of hardware and development of control
software for a previously constructed novel elastic force-field. The prototype
force-field was developed to address the precise problem that has been revealed
by experimental studies in neurologically intact controls and chronic stroke
survivors, individuals at an increased risk for falls often do not place their
feet in mechanically-appropriate locations. Behavioral experiments with control
participants will be used to characterize the interaction between the force-
field and its users, and to identify optimal force-field properties to help
improve gait stability. First, the relationship between gait stabilization
strategy and energetic cost will be characterized for a range of walking speeds
and force-field mechanical properties, providing norms for future use. Second,
the effects of force-field control strategies designed to reduce foot placement
errors will be quantified, revealing if mechanical assistance can have
beneficial effects. Finally, the effects of force-field control strategies
designed to increase errors in foot placement will be quantified, revealing if
beneficial after-effects are produced. In combination, this research will
develop and test various force-field control methods, producing a novel
rehabilitation device able to train foot placement in the task-specific context
of walking. The development of such a device will allow the implementation of
gait-training interventions that are currently impossible; no human clinician
has the ability to sense step-to-step variations in center of mass motion, and
place a patient's foot in an appropriate location within the course of a step.
In addition, the novel device will allow the responses to errors in foot
placement (a major cause of falls) to be experimentally quantified in a
controlled fashion, a capacity that has not previously existed.