* 1603755
* Collaborative Research: RUI: Novel Computational Tools to Predict Anionic Pesticide and Pharmaceutical Sorption to Soil Oxides
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Dharni Vasudevan, Bowdoin College
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 08/31/2021
* USD 63,759.00

1604305 / 1603755 / 1604165 MacKay / Vasudevan / Johnston

The last decade has witnessed a radical shift in the prioritization of
environmental contaminants. No longer is our primary concern non-polar compounds
that persist and bioaccumulate, but the inventory of organic contaminants has
expanded greatly to include many polar and ionic compounds with potential
adverse ecotoxicological effects. This study offers an innovative approach to
adapt computational chemical tools to the prediction of organic ligand sorption
to metal oxides.

The proposed approach represents a transformative advance in the quantitative a
priori prediction of sorption coefficients for polar and ionic compounds in the
environment. The integration of molecular dynamics calculations to obtain
quantum mechanics measures of van der Waals, electrostatic energies and
solvation effects overcomes the challenge of deconvoluting coupled structure
effects from experimental measures of sorption energies alone, is at the current
state of the science. Furthermore, other related sorption problems provide
opportunity to expand Linear Interaction Energy approximation techniques because
environmental sorbent characteristics are more generalizable than protein
binding site characteristics. The overarching hypothesis of the project is: that
changes in organic ligand structure by the addition/removal of non-ligand group
substituents impart regular changes in sorption free energy as a result of
coupled hydrophobic, electronic and proximity (i.e., steric and chelation)
effects that are in turn mediated by solvent effects. The ultimate goal is to
quantitatively describe organic ligand sorption to oxides as a function of
specific sorbate structure criteria. A novel approach is used to identify
structural criteria by bridging well-established experimental techniques with
innovations in computationally relevant environmental surface chemistry, and by
using the representative soil oxide, goethite. Task 1: The goethite force field
will be fine-tuned using density functional theory to determine accurate
compound conformations for a library of test sorbates. The chosen library
includes sorbates with incremental changes in structure that allow us to
identify the influence of specific ligand and non-ligand structural moieties.
Computational efforts will be validated by infrared spectra to delineate binding
mechanisms and transmission electron microscopy to identify relevant crystal
faces. Quantum mechanics calculations will be used to calculate free energies of
the inner sphere complexation reaction. Task 2: Experimental measures of
sorption energies, infrared spectra and goethite measures will be obtained for
test sorbates sorbed to high purity goethite. Task 3: The Linear Interaction
Energy approximation will be used with molecular dynamics simulations and Task 1
force fields and inner sphere binding energies to calculate van der Waals and
electrostatic contributions to overall sorption free energies. Linear
Interaction Energy offers significant reductions in computational cost because
molecular dynamics simulations are conducted only for the bound and unbound
states. van der Waals and electrostatic energies will be regressed against
experimental measures of sorption free energies to generate a predictive model
for sorption coefficients. Findings from Tasks 1-3 will be integrated to
identify how specific structural features can be linked to regular changes in
van der Waals and electrostatic energies, thereby indicating structure-sorption
relationships relevant to quantitative models. The PIs will mentor graduate and
undergraduate researchers through the processes of experimental design,
manuscript preparation and national professional society presentations. They
will also work closely with high school students and teachers to introduce
sorption concepts into public education with hands-on demonstration modules of
everyday applications: home drinking water treatment and pesticide application.
The PIs will continue their committed record of engaging student researchers
from groups underrepresented in the sciences and engineering.