* 1603326
* Collaborative Research: Shock interaction with a complex hydrodynamic medium
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Gustaaf Jacobs, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 07/31/2020
* USD 207,637.00

PI: Vorobieff, Peter / Jacobs, Gustaaf&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1603915 /
1603326&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;When a gas moves at high speeds, a pressure shock
is often formed. A comprehensive study that involves experiments and
computations is proposed for the case when small particles are also present.
Practical applications of the proposed work are found in a plethora of
engineering technologies that involve mixing, such as supersonic and hypersonic
combustion, and dust explosions (in coal mines and in grain or sugar silos). A
better understanding of the basic physics of shock-driven mixing will lead to
improved designs in the energy area, reducing use of natural resources and
impact on the environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is proposed to study shock-
driven instabilities in particle-laden flows, where large-scale density
gradients are present in the gas phase simultaneously with presence of the
particle phase, and the latter may account for a significant fraction of the
volume-averaged density. The proposed effort aims to overcome the current
disconnect between the studies of the purely hydrodynamic features of shock-
driven media (Richtmyer-Meshkov instabilities (RMI), secondary instabilities,
and transition to turbulence) and multiphase features of the same flows. By
combining computational analysis, experiment and theoretical and model
developments, a benchmark set will be developed to prepare for a detailed
investigation of the relevant physics, not just in terms of gross flow behavior,
but with focus on subtler mixing phenomena induced by baroclinic and particle-
gas interaction mechanisms. Experiments will be conducted in the University of
New Mexico shock tube, one of the most advanced research facilities of this type
in the world. It has a design Mach number of 4 and a highly modular architecture
allowing to study shock interaction with a wide variety of objects with minimal
reconfiguration. Computations will be conducted with Eulerian-Lagrangian and
Eulerian-Eulerian codes based on higher-order Weighted-Essentially-Non-
Oscillatory (WENO) schemes that have been developed by the PI at SDSU. The codes
will be validated for the interaction of shock and cloud of particles. Effects
on flow morphology caused by non-uniformities in the seeding and particle size
distribution will be determined. Three-dimensional computations of the complete
system and experiment will provide insight into the fully non-linear flow
development. The work will engage students from underrepresented groups,
encouraging them to pursue long-term careers in STEM-related fields.