* 1603253
* Collaborative Research: Determining the Vulnerability and Resilience of Boreal Forests and Shrubs across Northwestern North America
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2016,11/30/2016
* Scott Goetz, Woodwell Climate Research Center, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Marc Stieglitz
* 11/30/2016
* USD 228,000.00

The importance of Boreal and Arctic landscapes is recognized by the scientific
community as an important area of research. The overarching theory to be tested
in this proposal is that the current controls over vegetation growth are not
operating as they have been in the past. The investigators have at hand a
detailed network of ground measurements of tree-ring data collected across a
range of Boreal and Arctic forests and shrublands sites in Alaska and adjacent
Canada. This data will be compared with satellite based remote sensing proxies
of vegetation productivity. The work is by and large an analysis and comparison
of two independent methods for assessing vegetation growth variability in Arctic
ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will contribute to the education
of the general public (e.g. annual open house exhibits, websites, blogs from the
field), and will partially fund a post-doctoral researcher who will have the
opportunity to expand their scientific experience and knowledge of this
topic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will focus on Boreal and Arctic forests
and shrublands across Alaska and adjacent Canada, regions that are experiencing
some of the most rapid warming on the globe today. Satellite observations have
revealed significant vegetation productivity trends (both greening and browning)
of vegetation at high northern latitudes, with distinct differences between
North America and northern Eurasia biomes and between tundra and boreal regions.
At the same time, some observations show that the strong correlation between
northern tree growth and temperature appears to be weakening in recent decades.
The overarching theory to be tested in this proposal is that the current
controls over vegetation growth are not operating as they have been in the past.
The investigators have at hand a detailed network of in situ ground measurements
of tree-ring data collected from across this region. This data will be compared
with remote sensing proxies of vegetation productivity (from satellite NDVI),
across a range of Boreal and Arctic forests and shrublands sites in Alaska and
adjacent Canada. The work will include one year of field data in regions of high
priority where the investigators will extract up to date tree ring cores for
comparison with recent air temperature and remote sensing records.