* 1603088
* Collaborative Research: An exploration of the direct and indirect effects of climatic warming on arctic lake ecosystems.
* GEO,OPP
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2023
* Jiming Jin, Utah State University
* Continuing Grant
* Rainer Amon
* 06/30/2023
* USD 833,832.00

Arctic ecosystems are warming at some of the fastest rates observed on earth. In
particular, Arctic lakes are experiencing more frequent years of warmer and
deeper surface water. However, the ability to detect and quantify ecosystem
effects and specific biological responses to these climatic changes has been
primarily limited to non-mechanistic modeled scenarios and observational studies
in uncontrolled environments. These lakes provide subsistence harvest for native
communities in the Arctic and it is important to understand how the level of
sustainable harvests might change under scenarios of continued warming. This
project will manipulate the temperature regime of selected Arctic lakes, observe
the consequent changes of the lake ecosystem, and model these.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will contribute to STEM workforce development
through provision of support for the training of graduate students at two
institutions. It will also entrain undergraduate students into the research.
Through a collaboration with the US Fish and Wildlife Service, the principal
investigators will provide outreach to Iñupiat high school students via the
Kaktovik Science Camp and to Iñupiat K-12 students via the Arctic Village
Science Camp Goonzhii. They will contribute to the management of natural
resources by presentations through established collaborations with the US Fish
and Wildlife Service and the Alaska Department of Fish and Game, as well as
through an interactive seminar series with local communities, e.g. the North
Slope Borough of Alaska.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will complete a
multi-year, whole-lake warming manipulation, to quantify the effects of future
climate change on lake ecosystems in the Arctic. In addition, regional climate
and lake models will be coupled with biotic responses to better understand the
sensitivity of lakes to changing atmospheric conditions. The project is designed
to answer: How will warmer lake temperatures and extended growing season alter
(1) lake ice coverage and annual thermal regime; (2) abundance, activity, and
diversity of primary and secondary producers; (3) fish vital rates, production,
and dynamics; and (4) degree of carry-over across growing seasons and cumulative
effects. Experimental results will be combined with long-term, archived data to
inform a linked modeling system (coupled lake-climate model and integrated
physical, climate, biological, and bioenergetic modeling) to answer: How will
warmer lake temperatures and an extended growing season alter: (1) lake thermal
regimes at regional scales, and (2) fish populations across lake types of the
Arctic. This research will quantify lake thermal processes and lake-atmosphere
feedbacks, provide more precise projections of lake horizontal and vertical
temperature structures, and document and project lake biota and ecosystem
responses to changes in lake thermal condition over large spatial scales and
under different climate scenarios.&lt;br/&gt;