* 1603041
* Doctoral Dissertation Resaerch:  The Legal Incorporation of Private Regulation: Transforming Ratings in Finance and Healthcare
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2016,12/31/2017
* Joris Gjata, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Toby Parcel
* 12/31/2017
* USD 9,739.00

SES- 1603041 Elizabeth Gorman Joris Gjata University of Virginia

Ratings have become a symbol of the power of information to regulate lives. They
are condensed ways of presenting information about people, organizations, or
their products and activities. They take different forms and come from different
sources. However, only some of these ratings have gained tremendous regulatory
power over the lives of individuals and organizations as they evaluate
compliance with certain standards of behavior. Most scholars and analysts regard
ratings? regulatory power an inevitable, natural and functional response to
conditions of increasing market expansion and uncertainty. This project examines
the evolution of ratings and their sources for two large sectors - finance and
healthcare - in the United States. In both fields ratings with regulatory power
come from a few specialized private agencies. The recognition by law of those
few specialized private agencies - credit rating and hospital accrediting
agencies respectively - as legitimate sources of information to evaluate
organizations? worth, is a key moment in the history of ratings for both fields.
How and why were specific private agencies recognized as legitimate sources of
ratings instead of alternative governmental or professional forms of regulation?
How did ratings gain their regulatory power over healthcare and financial
organizations? What was the role of the state and law in the emergence of
ratings as a new institution? How did their meaning change over time? The
answers to these questions will highlight institutional configurations without
neglecting the agents that make possible their maintenance, change and
stability. They also contribute to the demystification of new regulatory forms
as inevitable, natural and functional outcomes necessitated by conditions of
uncertainty and increasing market expansion. The comparison of two different
fields helps reveal the interdependences of different fields and the crucial
role policy makers play in shaping new forms of regulation: legitimizing them,
contributing to their implementation, and mediating their power to shape social
life.

This project will combine data on congressional records and hearings about the
formal recognition in federal legislation of certain specialized private
agencies as legitimate sources of ratings, organizational histories and
accounts, examinations of field specific publications, and newspaper data to
trace the processes through which regulation-by-information emerged as a new
institutional form in two major fields of activity in the US. It uses theories
of institutional emergence to examine the political and cultural struggles
surrounding the emergence of ratings by certain specialized private agencies as
regulation-by-information and the sidelining of alternative sources of ratings
like associations or government agencies. The project aims to clarify the
meaning of ratings, the conditions under which they constitute ?regulation-by-
information,? and present a more coherent framework for examining other emerging
forms of regulation.