* 1603407
* Constraining Greenland's Surface Mass Balance using an Aggregated Dataset for Community Use
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Lynn Yarmey, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Anderson
* 08/31/2021
* USD 293,791.00

The accelerating loss of ice from the Greenland ice sheet is a major contributor
to sea level rise. Recent increases in ice loss are attributed to changes in
snowfall and melt water processes occurring over the surface of the ice sheets,
termed surface mass balance (SMB) processes. This project enables the generation
of new scientific knowledge regarding the state and fate of the Arctic
environment by providing researchers access to an aggregated dataset of SMB
measurements over both land ice in Greenland and Arctic sea ice. This dataset
will enable better predictions of sea level rise and Arctic sea ice loss by
validating models, improving remote sensing algorithms and providing a single
dataset with field measurements for broad use within the polar science
community. This project supports education by employing and training a student
at the University of Colorado to understand SMB processes and methods for using
measurements to constrain model predictions of Greenland ice mass loss. This
project will support broad public education by contributing to the National Snow
and Ice Data Center?s Greenland Today blog posts that update the public on the
current changes occurring over the Greenland ice sheet.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is to construct an aggregate
dataset of field measurements that are consistent in format, properly described,
and can easily be used to assess Greenland?s ice sheet mass balance. Without a
common, usable, centralized dataset, important research is slowed down by
unnecessary data discovery, access, and manipulation work currently being
repeated by many different researchers around the country and internationally.
Better prediction of sea level rise should not be hindered by this inefficient
process. This research addresses the Polar Cyberinfrastructure?s call for
longterm sustainable curatorship, standardization, management and discovery of
data, and metadata and access and interoperability of data across scientific
disciplines. This research seeks to answer and meet the following Scientific
Questions and Cyberinfrastructure Objectives: Science Question 1. What is the
current spatial and temporal resolution of existing measurements and how well
can they constrain SMB model outputs?; Science Question 2. Where and what type
of SMB measurements are needed to monitor and further constrain SMB estimates
into the future?; Cyber Objective 1. To ingest measurements quickly into an
aggregated, standard dataset for use by the Polar Science community; Cyber
Objective 2. To create data protocols and community guidelines to expand the
utility of specific geophysical measurements necessary to constrain SMB models
and develop remote sensing algorithms.