* 1603177
* Porous Silicon Nanoparticle/Polycaprolactone Composite Nanofibers for Nervous System Repair
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2020
* Michael Sailor, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 05/31/2020
* USD 350,369.00

PI: Sailor, Michael J.&lt;br/&gt;Proposal #:
1603177&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nanofiber scaffolds have been used extensively in
nerve regeneration strategies; however, current nanofiber technologies lack the
ability to fully repair the injured nervous system, often due to difficulty in
incorporating sensitive therapeutics into nanofibers caused by the volatile
solvents that are used in their fabrication. The proposing group was the first
to demonstrate the degradation of porous silicon nanoparticles to non-toxic
silicic acid byproducts in-vivo and the first to demonstrate the ability of
nanoparticles to be visualized in vivo using gated luminescence imaging. The
goal of the proposed research is to build on these results by combining the
advantages of porous silicon nanoparticles with polycaprolactone nanofibers,
thus developing drug releasing composite nanofibers that can assist in
increasing neurite outgrowth and improving nervous system repair. The
nanoparticles provide protection of the therapeutics, enhance imaging potential
and can be used to alter the degradation process. The nanofibers, whose
alignment can be carefully controlled, provide a regenerative substrate that
serves to enhance/direct the growth of extending neurites. In summary, if
successful, the biodegradable nanofiber scaffolds, which can be easily tuned to
alter scaffold degradation rate, photoluminescent intensity, therapeutic
delivery, and substrate alignment, will provide an innovative and
straightforward model for developing the next-generation of nanofiber scaffolds.
Students involved in the research will be provided with a highly
interdisciplinary education in materials chemistry, nanoscience, biomedical
engineering, and biology. A capstone activity will be a 6-week summer school for
silicon nanotechnology, involving high school, undergraduate, and graduate
student mentors and mentees. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nanofiber scaffolds have been
used extensively in nerve regeneration strategies; however, current nanofiber
technologies lack the ability to fully repair the injured nervous system, often
due to difficulty in incorporating sensitive therapeutics (such as proteins,
siRNA, etc) into nanofibers caused by the volatile solvents that are used in
their fabrication. The goal of this three year project is to develop composite
nanofibers, in which bioactive therapeutics can be incorporated, with the aim of
creating customizable tissue engineering scaffolds for nervous system repair.
The proposing group was the first to demonstrate the degradation of porous
silicon nanoparticles to non-toxic silicic acid byproducts in-vivo, and the
first to demonstrate the ability of nanoparticles to be visualized in vivo using
gated luminescence imaging. The aim of this proposal will be accomplished by
developing and systematically studying biodegradable porous Si/polycaprolactone
composite fibers with a focus on engineering scaffolds for nervous system
repair. The research is pursued under 4 main thrusts: 1) fabricate aligned or
randomly oriented porous Si nanoparticle/polycaprolactone composite nanofiber
scaffolds and determine photoluminescent properties and degradation of the
scaffolds; 2) functionalize the surface of the porous Si/polycarpolactone
nanofiber composites to improve cellular attachment and growth (including -OH
and peptide functionalization) 3) incorporate and monitor release of bioactive
therapeutics from the nanofiber composites that target the PI3K/Akt signaling
pathway to enhance neurite extension (i.e. nerve growth factor, PTEN siRNA, and
PTEN inhibitor) and 4) determine ability of nanofibers to enhance neurite
extension (dosal root ganglion neurons)in vitro. Three key innovations of this
research are the use of an airbrush method to fabricate nanofiber composites,
utilizing photolumiscent properties of porous Si nanoparticles to monitor
degradation of the composite scaffolds, and incorporating sensitive therapeutics
into nanofiber composites to enhance neurite extension. If successful, the
approach will have applications in medical therapeutics, tissue engineering, and
implantable scaffold imaging and broadly impact research areas of implantable
biomaterials, MEMS, and controlled drug release. Students involved in the
research will be provided with a highly interdisciplinary education in materials
chemistry, nanoscience, biomedical engineering, and biology, in preparation for
a variety of challenging research positions in the biotech sectors of industry,
government, and academia. A capstone activity will be a 6-week summer school for
silicon nanotechnology, involving high school, undergraduate, and graduate
student mentors and mentees.