* 1603646
* A Synergistic Approach to Pressure Ulcer Prevention for Spinal Cord Injured Individuals through Experiments and Modeling
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* T. Reid Bush, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Grace Hwang
* 07/31/2021
* USD 316,056.00

Wheelchair users sit in the same seat for the majority of their day and often
have limited ability to adjust their position within the wheelchair. This
results in significant, highly localized strains yielding critical stress
concentrations in the tissue of the buttocks and thighs, leading to reduced
blood perfusion (i.e., blood delivery through capillaries), tissue damage, and
ultimately the initiation of what is known as a pressure ulcer (PU). PUs are
painful, deep wounds that can penetrate to the bone. Their treatment can require
hospitalization and, if infected, can lead to death. Current efforts to reduce
the formation of PUs are insufficient and there is a critical need for better
prevention methods. The design of a wheelchair and its cushion impacts the load
distribution, which affects the stresses and strains on the deep tissues, and
consequently, the ability of blood to reach these tissues. Specifically, two
types of loads need to be considered in the mechanics of seating: normal load
(i.e., a force perpendicular to the skin), and shear load (i.e., a sliding force
parallel to the skin). Prior work has shown that: 1) seated individuals
experience constant shear; 2) loading conditions that include shear forces are
more detrimental to blood perfusion than normal forces alone; 3) internal tissue
stress concentrations decrease perfusion; and 4) decreased perfusion is a factor
that leads to a PU. No work has been done, however, to explore ways to
periodically redistribute forces to promote blood perfusion or to quantify the
effects of shear loading on deep tissues for wheelchair users. Through a
synergistic approach that combines rigorous experimental testing and
computational modeling, the PIs will develop a seat system that incorporates an
interface surface for reduction of shear loads and an articulating wheelchair
that can redistribute forces from one region to another. This seat system will
result in increased perfusion in the buttocks and thighs, therefore decreasing
the potential for PU formation. The proposed work will have an immediate impact
on patients who have a spinal cord injury through the potential for PU
reduction, and will have broader impacts for civilian and military
populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Both blood perfusion and loading play roles in
the formation of a Pressure Ulcer (PU), however there is no wheelchair design or
cushion design that focuses on promoting blood perfusion or reducing deep tissue
stresses caused by shear loads. Moreover, no previous work has focused on
quantifying the effect of shear forces on the deep tissues in the buttocks and
thighs of spinal cord injured patients. In this project, the PIs will employ a
combination of experimental testing and theoretical modeling to: 1) determine
the shear forces and blood perfusion on the ischial tuberosity region, as a
function of postural changes in seated positions, 2) determine effective
stiffnesses in-vivo of the buttocks and thighs, 3) conduct a finite element
study to design optimized interface surfaces to minimize deep tissue stresses
and strains, and 4) manufacture and test a patient-specific prototype of a
cushion/wheelchair system. The ultimate goal of this project is to develop a
seat system that includes an interface surface for reduction of shear loads and
an articulating wheelchair that can redistribute forces from one region to
another. This seat system will lead to decreased internal stresses and increased
perfusion, therefore decreasing the potential for PU formation. The work is
highly innovative in that it will be the first to relate the effects of posture
and shear forces on blood perfusion and the first to model the effects of
posture on deep tissue stress distribution. The ability to quantify and define
the relationship between force, posture, and perfusion is a significant
contribution to the advancement of science related to PU formation and for
device design. Understanding the relationship between forces, posture, and
perfusion is a necessity for improved modeling of PU formation, advances in
seating design, and imperative to the prevention of PUs. The impact of this work
will be seen through improved seat designs that are likely to lead to PU
reduction. This research will impact all individuals who have an injury or
disease causing limited mobility, including patients who are bedridden, elderly,
have experienced an accident, stroke, or injuries incurred during military
service.