* 1603179
* BME: DNA Origami for Investigating and Reprogramming Cell Signaling
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2016,04/30/2020
* Thomas LaBean, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 04/30/2020
* USD 367,865.00

PI: LaBean, Thom Proposal Number: 1603179

Complex webs of cell signaling pathways make up cell-to-cell communication
networks responsible for everything from homeostasis (maintaining equilibrium
within our body), to wound healing, to development, and to immunity. These
communication systems make use of direct contact between neighboring cells
through specific nanometer-scale organization and presentation of cell surface
receptors and ligands. This project will use a unique molecular engineering
tool, termed DNA origami (or DNA folding), to determine how genes that control
the production of proteins on the outer membranes of cells (major
histocompatibility complex or MHC) interact with T-cell receptors (TCR). The
interaction of the MHC and the TCR is the first step in the T-cell activation
process, which impacts important biomedical issues in normal immune function,
cancer, and autoimmune disease. Thus, the work in this proposal has the
potential to enable a powerful toolkit for performing fundamental biological
studies on receptor dynamics and developing therapies for immunological
disorders.

The goal of this project is to employ the rich palette of molecular engineering
tools provided by structural DNA nanotechnology to specifically organize,
orient, and present biologically active molecules to living cells in order to
understand, facilitate, interrupt, and reprogram molecular interactions involved
in cell signaling. Complex webs of cell signaling pathways make up the cell-to-
cell communication networks responsible for everything from homeostasis, to
wound healing, to development, and to immunity. These communication systems
often make use of direct contact between neighboring cells via specific
nanometer-scale organization and presentation of cell surface receptors and
ligands they interact with. Specifically, the project will examine the spacing
and multiplicity of presentation of the major histocompatibility complex (MHC)
and its interaction with T-cell receptors (TCR) on the surfaces of living cells.
The interaction of MHC and TCR is the first step in the complex biochemical
cascade involving T-cell activation that impacts important biomedical issues in
normal immune function, cancer, and autoimmune disease. DNA origami, a subset of
DNA nanotechnology, will be assembled with designed architectures, patterns, and
structural reinforcement in order to test a range of hypotheses in cell
signaling science that would be very difficult or impossible to test by other,
less programmable experimental methods. Novel basic science can now be pursued
as well as testing of possible therapeutic strategies using DNA origami
molecular assemblies displaying proteins, ligands, receptors, aptamers, small
molecules, and other cell effectors. The combination of well-engineered
experimental set-ups for probing individual cell-cell interactions allied with
the programmable molecular recognition platforms of DNA-based nanostructures
represents a new intellectual frontier with significant long-term potential in
understanding biology and affecting human health. The program will lead to
development of naturally biocompatible molecular organizers for a variety of
biological and biomedical applications. Results from this study may provide
major advances in understanding important events in T-cell activation and in
cell-to-cell communications in general. Future extensions of this project could
involve application of molecular materials and methods developed here toward
other cell signaling pathways critical to understanding and improving human
health. Graduate students will gain valuable opportunities for education and
research training. The PI has consistently involved undergraduate, high school,
and under-represented students in research programs and will redouble efforts to
do so on this project