* 1603754
* GOALI: Cationic Inorganic Materials for Perchlorate Remediation
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Scott Oliver, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 07/31/2021
* USD 338,487.00

1603754 Oliver

Perchlorate ion is highly mobile natural waters and is difficult to treat. Due
to its similar molecular size, it blocks the uptake of iodine by the thyroid
gland and can disrupt the ability to produce hormones needed for normal growth,
metabolism and development, and, is considered an endocrine disrupter,
especially dangerous to children and pregnant women. This GOALI proposal will
establish an important collaboration between the PI's group at UC Santa Cruz and
Aerojet Rocketdyne. The project will examine a new approach to treating
perchlorate contaminated waters and result in a more effective, economical
perchlorate remediation than the current single-use processes.

The PI has discovered SLUG-n cationic materials that can exchange nitrate for
perchlorate over indefinite cycles. This important advance could lead to the
replacement of the single-use ion exchange resins currently used at Aerojet
Rocketdyne. The groundwater plume at the Aerojet Rocketdyne site has perchlorate
at levels up to 6,000 ppb. The Maximum Contaminant Level (MCL) for perchlorate
in California is 4 ppb while the EPA mandates a nitrate MCL of 10 ppm. Release
of nitrate is therefore acceptable at 6 ppm. However, a recent breakthrough in
the PIs laboratory has been to replace nitrate by acetate, which is
environmentally benign. The anions are easily swapped by placing the solid into
a solution containing the incoming anion. The process is far more selective,
rapid and higher capacity than the extensively studied ion exchange resins
layered and double hydroxides. The SLUG-n solids can be reused indefinitely
(seven cycles performed as proof-of-concept). The research will focus on several
aims: (i) investigation of the anion exchange chemistry: characterization and
optimization of the exchange capacity, kinetics and cycling lifetime for the
current materials. Competing anions such as sulfate, nitrate and carbonate will
be introduced way above the levels typical of the contaminated groundwater to
verify the selectivity for perchlorate; (ii) pilot testing at the company?s
Groundwater Extraction and Treatment facilities: the most promising perchlorate
exchangers will be studied at Aerojet Rocketdynes treatment facility side
streams. Both batch and column testing will be conducted in parallel and
monitored daily by field specialists. Flow columns will be packed with material
and scaling up of the synthesis will be straightforward since the host materials
can be synthesized with 99% yield at room temperature; (iii) design of improved
anion exchangers: the templating anion, organic linkers and metal building block
of the host materials will be varied for isolating structures with improved
exchange properties, reduced cost, lower toxicity of the outgoing anion and
possible targeting of other anionic pollutants. Aerojet Rocketdyne is interested
in partnering with UC Santa Cruz to advance innovative technologies that will
improve the ability to capture and treat perchlorate in contaminated
groundwater. The company will provide practical experience to students whose
career paths will inherit and make significant advance towards a long-term
treatment goal. The Groundwater Extraction and Treatment facilities under high
security at the Aerojet Rocketdyne Sacramento site will provide a side stream
and daily test monitoring of these promising new materials. Aerojet Rocketdyne
has the expertise and infrastructure to help guide the research and aid in
commercialization when this three-year GOALI study demonstrates the potential of
commercial viability. The development of new materials for treatment of oxyanion
including chromate and arsenate, in addition to perchlorate, is an important
step in achieving remediation and water treatment goals more effectively and at
lower cost.