* 1603351
* Conference on Differential Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2018
* Xiuxiong Chen, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 02/28/2018
* USD 30,621.00

The Differential Geometry conference will take place in Montreal, Canada, from
July 5 - 10, 2016. The primary aim of this event is to gather together leading
experts in Differential Geometry, Geometric Analysis, and Mathematical Physics.
The dual aim is to expose graduate students and young mathematicians in the USA
and Canada to the new developments. Participation by both U.S. researchers and
graduate students is crucial and is greatly encouraged. As a branch of
Mathematics, Differential Geometry studies the shapes of spaces through
distances and angles. The key concept involved is that of a so-called curvature,
the simplest kind being the scalar curvature function on a space. The existence
of a constant scalar curvature metric, the twistor theory and the special
structure in geometry and physics are of major importance in Differential
Geometry. It lies in the inter-play of geometry and physics, thus it naturally
has impacts in both differential geometry and physics. Moreover, the main topics
of the proposed conference has impacts on algebraic geometry and partial
differential equations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In recent years, important
progress has been made in the understanding of the geometry of 4-manifolds where
we have seen fundamental progress in the theory of self-dual and Einstein
metrics, Seiberg-Witten theory, the Yamabe problem on 4-manifolds, and the
Calabi problem in Kahler geometry. The conference centers around the topics
below (but not limited to): (1) special structures in geometry and physics; (2)
complex methods in conformal geometry and twistor theory, and (3) extremal
Kahler metrics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For details, please check the webpage
http://www.crm.umontreal.ca/2016/LeBrunFest16/aidAutreLEBRUN_e.php.