* 1603639
* Nonlinear response of encapsulated contrast microbubbles for noninvasive blood pressure measurement
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Kausik Sarkar, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 07/31/2020
* USD 199,994.00

CBET - 1603639&lt;br/&gt;PI: Sarkar, Kausik&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Microbubbles
are used routinely in medical diagnostics to enhance the contrast of ultrasound
images. The microbubbles usually are encapsulated with lipids or proteins so
that they persist when introduced into the blood stream. The hypothesis of this
project is that the acoustic response of encapsulated microbubbles in the
bloodstream can be separated from the acoustic response of surrounding tissue
and can be used to measure the blood pressure in the small blood vessels of
various organs. The project comprises experiments to measure the acoustic
response of encapsulated microbubbles under varying ambient pressures, the
development of a numerical model to help interpret the experimental data, and
the formulation of a protocol for pressure estimation that will be tested in
collaboration with physicians at Thomas Jefferson University who discovered that
the acoustic response of encapsulated microbubbles depends on the local
pressure. Results of the study could provide physicians with a new diagnostic
tool to measure blood pressure throughout the body to enable early detection of
disease in specific organs. The investigators will involve in the project
students at all academic levels, including undergraduates from groups
traditionally underrepresented in science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal builds on an observation made by
clinicians at the Thomas Jefferson University that the subharmonic response from
contrast microbubbles decreases with increasing ambient pressure. However, other
experiments, including those by the project investigators, and models developed
by the investigators suggest the subharmonic response may increase or decrease
with ambient pressure. The goal of the project is to explain the apparent
discrepancy, delineate regions of different behaviors, and determine how the
subharmonic response depends on the pressure-dependent mechanical properties of
encapsulated microbubbles. In collaboration with clinicians at Thomas Jefferson
Medical Hospital, the investigators will synthesize lipid coated microbubbles
and characterize their encapsulations using a nonlinear interfacial rheological
model at different ambient pressures, investigate the pressure dependent
nonlinear response from contrast microbubbles, and determine optimal material
and excitation parameters for pressure estimation.