* 1603904
* Collaborative Research: Identifying and Controlling Conductivity Variations in Semiconductor Nanowires
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2019
* Michael Filler, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Catherine Walker
* 07/31/2019
* USD 175,000.00

1604931 / 1603904 PIs: Shan, Jerry W. / Filler, Michael A. Title: Collaborative
Research: Identifying and Controlling Conductivity Variations in Semiconductor
Nanowires

Semiconductor nanowires are emerging as important nanoscale building blocks for
applications as diverse as energy harvesting, solid-state lighting, heat
transfer, information processing, chemical detection, and even bioelectronics.
These nanoscale materials exhibit significant variations in their structure and
composition that can limit their function and properties. A better understanding
and control of run-to-run variations in semiconductor nanowire synthesis will
enable precise tuning of nanowire properties to yield ensembles with
conductivity distributions far narrower than the current state-of-the-art. This
project focuses on statistically assessing variations in the electrical
conductivity of semiconductor nanowires, understanding the underlying causes for
the variations, and developing methodologies that minimize the, in order to
enable commercial applications.

The research project involves coupling novel high-throughput electro-orientation
spectroscopy (EOS) with state-of-the-art nanowire synthesis techniques. EOS is
based on the frequency-dependent alignment rates of liquid-suspended nanowires
subjected to an AC electric field and can measure the conductivity of about one
thousand nanowires per day, hundreds of times faster than existing direct-
contact approaches. A fundamental chemical understanding of nanowire growth
allows for careful control of the hetero-interfacial processes that influence
dopant incorporation. Preliminary data confirm that nanowire conductivity can
vary considerably within an ensemble. The proposed work will focus on
identifying the critical process parameters that affect electrical conductivity
in semiconductor nanowires and on the development of new processes that reduce
conductivity variations. Two classes of nanowires will be studied: (1)
uniformly-doped Si and Ge nanowires of varying n and p character and (2) SiGe
alloy, core-shell, and other heterogeneous nanowires. While Si and Ge nanowires
are the focus of this project, the approach is expected to be applicable to a
broad spectrum of other materials (e.g., III-V semiconductors, oxides, etc.).
The project will involve cross-disciplinary and cross-university training of
graduate students, recruiting of minority undergraduate students into pursuing
research projects in the laboratories of the principal investigators, curriculum
development activities, and an outreach effort aiming at engaging K-12 students
into pursuing STEM careers.