* 1603944
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Understanding Youth Engagement in the Plea Process: Predictors and Consequences
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Allison Redlich, George Mason University
* Continuing Grant
* Reggie Sheehan
* 08/31/2019
* USD 199,996.00

Engagement in court proceedings is legally required, expected, and helps to
ensure that the judicial process is equitable and fair to all participants.
Engagement generally refers to defendants' understanding and appreciation of
their legal situation, their ability to participate, and their interactions with
legal actors. Engagement can also refer to court actions that promote or deter
defendants' involvement. Despite substantial attention focused on engagement in
adult defendants, very little is known about engagement among juvenile
defendants. Because of the large number of youth who come into contact with the
legal system as defendants, and because of their potential vulnerabilities in
general legal understanding and ability to participate, it is crucial to
evaluate the depth of youth engagement in court proceedings and determine
whether adverse consequences (e.g., recidivism) emerge as a result of a lack of
engagement. The goal of this collaborative research is to conduct a
comprehensive, multi-method investigation of youth engagement in one critical
hearing in which virtually all youth defendants participate: the plea hearing.
Findings will lay a much-needed foundation for understanding not only how
engaged youth are in the plea process and their legal case generally, but also
of how specific characteristics in youth or the case (e.g., in which court
setting it is prosecuted) affect engagement. Findings will also inform existing
models of procedural justice and therapeutic jurisprudence beliefs, which posit
that higher levels of engagement lead to better outcomes, such as improved
compliance with the court and reduced recidivism. Because offending often begins
in adolescence, determining the degree to which youth legal engagement affects
these outcomes is important to prevention and intervention efforts with this
population. Finally, findings have the potential to ensure that youthful
defendants--processed in juvenile and criminal courts--comprehend and
participate in their legal situation (as legally mandated), by highlighting
practices and policies that serve to augment or inhibit legal engagement.

In the study, engagement in the plea process will be examined in two court
setting--juvenile and adult criminal court--among youth aged 14 to 18 years.
Specific objectives are to: (1) Identify the degree to which youth in the
different court settings are engaged in their case and plea hearing; (2)
Determine how interactions between the youth and key legal professionals
influence the youth's level of engagement; (3) Evaluate how the culture and
climate of the court affects youth engagement; and (4) Examine the links between
youth engagement in the plea process and outcomes (court/probation compliance,
recidivism). In juvenile and criminal courts in Orange County, CA, and Albany
County, NY, 400 plea hearings of youth will be observed and coded;
interviews/surveys will be conducted with attorneys, judges, and juvenile
defendants; and documentation on youth outcomes a year post-plea will be
collected and analyzed. Using advanced statistical procedures, youth
characteristics, social interactions, and court contexts will be analyzed to
determine how they relate to youth engagement, and in turn how engagement
relates to youth outcomes.