* 1603635
* SusChem: Manganese oxide supercapacitor charging/discharging mechanisms to capture energy using capacitive mixing (CapMix)
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Bruce Logan, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 08/31/2020
* USD 330,000.00

1603635 Gorski, Christopher A.

Treating wastewater currently consumes 2-5% of the total national energy demand
and there are tremendous opportunities for providing this energy from renewable
on-site sources at wastewater treatment plants and industrial sites in the form
of salinity gradients and waste heat. The goal of the proposed work is to
explore a new concept using charging and discharging of manganese oxide to
generate electricity, on site, at wastewater treatment plants. This approach
uses low-cost and non-toxic materials and will be able to store energy in the
form of a concentrated salt solution which can be used when there is an energy
demand.

Treated wastewater discharged into seawater releases as much as 19 gigawatts
globally due to entropic energy released through mixing of the low-salinity
wastewater with high-salinity seawater. Over 1000 gigawatts GW of waste heat is
available in the U.S. at industrial sites and power plants, which can be used to
produce heat-generated salinity gradients through evaporative or distillation
processes. A new approach for generating electrical energy from both these
sources is using electrodes that undergo capacitive and/or pseudo-capacitive
redox reactions when exposed to solutions with different salinities. This
approach, referred to as Capacitive Mixing or CapMix, can use low-cost and non-
toxic materials. When CapMix is used in conjunction with waste heat sources, it
can store energy in the form of a concentrated solution that can be used when
there is an energy demand. CapMix processes are advantageous over previously
explored methods to capture salinity gradient energy, such as pressure retarded
osmosis and reverse electrodialysis, because they do not require membranes that
are often prohibitively expensive. CapMix processes have only recently been
invented and investigated, and consequently the relevant reactions that occur
remain poorly characterized and have not been optimized for energy production.
The goal of the proposed work is to determine Manganese (Mn) oxide charging and
discharging mechanisms as a function of aqueous solution conditions and Mn oxide
structure and particle size, and to use this information to optimize the power
densities of Mn oxide electrodes in CapMix cells. To reach this goal, the PIs
will pursue three fundamental research questions: 1) What is the mechanism of Mn
oxide charging in sodium chloride solutions, and how does it change as a
function of Mn oxide structure and particle size? 2) Does changing the salt from
sodium chloride to those relevant to heat-generated salinity gradients alter the
Mn oxide charging and discharging mechanisms? If so, how? 3) What are the
maximum achievable power densities for natural and heat-generated salinity
gradients when the Mn oxide and cell deign are optimized? To communicate this
research and help to educate young scientists, the researchers will develop and
conduct a 1-day workshop for approximately 100 young women each year through the
Penn State Outreach and Scientific Engagement Office. These efforts, and others,
will benefit society by addressing the national need to capture energy from
renewable, carbon-neutral sources through research and outreach activities.