* 1603152
* EAGER: Interfacing Nanotubes and Graphene into Ordered Crystallographic Orientations Through Substrate-Induced Strain
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2019
* Douglas Strachan, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 07/31/2019
* USD 137,610.00

PI: Strachan, Douglas R. #: 1603152

As future devices are reduced to the smallest nanometer sizes, material
interfaces are expected to play an ever-greater role in determining their
behaviors. At these ultra-small sizes, the precise ordering of the atoms at the
interfaces is of critical importance for determining these nanoscale properties.
A promising approach for controlling these precisely-ordered interfaces is to
connect together the nanoscale materials the same way that lego toys are
connected; i.e., with their periodic lattices snapped together. To make these
nanoscale ?lego-snapped? interfaces of use requires that they be reproducibly
and controllably achievable between technologically-relevant materials.
Achieving this goal, however, requires a fundamental understanding and control
of the relevant interactions at the interfaces of nanomaterials. As an important
step in the long-term goal of understanding and controlling the relevant
interactions at such interfaces, lego-snapping will be investigated between two
of the most promising and important nanomaterials ? these being graphene and
carbon nanotubes. The investigation of lego-snapping between these nanomaterials
will be achieved in an innovative method that tunes the interactions between the
graphene and the carbon nanotubes through the use of a third adjacent material.
This innovative investigation should provide fundamental insight into the
mechanisms of forming lego-snapped interfaces that could be of use in
engineering nanoscale alignments with mass-scale reproducibility and specificity
? results that would be of tremendous technological use in the fabrication and
synthesis of future nanoscale technologies.

As nanoscale systems are reduced in size, the relative crystallographic
orientations of materials? lattices should become increasingly important to
their interfacial properties. Utilizing nanoscale components that consist of
well-ordered lattice-matched nanomaterials is a novel and promising avenue for
achieving these highly crystalline interfaces. Atomically-thin nanomaterial
components, like carbon nanotubes and graphene that consist of the same lattice
back-bone are ideal for achieving such lattice-matched interfaces. Moreover, the
fact that these materials are atomically-thin permits a new innovative method
for probing their interfaces via the use of additional adjacent ?substrate?
materials. These adjacent ?substrate? materials will provide a route to control
the localized strain of the nanotube-graphene system and, thus, provide a method
to modify, probe, and enhance the lattice matching of their interface. Through
the use of this external strain control, a fundamental understanding of the
relevant interactions at the interfaces of these atomically-thin nanomaterial
systems will be obtained.