* 1603192
* Discovery of New Phenomena in Biomineral Formation
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2019
* Pupa Gilbert, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Randy Duran
* 08/31/2019
* USD 450,000.00

Non-technical: This award by the Biomaterials program in the Division of
Materials Research to University of Wisconsin Madison is to investigate the
mechanisms for the formation of natural biominerals. These biominerals are
crystalline composite materials formed by living organisms. Despite being
crystalline, they do not frequently exhibit the flat faces and sharp edges
characteristic of geologic crystals, but have rounded surfaces, and shapes
highly adapted to their functions. They grow by attachment of amorphous
particles, as was first discovered in sea urchin biominerals, and later in
eggshells and others, but never directly in the formation of seashells. This
proposal will analyze these biominerals to study how they are formed. Using
crystal orientation measurements, this award will study crystal growth in egg
shells in a quantitative manner. The discoveries coming out of this study will
greatly advance knowledge of biomineral formation mechanisms, and the results
will be helpful for future biomimetic 3D printing of these biominerals, with
potential use in bone repair and replacement, and other useful devices. The
discoveries in these biominerals will be broadly disseminated in peer-reviewed
publications, at conferences where the researcher gives frequent invited
lectures, in popular science magazines, at the Conference for Undergraduate
Women in Physics, to under-represented minority high-school students attending
the "Pre-college Enrichment&lt;br/&gt;Opportunity Program for Learning
Excellence" program, to grade school women attending the Expanding Your Horizon
yearly events, and in public lectures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: The
researcher and the team members will study new phenomena in forming biominerals,
selected to maximize the likelihood of new, unexpected results because they have
never been studied with the same objectives as planned here: Objective 1 is to
identify amorphous precursor phases in fresh, forming mussel nacre and prismatic
layers, and eggshells using x-ray absorption near-edge structure spectroscopy at
the calcium L-edge, and localization in component-mapping with 20 nm spatial
resolution, and 3 nm probing depth. Calcite, aragonite, and their amorphous
precursors have distinct XANES spectral lineshape and are therefore
identifiable. If there are amorphous precursor phases in forming eggshell, nacre
and prisms, we will identify them as proto-aragonite or proto-calcite. These
"polyamorphs" have the short-range order of aragonite and calcite, respectively,
and are expected to transform into the corresponding crystalline phases.
Objective 2 is to obtain a quantitative definition of spherulite from synthetic
aragonite using polarization-dependent imaging contrast (PIC)-mapping at the
oxygen K-edge. This definition will then be used to determine if nacre and
eggshells do or do not grow spherulitically. Both component- and PIC-mapping are
state-of-the-art synchrotron methods, which this researcher introduced and
continues to improve.