* 1603314
* Development of Functionalized Nano Carbon Immobilized Membranes for Sea and Brackish Water Desalination
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Somenath Mitra, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Nora Savage
* 08/31/2022
* USD 300,126.00

PI: Mitra, Somenath&lt;br/&gt;# 1603314&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
addresses one of the world's major opportunities - the generation of potable
water from sea and brackish water. Conventional high-energy processes for
generating desalinated water include reverse osmosis (RO) which is a membrane
based technique that requires high pressure, and thermal distillations such as
Multi Stage Flash (MSF) and Multiple Effect Desalination (MED) where the brine
is distilled to generate pure water. These methods have their limitations, and
the development of the next generation of water purification technology is of
great importance for generating soft water for public consumption to a range of
industrial applications such as using brackish water for industrial cooling and
the treatment of produced water from oil and gas production via fracking.
Membrane distillation (MD) is a thermal evaporative process that vaporizes water
through a membrane to generate pure water. It offers several advantages over
traditional methods mentioned above. These include low temperature operation
(60-90C) where industrial waste heat as well as solar energy can be used to
desalinate water. The objective of this project is develop carbon nanotube based
high performance membranes that can efficiently desalinate water at low
temperature via MD. The resulting materials can be used of generate energy and
treat saline or contaminated water in a cost effective and efficient
manner.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to utilize nano
carbons (NC) to create breakthrough membrane properties for desalination via
membrane distillation (MD). In MD, a hydrophobic porous membrane separates a hot
salt water feed and a cold permeate stream. As the heated brine passes on the
membrane, it is partially transformed to water vapor. The hydrophobicity of the
membrane prevents the aqueous solution from entering the pores. However, freed
from hydrogen bonding the water vapor passes through and is condensed on the
permeate side of the membrane. The novel membrane referred to as NC immobilized
membranes (NCIM) will be developed by immobilizing NCs into membrane pores where
they will serve as molecular transporters and sorbents, thus providing
additional pathways for water transport. This project will develop new
technology and insight into the optimum process for functionalizing NC for water
vapor transport as well as the incorporation of NC in membrane structures for
desalination. The project will also real-world applications for power plants by
emphasizing waste heat utilization and specific waste water streams encountered
in that industry.