* 1603433
* Remotely activated biomaterial scaffolds for flexibly directing the recruitment and differentiation of bone progenitor cells
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2016,01/31/2021
* Daniel Roxbury, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 01/31/2021
* USD 374,765.00

1603433-Kennedy&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Directed regeneration of bone tissue
requires a choreographed sequence of distinct biological events, beginning with
the need for an inflammatory response to stave off infections, followed by the
recruitment of progenitor cells to the injury site and ending with the
differentiation of the progenitor cells into bone-specific cell types. The
objective of this proposal is to develop a biomaterial scaffold where the timing
and sequence of progenitor recruitment and progenitor differentiation factors,
which are loaded into magneto-liposomes, can be controlled through remotely
applied magnetic instructions that have been fine tuned to selectively respond
to magnetic signals of different amplitudes and frequencies. Results obtained
would have impact by enabling discovery of more optimized regenerative
strategies in bone tissue engineering. The biomaterial system developed will be
broadly adaptable for investigating how the timing, sequence, concentration, and
spatial directionality of molecular presentations influence a wide variety of
clinically relevant biological processes (e.g., regenerating other tissues, pain
management, diabetes treatments, chemotherapies, and immunotherapies). The
research will provide mentorship opportunities and enhance undergraduate
education and outreach through recruitment, retention and providing
undergraduate research opportunities, class projects, capstone designing
projects and enhanced diversity, facilitated by plans to organize/lead summer
workshops for minority students at local elementary and middle
schools&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bone regeneration and other regenerative processes
are coordinated by a complex sequence of biomolecular deliveries. Implantable
biomaterial scaffolds have shown promise in providing a source of these
deliveries as well as the mechanical framework for the growth of new tissues.
However, current biomaterial strategies in bone tissue engineering are unable to
provide controlled sequences of deliveries with the flexibility required to 1)
experimentally investigate how the sequence and timing of these biomolecular
presentations impact regenerative outcome and 2) modify the course of therapies
on a case by case basis and in real-time as informed by patient history and
current patient prognoses. Therefore, there is an urgent need for implantable
biomaterial systems where the timing and sequence of multiple biomolecular
deliveries can be controlled in a flexible manner. The objective of this
proposed research is to develop a biomaterial scaffold where the timing and
sequence of at least two biomolecules can be controlled through remotely applied
magnetic instructions. This scaffold will be impregnated with magneto-liposomes
(MLs) that are loaded with either bone progenitor recruitment factors or
differentiation factors. Critically, these MLs will be tuned to differentially
respond to RF magnetic signals of different amplitudes and frequencies. Tuning
will be achieved by integrating MLs with nanoparticles of different sizes,
concentrations, and compositions. Experiments will be conducted in order to 1)
verify the ability to magnetically control the timing and sequence of bone
progenitor recruitment and differentiation factors, 2) characterize how these
growth factors propagate within and beyond the confines of the scaffold, and 3)
demonstrate the scaffold system's ability to coordinate and optimize the timing
of critical regenerative events (i.e., bone progenitor recruitment and
differentiation). The proposed work will provide significance by enabling the
discovery of more optimized regenerative strategies in bone tissue engineering
and will initiate a transformative research trajectory by providing the material
means to clinically implement optimized strategies. The proposed work will
improve patient quality of life by producing both an investigative and clinical
tool for optimizing and implementing improved bone regeneration strategies. This
biomaterial system will be broadly adaptable for investigating how the timing,
sequence, concentration, and spatial directionality of molecular presentations
influence a wide variety of clinically relevant biological processes (e.g.,
regenerating other tissues, pain management, diabetes treatments,
chemotherapies, and immunotherapies). The research will be utilized as a vehicle
for mentorship and enhancing undergraduate education by: 1) providing a foil for
undergraduate research, class project in the PI/Co-PIs' Biomaterials and Nano-
Tool courses, and capstone design projects and 2) improving the
infrastructure/equipment required to carry out these projects. In coordination
with the college's diversity office, the PI/Co-PIs propose long-term initiatives
to enhance diversity through recruitment, retention, and outreach. The PI/Co-PI
will improve the research, organizational, and leadership skills of minority
students specifically recruited to conduct research and organize/lead summer
workshops at local elementary and middle schools.