* 1603737
* Flexible flapping surfaces for water collection and condensation
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2021
* Melanie Derby, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 06/30/2021
* USD 361,652.00

1603737&lt;br/&gt;Derby&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Electrical power production is an
extremely water intensive process, requiring over ten gallons of water to
produce each kWh of electricity in the U.S. Power plant cooling towers represent
a promising area for water harvesting, as blowdown and evaporated water could be
recovered and used for energy production, industry, or agriculture. Thin,
flapping polymer films/meshes are a potentially transformative process which
would reduce thermal resistances from air, conduction through the polymer, and
condensation, thereby increasing total water removal
rates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;From preliminary findings, droplets oscillated on a
perfluoroalkoxy film, flapping at 14 Hz were ejected from the flapping surface.
Average droplet departure diameters were 0.985 mm on flapping surfaces, compared
to 3.27 mm on stationary surfaces. Flapping increased droplet removal rates by
two orders of magnitude and estimated water collection volume by 204 %.
Estimated energy to flap was &lt; 17 W/m2, and this could be reduced or
eliminated by self-flapping. This research will investigate the effects of
flapping on flexible polymer films for water harvesting. Numerical simulations
will determine accelerations required to motivate droplets, and understand the
impact of flapping on water harvesting. Experimental validation will be
conducted on flapping films/meshes in an environmental chamber, with conditions
similar to a cooling tower plume. Also, experiments will be conducted using
water samples from Wolf Creek Generating Station and Jeffrey Energy Center to
determine recovered water quality, and will consider the first flush and
subsequent samples to determine the change in water quality with time. Water
quality assessment will focus on salinity, cations and anions, nutrients, and
bacteria. Recovered water will be compared to irrigation standards for
agricultural production, as well as power plant and industrial requirements. The
proposed work will increase fundamental knowledge of droplet motion on flexible,
flapping surfaces. Numerical simulations will yield flapping frequencies and
amplitudes required for droplets to translate or eject from the surface. Droplet
growth with respect to time will be determined with high-speed flow
visualization using impinging droplets and condensing droplets. Flapping
condenser surfaces will be studied at 301 K and 80 % RH, similar to cooling
tower plume conditions. In addition to water collection rates, droplet
nucleation, coalescence, and departure will be compared for flapping and
stationary surfaces, resulting in an improved understanding of droplet dynamics
on oscillating surfaces. Several mechanisms have been identified which may
explain superior droplet motion on flapping surfaces: surface tension, air
entrapment, and altered contact lines on soft, polymer surfaces. Numerical
simulations and experimental validations will be conducted to determine the
relative effects of these proposed mechanisms on water collection. Recovered
water quality will be assessed and possible industrial and agricultural uses
identified. The research objectives are to: 1. Understand the impact of flapping
frequency (1-100 Hz) and amplitude on droplet coalescence and ejection from the
surface. Butterflies, insects, and flags flap in this frequency range. 2. Model
droplet behavior on a soft, flapping surface, including the effects of
coalescence, gravity, acceleration, surface tension, and surface energy on
droplet formation and motion. 3. Determine the effects of flapping on droplet
sweeping and water collection in a controlled environment, similar to a cooling
tower plume. 4. Assess recovered water quality for power plant and agricultural
applications. In addition, the PIs and students will create an engineering
outreach module for middle and high school girls, reaching 100 girls each year
through the KAWSE program. The girls will create airbrushed T shirt designs.
Using high speed videos, the girls will determine average paint droplet size and
assess how paint droplet behavior changes with flapping, analogous to the
flapping film for water collection. The relevance of this project to water
conservation and daily life will interest and inspire the girls to pursue STEM
careers. A simplified version of this module would be conducted every year at
the Aggieville Mini Maker Faire, and will engage children in the local
community.