* 1603347
* SusChEM: Mapping Reaction Pathways of Biomass Pyrolysis and Catalytic Pyrolysis using Isotopically Labeled Plant Cell Culture
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Yair Shachar-Hill, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Catherine Walker
* 08/31/2020
* USD 300,000.00

Plant biomass such as wood, grass straw, and agricultural residues represent an
abundant, cheap, and renewable feedstock for the production of liquid
transportation fuels and chemicals. One way to make fuel out of biomass is
through a process called fast pyrolysis, where the solid plant material is
rapidly heated in the absence of air to decompose it to a mixture of gas, solid
char, and a liquid called bio-oil, which can be upgraded to liquid
transportation fuel. Plant biomass is a mixture of three biologically- produced
polymers - cellulose, hemicellulose, and lignin - arranged into a complex three-
dimensional network. The origin of pyrolysis products from this complex mixture
is not well understood, since all these materials interact with one another
during biomass pyrolysis. This lack of understanding has hampered efforts to
maximize bio-oil production from a given plant species. This project seeks to
map the origin of biomass pyrolysis products to specific biomass components
within real biomass materials. A key innovation is the use of plant cell
technology to label the cellulose and lignin components so that their fate can
be tracked during fast pyrolysis. The educational activities associated with
this project include a summer residential program for high school students using
topics developed from the research. Students will see how plants capture and
store carbon and energy, use chemical probes to help discover biological
processes, and discuss the opportunities and challenges of obtaining fuels and
chemicals form renewable resources.

The overall goal of the research is to identify and map reaction pathways for
fast pyrolysis of lignocellulosic biomass to specific cellulosic and lignin
molecular constituents. The research plan has two objectives to trace the
origins of the fast pyrolysis products. The first objective is to develop a
methodology to enable mapping of the reaction pathways through carbon-13
labeling. Towards this end, cells of the model plant Arabidopsis thaliana will
be heterotrophically cultured on a mixture of unlabeled and 13-C labeled glucose
and phenylalanine, precursors for cellulose and lignin biosynthesis
respectively, to separately tag the carbohydrate and lignin fractions in the
Arabidopsis cell wall. Arabidopsis stem cuttings will then be pyrolyzed, with
and without catalyst, using 13C-labeled Arabidopsis cells as probes at different
temperatures. The results will be compared to the products of simple mixtures of
unlabeled cells with labeled small-molecule building blocks. By tracking the
fate of the labeled sites, it will be possible to construct a reaction network
that describes both their incorporation in the plant matter, and the chemical
events that form the pyrolysis products. The second objective is to use the
methodology developed under objective 1 on woody plants within genera Populus
and Paniceae that are relevant to bioenergy production. The research outcomes
will lead to improved, mechanism-based reaction and kinetic models for
predicting product yields from reaction pathways for fast pyrolysis from real
lignocellulosic biomass substrates, not just model compounds. This information
can then be used to identify reactor design and operation strategies to
stabilize and optimize the yield of bio-oil and its downstream conversion into
liquid transportation fuel.