* 1603557
* Collaborative Research: Quantifying the Residual Circulation of the Arctic Ocean
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* John Marshall, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 08/31/2019
* USD 411,042.00

Geostrophic eddies in the ocean transport heat, salt, and mass in much the same
fashion that storms transport heat, humidity, and mass in the atmosphere. The
net effect of these eddy transports has a significant impact on the mean
temperature and salinity stratification and circulation of the waters of the
Arctic Ocean ? their climatology. Our understanding of these eddy transport
process in the Arctic Ocean is weak. This project is devoted to improving that
understanding.

The project contributes significantly to STEM workforce development. It will
support the training of a post-doctoral associate and a graduate student.
Furthermore, the principal investigators will develop a teaching module for the
public ?Weather in a Tank? project - a laboratory guide for students to explore
fluid dynamics experiments in a rotating frame to better understand the
essential physics of atmosphere and ocean phenomena. The module will describe an
instructive rotating laboratory experiment to simulate the fundamental
principles at work in the Beaufort Gyre in the Arctic Ocean. The project also
contributes indirectly to national security in that the mean salinity
stratification of the Arctic Ocean is an important control on the fate of the
Arctic sea ice cover, which influences resource development, transportation,
tourism, and defense activities in the Arctic. A better understanding of eddy
transport processes and their subsequent incorporation into models will improve
projection of future states of the Arctic sea ice cover.

This project will determine, through study of a hierarchy of models in context
with observations, the degree to which geostrophic turbulence plays a central
role in setting the large-scale circulation of the Beaufort Gyre (BG) of the
Canadian Arctic, shaping its so-called ?Residual? circulation. It is the
Residual-mean circulation that transports tracers (e.g., heat, salt, carbon) in
the ocean, and this has two components: a contribution from the mean velocity
(the ?Eulerian-mean? circulation), and a contribution from eddies (often called
the ?bolus transport?). This decomposition has provided the essential framework
for progress in understanding the fundamental dynamics and global climate
implications of the Southern Ocean circulation. In this project, through study
of the Residual-mean circulation and its components, fundamental dynamical
processes at work in the Beaufort Gyre (BG) will be explored, including: 1.
analysis of the role of eddies in equilibrating the freshwater budget of the
gyre, balancing the pumping down of fresh water from the surface by the action
of the wind, 2. examination of the role of boundary currents and seasonal
forcing, 3. characterization of the ?Residual-mean? circulation of the BG -
distinguishing it from the ?Eulerian-mean? circulation. Significant differences
between Residual and Eulerian descriptions in the BG will mean that eddies have
a leading order role in tracer transport. This will have far-reaching
implications for Arctic oceanography, its circulation and biogeochemistry, how
we interpret and take observations in the Arctic and how we model the Arctic.