* 1603526
* Research at the Interface of Algebraic Geometry and String Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2021
* Ron Donagi, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Sandra Spiroff
* 06/30/2021
* USD 510,000.00

The award supports the principal investigator's research at the interface of
algebraic geometry and string theory. Algebraic geometry is the mathematical
study of spaces described by arbitrary algebraic equations. Fundamental
investigation of such diverse scientific disciplines as high energy physics,
cryptography, phylogenetics, robotics, or control theory, often reveals that key
concepts of the discipline can be encoded in terms of such geometric spaces. In
some cases, such interactions suggest deep new problems in algebraic geometry
whose solution is necessary for further progress. In other instances, the
scientific intuition actually suggests new methods for solving old problems in
algebraic geometry that were otherwise inaccessible. String theory and quantum
field theory (QFT) explore physics at the smallest length scales, or
correspondingly at the highest energy levels. Exploration of the interactions of
these physical theories with algebraic geometry has been extremely productive
for both math and physics, and the power of this combination of tools and
approaches only seems to strengthen with time.

The goal of this project is to explore and push forward the interface of
algebraic geometry with string theory. This will be done by focusing on a number
specific research directions, each representing a major open problem in math
and/or in physics, whose solution will make a major contribution to the field,
and is likely to benefit from the application of techniques of the opposite
discipline. Specifically, the principal investigator proposes to explore the
extension of the classical theory of curves and their moduli to super Riemann
surfaces, with a view towards establishing the foundations of perturbative
superstring theories and studying the superstring measure; to prove the
geometric Langlands conjecture via non abelian Hodge theory, and explore its
relation to QFT and to mirror symmetry; to extend his construction of Calabi-Yau
integrable systems realizing Hitchin's system to meromorphic and parabolic
versions, and explore the physical applications; to use his new parametrization
of the moduli space of 6 dimensional principally polarized abelian varieties to
analyze this space and determine its Kodaira dimension; and to explore further
aspects of F theory and attempt to establish its mathematical foundations.