* 1603211
* Collaborative Research: Coordinated Experiments and Simulations of Near-Surface Turbulent Flow over Barchan Dunes: Informing Models of Dune Migration and Interaction
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2019
* Kenneth Christensen, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 07/31/2019
* USD 268,183.00

PI: Christensen, Kenneth / Best, James / Anderson, William Proposal Number:
1603211 / 1604155 / 1603254

The focus of the proposed research is to explore the migration of sand dunes in
large scale, desert environments or ocean floor environments. The proposed
collaborative approach involves experiments, theory and simulations to
understand the process of dune migration under turbulent flow. The findings of
this work can be important for Aeolian dune migration, a problem that can be
critical to predicting and mitigating desertification as it occurs in the
Western US and in other places in the world.

Understanding and predicting the morphodynamics of subaqueous barchan dunes is
critical for management of waterways and quantifying transport of nutrients and
pollutants. Similarly, understanding these processes for aeolian barchan dunes
is important for characterizing desertification processes and for informing
numerical weather prediction. At large dune spacings, barchan kinematics can be
accurately predicted using sediment transport models predicated on mean bed
shear stress. However, barchans typically occur in fields. Since dune migration
rate is size dependent, a heterogeneous dune field will result in variable
bedform spacing, with smaller (faster) dunes approaching larger (slower) dunes.
Thus, when two dunes are in close proximity, the upstream one will produce an
unsteady, turbulent wake that will sculpt the morphology of the downstream one,
introducing significant morphological complexity owing to spatially-
heterogeneous turbulence. Such effects are not captured by current state-of-the-
art models. (These approaches simulate the bedform evolution but do not resolve
the overlying flow; they instead use a spatially homogeneous representation of
turbulence as the flow input). Informed by preliminary research, and compelled
by deficiencies in existing dune modeling approaches, it is hypothesized that
the "missing link" to elucidating the morphodynamics of interacting barchan
dunes is the unsteady nature of the turbulence generated within the inter-dune
space. It is proposed to pursue a collaborative research effort that leverages
an innovative measurement protocol and scientific computing, complemented by
observations in nature. The results will transform the understanding of dune-
dune flow field interactions for fixed-bed dunes as a function of proximity and
volumetric ratio and will form the basis for advancing morphodynamic models.
Planar and volumetric PIV measurements will be conducted in a refractive-index-
matched environment (allowing unprecedented optical access to the flow) for
targeted dune configurations. These experiments will validate large-eddy
simulations that will enable larger spatial volumes and a much broader suite of
dune field parameters to be explored, with the latter informed by field
observations. The culminating task will involve incorporating the turbulence
heterogeneity identified into existing morphodynamic models to test the
hypothesis. The proposed work will have an impact not only in fluid dynamics
through its impact on engineering turbulent flows, but also to other disciplines
including boundary-layer meteorology, geomorphology and sedimentology.