* 1603720
* Novel flow control strategies for heat transfer enhancement in a minimal array of impinging jets
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Ahmed Naguib, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 07/31/2021
* USD 309,976.00

PI: Naguib, Ahmed Proposal Number: 1603720

The goal of the proposed research is to investigate the flow behavior of arrays
of jets used in several engineering applications - most prominent of which is
turbine blade cooling in gas turbine engines. In addition, cooling effects that
the flow from the jets generates when it impinges on a surface will be studied.

The proposal is motivated by the significance of impinging jets for heating,
cooling and drying in many industrial processes and engineering devices. A
particularly significant application is turbine blade cooling in gas turbine
engines, where effective cooling can have a strong favorable impact on engine
efficiency, causing substantial reduction in fuel consumption and pollution. The
goal of the proposed work is to study the potential for significant augmentation
of heat transfer in impinging jet arrays using active flow control strategies.
The control strategies, which are conceived based on detailed understanding of
the spatio-temporal relationship between the jet's vortical structures and the
surface heat flux, will be implemented using plasma actuators mounted around the
lips of axisymmetric jets arranged in an inline array. The array size is kept to
a minimum of three to enable reproduction of fundamental jet-jet interaction
phenomena while avoiding the complexity of large-size arrays. The study will
employ time-resolved flow visualization and phase-locked PIV measurements to
capture flow-field information simultaneously with measurements of the average
convection heat transfer coefficient using temperature-sensitive paint, and
spatio-temporal wall heat flux information using thin-film gage arrays. Data
will be acquired for a range of parameters including jet-to-impingement-wall
spacing, jet-to-jet spacing, Reynolds number, control strategies/parameters, and
crossflow presence. This work will result in the education of a graduate student
and the involvement of undergraduate students in research, who will also be
actively involved in the dissemination of the research to summer high-school
students. The graduate and undergraduate researchers will be recruited from
underrepresented groups with the aid of existing programs at Michigan State
University. New course content will be developed on experimental fluid dynamics
that will integrate results from this research.