* 1603414
* Molecularly Porous Non-network Polymer Membranes with Superior Resistance to Physical Aging for Gas Separations
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2020
* Ruilan Guo, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 07/31/2020
* USD 311,000.00

Proposal Number: 1603414, PI: Guo, Ruilan Title: Molecularly Porous Non-network
Polymer Membranes with Superior Resistance to Physical Aging for Gas Separations

Gas separations are central to many of the technological innovations in clean
energy industries (e.g., H2 purification) and environmental remediation (e.g.,
carbon capture). Membrane technology, which takes advantage of materials
selectivity, provides a powerful means to effect separations in complex streams
because of its low energy consumption, modularity and reliability. Fast and
selective transport combined with scalability and long term durability are key
attributes of an ideal separation membrane material. However, currently used
polymer membranes are frequently challenged by a tradeoff between gas
permeability and selectivity largely due to insufficient microporosity and/or a
broad size distribution of micropores that collapse over time (known as physical
aging). This project will focus on developing an innovative membrane platform
based on a family of super rigid, ladder-like polymers that exploit the novel
properties imparted by shape-persistent structural unit to construct
configuration-based non-collapsible molecularly porous structure. The new
membranes will meet the needs for a broad range of critical gas separations. The
separations to be addressed are of enormous significance to more efficiently
exploit fossil fuels and to address the challenges in carbon capture. Equally
important, the project will also produce exemplary materials and processes that
will serve as vivid educational and training tools for students at all levels
including graduate and undergraduate students and high school teachers. The
efforts via the Research Experiences for Teachers (RET) program and its outreach
activities will excite the general public about materials research that carries
societal importance through its objectives of clean fuel production and carbon
capture for environment remediation via energy efficient membrane technologies.

The overarching goal of this project is to identify and to elucidate the key
material's structural and functional features that control the molecular
transport and physical aging properties of microporous polymers. The major task
of this project is to synthesize super rigid ladder polymers via covalently
bonding shape-persistent pentiptycene units with bulky bridgehead substitutions
into various main polymer chain contour profiles. The novel materials will then
be used to fabricate membranes with systematically controlled processing
conditions. Characterization work will include physical aging and atomic-level
detection of free volume architecture to correlate with structural and
processing parameters to evaluate membrane gas transport properties and physical
aging properties. The transport and aging behavior will be used to determine the
quantitative effect of structural parameters on the separation performance to
establish fundamental structure-property relationships to guide new membrane
design. Successful execution of this project will deliver transformative
membrane materials applicable for a broad range of critical gas separations. The
project will provide fundamental understanding of how the polymer's local
configurational and conformational variations propagate through intra- and
inter-chain and supramolecular interactions to construct molecularly porous
membranes with maximized separation productivity and efficiency as well as long
term durability.