* 1603028
* GEM: Relative Locations of Auroral Breakups to Large-scale Field-aligned Currents
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2021
* Haje Korth, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 08/31/2021
* USD 312,806.00

This project will investigate the locations of auroral breakup events with
respect to the large-scale electric current system connecting the magnetosphere
and ionosphere. This framework of large-scale field-aligned currents is created
as a result of the interaction between the Earth's magnetic field and the solar
wind. The closure of these field-aligned currents through the polar ionosphere
is responsible for the auroral oval. Another consequence of the interaction with
the solar wind is the extremely stretched magnetic field lines on the nightside
of the Earth that form an extended magnetotail. The stretching increases until
the energy stored in the magnetic fields is released explosively and the
stretching decreases. During this time, the electric current across the
magnetotail is disrupted and shunted through the high-latitude ionosphere
forming the substorm current wedge. This stretching-release-recovery cycle is
called a substorm. The interval during which the stretching increases is called
the substorm growth phase; the explosive energy release is an element of the
substorm expansion phase (or auroral breakup). The auroral breakup begins with a
brightening of an existing arc near midnight close to the lower latitude edge of
the auroral oval. This is followed by an initially localized region of bright
and rapidly varying auroras that spreads westward and poleward with time. The
auroral breakup is thought to be associated with the upward current leg of the
substorm current wedge. This study answers important questions about the
connection between the large-scale current systems and the disturbed substorm
currents associated with the auroral breakup using satellite observations of
global field-aligned electric currents and ground-based observations of auroras
and geomagnetic field disturbances. An important element of this project is the
unique global view enabled by new data products. The project will have
significant broader impacts. Summer interns including high school science
students and teachers will be involved in the research, receiving training on
automatic identification of auroral break-up candidates and other aspects of the
research. In the longer term, an increased understanding of explosive space
weather disturbances in the vicinity of Earth will improve forecasting
capabilities of value to a technology-dependent society.

The primary objective is to determine how auroral breakups relate to the global
magnetospheric current systems. The methodology consists of case studies and
statistical correlations of auroral breakup timing and location relative to the
current systems. This study is only now possible because of the groundbreaking
development by the NSF-NASA AMPERE program of global maps of field-aligned
currents on a ten-minute cadence utilizing existing engineering magnetometers
onboard 66 commercial Iridium communications satellites. These maps will be
combined with ground-based maps of geomagnetic field perturbations from the NSF-
NASA-ESA supported SuperMAG Program, which is a worldwide collaboration of
organizations and national agencies that currently operate more than 300 ground
based magnetometers. SuperMAG turns these observations into global maps of
magnetic field disturbances and other parameters that measure the level of
geomagnetic activity. Finally, auroral breakup images will be obtained from 20
THEMIS ground-based All Sky Imagers (ASIs) distributed across the entire North
American polar region (some stations funded by NSF).