* 1603854
* Collaborative Research:  Understanding the controls on spatial and temporal variability in ice discharge using a Greenland-wide ice sheet model
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2021
* Patrick Heimbach, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Marc Stieglitz
* 06/30/2021
* USD 249,340.00

Sea level is observed to be rising at an increasing rate. A significant
contribution during the past decades has been from mountain glaciers, but the
contribution from the Greenland Ice Sheet is anticipated to become dominant in
the near future. This contribution is delivered to the ocean as both meltwater
and icebergs that melt in the fjords and coastal ocean around Greenland. These
contributions vary spatially. The proposed work will develop a model of
Greenland's contribution to sea level rise, constrain the model using observed
data, and estimate contributions based on scenarios of future
climate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will contribute to STEM workforce
development by providing support for the training of two graduate students. It
will also provide support for a beginning investigator during the formative
years of his career. It will contribute to the community resources by
maintaining and enhancing the open source Parallel Ice Sheet Model (PISM) code
for community use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Four possible controls on outlet glacier
systems dynamics have been identified: &lt;br/&gt;1) Warming subsurface ocean
water and/or increased subglacial runoff may increase submarine ice melting at
the glacier-fjord interface;&lt;br/&gt;2) Rigid sea ice and ice m√©lange (a
mixture of sea ice and icebergs) may suppress calving, allowing for terminus
advance; &lt;br/&gt;3) The terminus position relative to subglacial topography
(e.g., over-deepenings or sills) influences rates of retreat; and &lt;br/&gt;4)
Changes in the resistive stress caused by contact with the fjord walls and/or
glacier bed can lead to terminus advance, retreat, and/or
thinning.&lt;br/&gt;Previous simulations of ice sheet contributions to sea level
rise have been limited by the insufficient spatial resolution of models and
observational data, which prevented whole-ice sheet simulations to faithfully
capture outlet glacier flow. Results to date are either obtained from regional
models or from highly idealized flow line models that were upscaled to ice-sheet
scale. Recent advances in ice sheet modeling, and the availability of high-
resolution subglacial topography, now allow one to resolve individual outlet
glacier flow in ice sheet-wide simulations. This project will use the framework
of the open-source Parallel Ice Sheet Model (PISM), uni-directionally coupled to
new high-resolution hindcasts of the atmosphere and ocean. This will provide a
test bed for assessing, on a glacier-by-glacier basis: &lt;br/&gt;1) what is the
relative present-day influence of the four controls on outlet glacier flow and
ice discharge; &lt;br/&gt;2) what is the potential for a substantial increase in
21st century ice discharge; &lt;br/&gt;3) what conditions would precipitate
large changes (e.g., spatio-temporal distribution of ocean warming, enhanced
surface runoff); and &lt;br/&gt;4) what observations are required in support of
a Greenland Ice Sheet Ocean Observing System to capture the forcing or onset of
large changes? &lt;br/&gt;Comparison to available remotely-sensed and in-situ
observations, including, but not limited to, time-series of surface velocities,
surface elevation, and mass changes will serve as metrics of success.
Simulations of the 21st century evolution of the Greenland Ice Sheet will then
be performed, forced by available atmosphere-ocean projections, to provide
realistic estimates of future ice discharge.