* 1603777
* Collaborative Research: Adding animals to the equation: assessing herbivore impacts on carbon cycling in northern Alaska
* GEO,OPP
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2023
* Kevin Griffin, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Colleen Strawhacker
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,070,591.00

Small mammals graze on the vegetation of the Arctic tundra. Although this
grazing may influence many aspects of tundra ecosystems, current models do not
include grazing by small mammals. In this project, the abundance of voles and
lemmings will be varied experimentally using fenced plots. The investigators
will observe the responses in the plots, especially focusing on changes in the
cycling of carbon and nitrogen. To understand how the current climate controls
the importance of grazing by small mammals, the investigators will conduct their
studies at three sites in Alaska located in the Seward Peninsula, the foothills
of the Brooks Range, and on the Arctic coastal plain. The natural abundance of
voles and lemmings will be studied at these sites to provide background for
applying the experimental results throughout the Arctic. The results will be
used to expand a mathematical model of tundra ecosystems to include grazing by
small mammals, which will improve the predictions that can be made about how the
Arctic may change in the future. The research will involve a number of
undergraduate students and investigators will integrate their research into
classes and other educational programs. In addition, they will present a radio
program in Barrow, AK. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will investigate
the importance of herbivory by small mammals in controlling the cycling of
carbon and nutrients in the rapidly changing Arctic tundra. Through studies at
three sites along a latitudinal gradient, the investigators will employ both
observations and experiments to quantify the role of grazing by rodents (voles
and lemmings) in the functioning of tundra ecosystems. The observations of
rodent population dynamics along with ecosystem function will provide key new
information relevant to understanding the feedbacks of the Arctic tundra to the
global climate. The manipulation of rodent density through exclosures and
enclosures will show how potential changes in rodent populations may influence
the tundra ecosystem response. In corporation of the observational and
experimental results into a quantitative ecosystem model will enhance
predictions of future changes and feedbacks with climate. &lt;br/&gt;