* 1603929
* Hydrodynamics of outer flow at low Reynolds numbers for locomotion and flow control
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2020
* Daisuke Takagi, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 05/31/2020
* USD 297,941.00

PI: Takagi, Daisuke&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1603929&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
focus of the proposed project is to investigate the dynamics and associated
fluid flow around small organisms driven by multiple appendages. The goal is to
develop theoretical understanding and new mathematical models based on
experiments for the swimming of small animals that could be used to challenge
existing concepts of aquatic locomotion and to design micro-robots that can move
autonomously in aquatic environments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
activities are expected to reveal new flow patterns around crustaceans, which
move differently from the flagellated and ciliated microorganisms that have
attracted much attention to date. The project will elucidate the basic physical
mechanisms of generating seemingly complex patterns of Stokes flow using a
simple combination of paddling legs as performed by swimming and feeding
crustaceans. The flow fields should be different from those commonly assumed in
existing models of the collective behavior of swimmers, so they may produce
novel interactions with other organisms and boundaries and produce new emergent
behavior. The results can impact fields beyond fluid dynamics including
biological and soft matter physics. In addition to elucidating the swimming and
feeding behavior of small organisms, the work could inspire novel designs for
driving and controlling flow in practical applications such as the development
of versatile and efficient biomimetic robots. There is also an outreach and
education plan that involves hands-on demonstrations of robots to promote STEM
education at local public schools in Hawaii. The proposed activities involve
participation of K-12 teachers and students from underrepresented groups
including Native Hawaiians and Pacific Islanders.