* 1603761
* Combining 2D Materials with 3D Nanostructures to Control Thermal Radiation
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2020
* Zhuomin Zhang, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ying Sun
* 06/30/2020
* USD 355,000.00

Understanding nanoscale thermal radiation is critically important for advanced
energy systems, nanomanufacturing, local thermal management, and high-resolution
thermal sensing/imaging. Micro/nanoscale thermal radiation concerns both
radiative heat transfer between closely spaced objects and the interaction of
electromagnetic waves with micro/nanostructured materials that could modify the
spectral radiative properties. Recent advances in graphene and other two-
dimensional (2D) materials offer enormous potential to revolutionize current
microelectronic, optoelectronic, and photonic devices as well as energy
harvesting systems. The objective of this research project is to investigate the
underlying mechanisms of hybridization of 2D materials with 3D nanostructures
for active and passive control of thermal radiative transport and properties.
The results may directly benefit the practical engineering applications
mentioned previously. Graduate and undergraduate students working on this
project will gain fundamental knowledge of thermal radiation at small length
scales and research experiences in micro/nanofabrication, radiometric
instrumentation, and numerical simulation. The successful implementation of this
project will have a great impact on engineering education and human resource
development, including opportunities for underrepresented groups. In addition,
the computational codes developed from this research will be made available via
internet to promote future research and applications.

Hybrid graphene on metal grating structure will be fabricated and their
radiative properties measured with spectrometers to explore the effect of
coupled graphene plasmons with magnetic polaritons in gratings on the
absorptance or transmittance. The potential of gating graphene to actively
control the spectral radiative properties will also be experimentally examined.
Simulation tools based on the rigorous coupled-wave analysis will be developed
and applied to model the radiative properties of anisotropic hybridized 2D/3D
structures. For example, hexagonal boron nitride (hBN) films coupled with
grating structures will be investigated to shed light on the excitation of the
hyperbolic waveguide modes in hBN using gratings. The far-field radiative
properties of layered black phosphorus (BP) and other hybrid 2D/3D materials
will also be analyzed. By combining the exact scattering theory with the
anisotropic RCWA, this research seeks understanding of near-field thermal
radiation for coupled plasmonic modes, such as the hybrid graphene surface
plasmon and hBN phonon polaritons (SPPPs), and for structures with inherent in-
plane anisotropy such as few layers of BP. Moreover, the validity of Kirchhoff?s
law for anisotropic media will be evaluated based on fluctuational
electrodynamics. Fundamental understanding will be gained as to how plasmons in
2D materials can couple with each other and with resonance modes in 3D
micro/nanostructures, as well as how these coupling phenomena may affect thermal
radiative properties and radiative energy transport in both the near-field and
far-field regimes. The success of this project will advance the frontier of
thermal radiation research.