* 1603316
* Collaborative Research: Merging of Horizontally and Vertically Separated Flames in Wildland Fires
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2020
* Thomas Fletcher, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* John Daily
* 07/31/2020
* USD 180,001.00

1603316 - Fletcher&lt;br/&gt;1603947 - Mahalingam&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will study how two or more flames in close proximity merge into a single
flame. The immediate application for this information is wildland fires in live
shrubs, like in the California chaparral. Living vegetation is characterized by
its ability to hold large quantity of moisture, unlike dead vegetation. A few
leaves are initially ignited, and the flames from the separate leaves merge into
one large flame. In a similar manner, flames from individual shrubs merge to
often form a more intense fire, capable of spreading faster. For example, flame
heights from individual leaves are only 2 to 5 cm, but flames from shrubs may
reach heights of 10 to 12 m due to flame merging. Small-scale experiments will
be performed on leaves, wood dowels, or popsicle sticks in 3-D geometries to
examine how spacing affects flames-merging behavior. Correlations that describe
flame-merging will be based on spacing, heat release, and other variables, and
then compared with physics-based fluid dynamics simulations. The simulations
will further enable direct investigation of merged flame behavior in shrubs and
between adjacent shrubs. Generalized correlations of flame-merging behavior
derived from the combined experimental and modeling activities can possibly be
applied to fires in buildings, factories, fuel piles, and other combustible
materials. Findings from this research will be used to develop educational
materials for STEM educators and students. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Flame merging
has been studied for jets or pool fires spaced in a horizontal plane, and
correlations for flame merging behavior have been developed. However, three-
dimensional flame-merging is important for ignition of live shrubs, as well as
building fires. Small-scale experiments will be performed on solid fuel elements
such as leaves, wood dowels, or popsicle sticks as a function of vertical and
horizontal separation distance. Experiments will be performed with and without
wind. Flame behavior will be monitored with video and IR cameras, and
correlations of flame behavior will be developed. Physics-based modeling of the
small-scale experiments will be performed to help identify the most important
mechanisms for flame merging. The simulations will then be extended to describe
flame merging of adjacent shrubs, with and without wind. The scalability of the
empirical correlations will be determined by comparison with the multiple shrub
simulations. It is expected that such correlations of flame merging behavior
will provide a reasonable alternative to time-consuming computational fluid
dynamics simulation of large landscape fires.