* 1603361
* Collaborative Research: Snow, Wind, and Time: Understanding Snow Redistribution and Its Effects on Sea Ice Mass Balance
* GEO,OPP
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2020
* Christopher Polashenski, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Colene Haffke
* 09/30/2020
* USD 592,146.00

The insulating and reflective properties of snow substantially influence Arctic
sea ice growth and decay. The overwhelming consensus within the scientific
community is that the details of snow and sea ice interactions must be better
incorporated in Earth System models, yet basic information on snow processes
remains poorly quantified. The limited treatment of snow in Earth System models
is largely based on datasets from field experiments on multi-year ice and does
not capture changing snow properties and processes. Increasingly pervasive
younger, thinner ice carries a different snowpack and is likely much more
sensitive to snow conditions than the multi-year ice of the past. Predicting
Arctic climate requires that we understand snow on sea ice and its interactions
and feedbacks among the rest of the climate system components. A particularly
important aspect of snow on sea ice is its fine-scale spatial redistribution.
Wind-driven snow redistribution into dunes and drifts controls thermal fluxes
and melt pond formation, exerting considerable control over ice mass balance.
The principal investigators of this project will study snow distribution, its
variability, and its effects on ice mass balance using an integrated field
observation and modeling approach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
contribute to STEM workforce development in multiple fashions. It will provide
support for an early-career scientist during his formative years. It will
support the training of a graduate student. It will entrain undergraduate
students and high school interns into the research effort. Outreach to local
schools near the institutions of the principal investigators will be enabled
through blogs and classroom presentations. The project will enable an outreach
program targeted at improving science engagement at the Barrow
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Field programs will track snow distributions over
the course of a multi-month experiment, while modeling efforts will seek to
reproduce the observed evolution of snow conditions. Lidar technology will track
snow surface position as drifts build, erode, and migrate, creating time series
of three-dimensional snow surface models with cm-scale accuracy. Snow properties
observed in pit studies will be synthesized with surface position maps to
construct a three-dimensional snow stratigraphy for model initialization and the
study of aggregate snow thermal properties. The observations will be integrated
into a pair of resolved-scale snow and sea ice models to quantify impacts of
snow redistribution on sea ice mass balance through alteration of thermal
conduction and melt pond formation. Model trials and development will permit
investigation of the representations of snow redistribution in the models and
will quantify the importance of snow processes on the annual ice mass balance. A
library of prior field observations and short visits to offshore sites will be
used to validate the generality of the field sites and assess the variability of
snow distributions. The model will also be used to investigate how to best
aggregate (or parameterize) snow properties and processes at coarser resolutions
found in Earth System models. Findings and results will be shared with the Earth
System modeling community to support development of improved snow-on-sea-ice
representations.