* 1603051
* Development of new high-resolution pCO2 records for quantifying Earth system climate sensitivity
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Ying Cui, University of Louisiana at Lafayette
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 06/30/2020
* USD 347,945.00

Determination of Earth system climate sensitivity, the amount that global
temperatures increase in response to a doubling of atmospheric carbon dioxide
levels, is critical towards predicting the increase in global temperatures from
rising carbon dioxide levels in the atmosphere. Much of our knowledge of this
value is based on data from periods with atmospheric carbon dioxide levels no
higher than today. This project will develop new high-resolution atmospheric
carbon dioxide records for comparison with existing temperature data in order to
better quantify the response between temperature and atmospheric carbon dioxide
levels across the last 65 million years of Earth history. This approach will
allow for improved quantification of climate sensitivity across a wide range of
atmospheric carbon dioxide levels and climate states, including both icehouse
and greenhouse conditions, and will provide better information for understanding
how temperatures could increase as a result of future increases in atmospheric
carbon dioxide from fossil fuel burning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will
use the large number of published carbon isotope measurements on fossil
terrestrial organic matter and the known effects of pCO2 on C3-plant carbon
isotope fractionation in order to provide a new, high-resolution pCO2
reconstruction using a Monte Carlo uncertainty analysis. Expansion of the
available pCO2 proxy data to significantly higher resolution using the abundance
of terrestrial carbon isotope data available in the literature will allow for
improved estimates of Earth system climate sensitivity across different climate
states. This work will focus on: 1) the late Cenozoic (30-0 Ma), which is
characterized by relatively low pCO2, Antarctic ice sheets, and well-constrained
estimates of the carbon isotope composition of atmospheric CO2, and 2) the early
Cenozoic (66-50 Ma), which is characterized by elevated temperatures, moderate
to high pCO2, a lack of polar ice sheets, and a series of geologically brief
global warming events known as hyperthermals.