* 1603914
* Predictability of Open Water in the Chukchi/Beaufort Seas and Other Regions
* GEO,OPP
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2020
* Mark Serreze, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Anderson
* 06/30/2020
* USD 713,339.00

This grant supports an effort to assess and implement approaches to predict the
timing of autumn freeze-up and spring-summer ice retreat in the Arctic coastal
seas. The study is motivated by recognition that the Arctic Ocean is becoming
more accessible for resource exploration, marine shipping, tourism and other
activities, increasing the need for reliable seasonal predictions of ice
conditions. The project will focus on regional scales addressing stakeholder
needs. All Arctic coastal&amp;#8232;seas and the channels of the Canadian Arctic
Archipelago will be examined, but emphasis will be placed on the Chukchi and
Beaufort Seas. This recognizes these regions as foci for resource exploration,
where ships entering or exiting the Arctic Ocean via Bering Strait must pass,
and as part of the seasonal bowhead whale migration route supporting subsistence
hunting. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The core of the proposed approach is that the
date of the spring/summer sea ice retreat to a given location (e.g., the
continental shelf break) can be used to predict the date of the autumn advance
back to that location (i.e. freeze-up), and hence the open water period. This
reflects albedo feedback and ocean heat uptake processes that have always been
part of the sea ice system. Briefly, earlier seasonal sea ice melt and retreat
leads to earlier exposure of dark open water areas that readily absorb solar
radiation, meaning more heat in the ocean mixed layer at summer's end, delaying
autumn ice growth. This is manifested in observations that the upward trend in
the open water period in the Chukchi Sea is driven more by later autumn return
of ice than an earlier spring/summer retreat, and that there is a strong
relationship between ice retreat and return in de-trended time series of the two
variables. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Factors such as atmospheric variability and
ocean heat transport are viewed as modulating expressions of albedo feedback and
ocean heat uptake; such variables, along with seasonal climate forecasts, will
be examined as additional predictors. It will be determined in
which&amp;#8232;sectors predictions are most and least skillful, the reasons for
these differences, and whether&amp;#8232;the changing sea ice regime (e.g.,
changing ice thickness) is changing predictability. In&amp;#8232;addition,
multiple processes, including winter atmospheric conditions, ocean heat
transport, ice thickness and surface melt onset, will be examined as sources of
predictability on the&amp;#8232;date of retreat. The study will utilize
satellite observations of sea ice extent and concentration, surface melt onset,
ice motion, thickness and age, ocean heat flux measurements, and
output&amp;#8232;from the NCEP coupled Climate Forecast System, Version 2, along
with fields of sea level pressure, temperature and other variables from two
modern atmospheric reanalyses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Arctic Ocean,
particularly the Chukchi and Beaufort seas, is of growing strategic
importance&amp;#8232;to our nation. The proposed&amp;#8232;effort to provide
skillful seasonal predictions of sea ice conditions at the regional
scale&amp;#8232;serves the goal of improving methods of connecting science with
decision making through addressing diverse stakeholder needs, including
marine&amp;#8232;shipping agencies, extraction industries and subsistence
hunting. Support is included for a graduate student and undergraduate students
to help educate the next generation of scientists, and study results will be
assimilated&amp;#8232;into an Arctic climate course at the University of
Colorado.