* 1603589
* Collaborative Research: A Langevin Subgrid Scale Closure and Discontinuous Galerkin Exascale Large Eddy Simulation of Complex Turbulent Flows
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Dimitri Mavriplis, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* John Daily
* 07/31/2020
* USD 99,480.00

1603131/1603589/1604142 &lt;br/&gt;Givi/Mavriplis/Girimaji&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Turbulent combustion is encountered in nearly all energy
conversion devices, such as internal combustion engines, gas turbines, boilers,
and gas burners. Turbulent combustion involves many complex physical and
chemical phenomena. The ability to predict accurately the turbulent combustion
process is critical to the design and optimization of combustion devices for
achieving low emissions and high efficiency. This research will develop accurate
computer models and numerical algorithms that can reveal the fundamental
turbulent combustion processes and allow industry to design clean combustion
devices, thus benefiting the environment. Extensive code development and
computer simulations will be conducted. Additionally, this project will also
include numerous education and outreach activities, including the development of
an Interdisciplinary Computational Science Minor to provide additional courses
on high-performance computing, student training in the multidisciplinary field
of Computational Modeling and Simulation, K-12 outreach through the INVESTING
NOW and CAMP-SOAR programs, and recruitment of students from minority and under-
represented groups through the EXCEL program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In an effort
to increase the accuracy of turbulent combustion simulation, this award provides
funding to develop a new Langevin subgrid scale (SGS) closure and to implement
it with a new discontinuous Galerkin numerical scheme for large eddy simulation
(LES) of turbulent flows. The former provides accurate modeling of the SGS
transport for a wide range of turbulent flows, including compressible and
chemically reactive. The combined methodology will be put together in a package
in which the available computational cores are utilized in a dynamic, adaptive
manner. This is an important concept in high performance computing necessary for
massively parallel simulations up to petascale, and towards (future) exascale.
The new LES tool will be employed for predictions of several turbulent flows.
The computational requirements for the proposed LES, in its most sophisticated
form and utilizing the highest intended resolution, will be several orders of
magnitude less than that required for direct numerical simulations. When
successfully completed, this research will have a significant impact on
turbulent combustion research. It will be extremely valuable for both industry
and government agencies. The outcome of this work can also positively impact
other disciplines, such as climate and atmospheric modeling or bioengineering.