* 1603276
* Proteomic evidence of microbial weathering processes beneath the Greenland Ice Sheet
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2018
* Brook Nunn, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 07/31/2018
* USD 150,755.00

Greenland Ice Sheet (GrIS) melting is increasing. The associated runoff to the
adjacent oceans may have important impacts on marine ecosystems. Meltwater
characteristics, such as iron, sulfate and carbon content, are not well known
and depend on the extent and activity of weathering reactions beneath the ice
sheet. Microbes in these critical subglacial environments are important
contributors of chemical weathering processes, yet, to date, direct molecular
evidence of such processes remains to be obtained from GrIS subglacial
environments. Here, the principal investigators propose to optimize methods to
analyze samples obtained previously from GrIS subglacial meltwaters and to
identify evidence of microbial activity in GrIS? subglacial meltwaters. This is
necessary background information required to develop models of the potential
impact of increasing meltwater discharge from GrIS on local and downstream
commercial fisheries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will contribute to STEM
manpower development by offering research experience to an undergraduate student
and mentoring to a female postdoctoral researcher. Its public K-12 focused
outreach efforts include workshops and exhibits at three annual Science Weekend
experiences for the museum-going public at Seattle?s Pacific Science Center
(Polar Science, Life Science Research, and UW PAWS on Science). Each event
provides the possibility of one-on-one interactions with over 9000 students from
diverse socio-economic backgrounds, allowing time to excite students during
explanation of the ?Greenland ice microbes? exhibit and presentation of a hands-
on mass spectrometry model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will ultimately
provide the first direct molecular evidence for enzymatic microbe-mediated
nutrient cycling and remineralization (e.g., iron, sulfate, carbon release)
underneath the GrIS. It constitutes the critical first step towards improving
conceptual models of microbial GrIS weathering and its resulting impact on
nutrient fluxes to future polar oceans. Specifically, the principal investigator
anticipates that it will:&lt;br/&gt;1. Optimize protein extraction and
environmental proteomics techniques for subglacial meltwater
samples;&lt;br/&gt;2. Identify enzymes involved in microbial weathering and
nutrient release to the ocean;&lt;br/&gt;3. Decipher molecular protective
mechanisms that help microbes in the subglacial environment
survive;&lt;br/&gt;4. Identify protein/peptide biomarkers to identify and
quantify key metabolic processes in future subglacial studies; and&lt;br/&gt;5.
Promote further discovery of novel cold-adaptive enzymes of significant interest
to&lt;br/&gt;environmental ecologists and industrial
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;Through these efforts, the PIs will demonstrate the
ability to detect enzyme-controlled weathering, a prerequisite to quantify and
track these processes in detail in the field (e.g., by combining geochemical
measurements with targeted quantitative proteomics and 13C-isotopic tracer
studies). The success of this project has the potential to fundamentally change
the way in which science views the effects of ice sheet melting. Identification
and quantification of the microbial processes controlling weathering and
nutrient availability is critical to the next generation of conceptual models
ice sheet-ocean interaction.