* 1603656
* SusChEM:  COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:  Engineering the hollow-fiber membrane biofilm reactor to convert syngas to valuable products
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Bruce Rittmann, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 06/30/2020
* USD 209,022.00

1603656 / 1604385 PIs: Rittmann, Bruce E. / Lively, Ryan P. &lt;br/&gt;Title:
SusChEM: COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Engineering the hollow-fiber membrane biofilm
reactor to convert syngas to valuable products&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The syngas
platform for conversion of lignocellulosic biomass to liquid biofuels involves a
thermochemical conversion step to produce syngas (H2 + CO) followed by
biological conversion of syngas to liquid biofuels. Combining the two steps
overcomes the limitations of sequential conversion steps for producing second-
generation biofuels, but only when the syngas bioreactor allows high rates of
gas delivery to the homoacetogenic bacteria responsible for syngas conversion.
The PIs propose a collaborative project aiming to adapt the hollow-fiber
membrane biofilm reactor (MBfR), now used for water treatment, to deliver the
low-solubility gases directly to a biofilm that grows on the outer surface of a
hollow-fiber membrane and utilizes the gas as a substrate. The membrane-based
biofilm avoids direct gas-liquid mass transfer, which normally slows the rate of
H2 and CO delivery. The over-arching goal is to adapt the MBfR for the
production of valuable chemicals from syngas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
collaborative project aims to develop the scientific and engineering foundations
for a new environmental-biotechnology platform that allows rapid and cost-
effective conversion of syngas to valuable organic products. The proposed
research will be focused on developing a fundamental mechanistic understanding
of the novel material properties of asymmetric membranes useful in the MBfR, the
physiology of homoacetogens that work well in a biofilm, and the interactions of
biokinetic, ecological, and mass-transfer processes in biofilms fed with H2 and
CO. The proposed research, if successful, will contribute to the foundation of a
new environmental biotechnology platform for the production of valuable products
from syngas (H2 and CO). The project will involve an experimental investigation
focused on the development of membranes and the selection and characterization
of suitable microorganisms (homoacetogens). It will also involve the development
of a theoretical model, based on the experimental data, to describe and optimize
the performance of biofilm reactors. The project will include a STEM education
and workforce development effort by involving under-represented community-
college students in research. An outreach effort to high school students will be
focused on sustainability and green chemistry demonstrations in high school
science laboratories and on hosting teachers and students for summer research
internships.