* 1603475
* CAREER: An Integrative and Scalable Approach to Embedded Hardware Protection
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2015,06/30/2017
* Swarup Bhunia, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 06/30/2017
* USD 168,635.00

This project explores an integrative approach to embedded hardware security,
where efficient design solutions complement appropriate test/validation steps
and security analysis. It creates technology to protect embedded systems at
different stages of life-cycle against hardware intellectual property (IP)
piracy and reverse engineering, hardware Trojan attacks in untrusted design and
fabrication facilities, and malicious modifications of hardware IP. It
investigates a design approach based on scalable key-based hardware obfuscation
to protect hardware IP from illegal usage and malicious modifications. The
design technique is combined with a "self-referencing" based validation
approach, which compares side-channel signature of a chip with itself - in both
spatial and temporal manner, to reliably detect hardware Trojans. Security
analysis is performed to measure effectiveness of the proposed framework using
appropriate trust metrics and to identify emerging security threats. The
approaches are validated using software automation tools and a custom hardware
emulation platform.

The research improves understanding of technological issues related to embedded
hardware security and will enable technologies for secure and trustworthy
hardware at low cost. The project integrates education through training students
various aspects of hardware security using hands-on experiments, involving
undergraduate and high-school students in research, and disseminating research
results, course modules, software tools and the hardware test bed to local
schools and peer research community. It will create awareness about the security
issues and countermeasures through the "Hardware Security" group in Facebook
created by the PI and through organizing special sessions in major IEEE/ACM
conferences.