* 1603707
* GOALI: WERF: Bioaugmentation of activated sludge with high activity nitrifying granules/flocs: population selection, survival, biokinetics
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2020
* H.David Stensel, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 08/31/2020
* USD 200,000.00

1603707 Stensel

Municipal wastewater treatment plants are faced with new goals for nitrogen
removal that are difficult to meet with limited space in urban areas. In
cooperation with the DC Water (Washington DC), as well as King County (KC,
Seattle) and Los Angeles County (LAC) water treatment facilities, the PIs intend
to demonstrate and develop fundamental design information for an innovative
bioaugmentation technology that meets high nitrogen removal standards and
greatly reduces space, capital cost, energy, and chemical requirements. The
proposed project examines ways to reduce operating costs for nitrogen removal
using both pilot plant (at the participating plants) and lab-scale testing.

Two systems are proposed. System I (operated at KC and LAC) develops nitritation
granular sludge from sidestream centrate treatment that is added to the
mainstream process. Granular sludge is a new type of round shaped dense rapid
settling biomass of 1.0 to 3.0 mm diameter, resulting in bioreactors with
greatly reduced area in contrast to conventional processes with lighter, less
dense flocculent sludge, process intensification. The ability to uncouple the
sludge retention time of the granules and flocculent sludge (selective
retention) provides a long sludge retention time to increase the volumetric
nitrification capacity of the mainstream significantly due to the high solids
concentration of dense granules. Granular sludge bioreactors have contributed to
a wastewater treatment revolution in Europe but are not yet implemented in the
US, partly because aerobic granular sludge technology cannot be readily adapted
to most existing activated sludge process reactor geometries. System II
(operated at DC water) provides an enriched high activity nitritation floc from
the cyclone separation overflow from a sidestream anammox process, which is fed
to the mainstream to also intensify the volumetric nitrification capacity and
promote a nitrite shunt in the main plant. Bioaugmentation of nitritation flocs
and granules will enable the PIs to intensify existing infrastructure and
achieve higher efficiency in given space, while reducing oxygen and carbon
demands. The granular and flocculent biomass microbial populations and their
survival and fate will be followed by molecular tools, fundamental biokinetic
tests and process simulation models. The proposed work advances transformational
innovative biological treatment methods and a deeper understanding of the
microbial selection principles of ammonium and nitrite oxidizing bacteria in
bioaugmented systems. It will be unique in combining population dynamics,
identity, and kinetic parameters of granules and flocs with the ultimate goal to
engineer an effective compact short cut nitrogen removal process. An innovative
feature is increasing the volumetric nitrification capacity without increasing
tank volume by growing high activity nitrifiers (granules/flocs) in a side
reactor and to then seed the mainstream treatment to increase the nitrifying
biomass density and volumetric capacity. This project enhances infrastructure
for research and education in environmental engineering by exposing students to
granular sludge technology. The results will be broadly disseminated by
presentations at conferences. The PIs will reach underrepresented groups at the
K-12 and undergraduate level through the minority science and engineering
program, and the mathematics, science, engineering achievement program. This
program has a strong history of bringing minority students on campus for
extended program for faculty lectures and laboratory visits in which the PIs
have participated.