* 1603705
* GOALI: Improved Association-based Models for Separations in the Bioeconomy
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Paul Mathias, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 08/31/2021
* USD 337,405.00

Proposal Number: 1603705, Lira&lt;br/&gt;GOALI: Improved Association-based
Equilibria Models for Separations in the Bioeconomy
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bioprocess product streams from bioethanol manufacture or
other biomass conversions typically include 'sticky' polar molecules such as
water, alcohols, amines, and organic acids that associate by hydrogen bonding.
Today, process design efforts for such material streams require many laborious
empirical measurements and expensive pilot plant studies. Accurate and adaptable
predictive models are critically needed to reduce the time and resources spent
on the pilot plant stage and to enable efficient design of renewables-based
chemical manufacturing plants. Engineers and Scientists at Michigan State
University, Dow Chemical, Fluor, and Honeywell/UOP are building new tools to
simulate the equilibria behavior of solvents and solutions relevant to the
emerging bioeconomy. This GOALI project addresses many of the challenges set
forth in the National Bioeconomy Blueprint by facilitating the transition from
petroleum feedstocks, supporting student interaction with industry, and
educating students for the bioeconomy workforce. The model will be distributed
as a plug-in to commercial software and hence will broadly benefit the
biochemical and chemical industries. In addition to its practical value, this
research aims to improve understanding of the physical nature of hydrogen bonds.
The project will fund a PhD student and engage undergraduate students in
research. Through collaboration with a high school chemistry teacher, the
project will develop a secondary school module addressing engineering design,
part of the Next Generation Science Standards. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project addresses a need to link fundamental molecular measurements to parameter
values used in the modeling of associating fluids and their equilibria.
Industrial phase equilibria models using the Wertheim approach for association,
such as Statistical Associating Fluid Theory (SAFT), Cubic Plus Association
(CPA) and Elliott-Suresh- Donohue (ESD) equation of state models have become
increasingly common. Despite the theoretical rigor of the framework, the
association parameters are usually fitted to macroscopic phase equilibria data
that relate only indirectly to true associations. As a result, the physical
significance of the parameter values is unclear, hindering extensions to predict
multicomponent or variable temperature behaviors. The project will include three
interdependent features: (a) a model designed with the mathematical flexibility
to represent liquid and vapor mixtures of associating compounds over temperature
and pressure ranges relevant to reaction and separation processes; (b)
spectroscopic analysis to quantify associations such as hydrogen bonding at the
molecular level; and (c) quantum chemical simulations both to guide
interpretation of the spectroscopy and provide insight into association
energies. The novelty of this work is the proposed incorporation of
spectroscopic data, informed by quantum chemical simulations, to determine the
extent of association at the molecular level while simultaneously including
thermodynamic balances. This three-way approach will improve parameter
transferability and enable more accurate correlations and predictions of
temperature dependence and multicomponent behavior for vapor-liquid equilibria,
liquid-liquid equilibria, and simultaneous vapor-liquid-liquid equilibria.