* 1603264
* Freestanding and Permselective Graphene Oxide Membranes Assembled at Liquid/Liquid Interface through Novel "Stitch Chemistry"
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2020
* Jiahua Zhu, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 07/31/2020
* USD 299,204.00

Proposal Number: 1603264, PI: Zhu, Jiahua&lt;br/&gt;Title: Chemically Stitching
Graphene Oxide Nanosheets into Separation Membranes
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Purifying water from processing streams with low energy
consumption is urgently needed in the chemical, petrochemical and bioengineering
industries. In addition, conventional polymer- and ceramic-based membrane
technologies have significant challenges in biofuel separations. Graphene oxide
(GO, a sheet material with a thickness less than 1.0 nm) has been explored as a
membrane material with great potential in water separations. The membrane would
consist of layers of this sheet material. The proposed research will use novel
"stitch" molecules as a tool to assemble GO sheets into a membrane with desired
microstructure pattern and layer spacing. These membranes are designed to
achieve permselective separation of water in a broad range of separation
practices. The outcome of this research is to offer a transferrable freestanding
membrane processing technology that is capable to revolutionize biofuel
separation efficiency, and greatly improve water purification capability. The
educational broader impacts are addressed through professional training of
graduate students, development of graduate curriculum and promoted STEM
education and engagement in focused outreach activities to pre-college students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research focuses on the fundamental understanding of
interfacial transport, reaction kinetics, and self-assembly phenomena of
graphene oxide sheets into freestanding membranes at using polymerization
chemistry facilitated by a liquid/liquid interface. The self assembly at the
liquid/liquid interface will be enabled with the use of novel stitching
molecules to impact the layer to layer spacing of the GO membrane, the formation
of the membrane surface, and the surface chemistry of the pore channels. The
research will use examples of biofuel separation and water purification
applications to test the selectivity and permeability of the resultant
membranes. The specific research goals are to: 1) understand the transport
behavior and assembly phenomena of GO sheets into membranes at the liquid/liquid
interface; 2) tune GO membrane pore microstructure and surface chemistry
properties using reactive groups in the GO basal planes to impact the membrane's
structure and chemical function; and 3) reveal the process-structure-property
relationships of GO membranes targeting permselective biofuel separation and
water purification applications. The transferability of this technology will
enable its immediate dissemination to a wide range of separation applications.