* 1603674
* Collaborative research: Validation of the Lacustrine Branched GDGT Paleothermometer
* GEO,EAR
* 11/15/2015,07/31/2019
* Jessica Tierney, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 07/31/2019
* USD 224,948.00

The reconstruction of past continental temperatures provides critical insights
into the Earth's climate system and its sensitivity to internal and external
forcing mechanisms. Such reconstructions provide geological context for observed
and projected future climate changes, and reveal the impact of diverse forcings,
such as changes in solar irradiance, volcanic events, and greenhouse gas
concentrations, on global climate. Organic molecules preserved in sediments
provide a tool for inferring past climate that may be widely applicable in both
space and time. A promising and recently developed technique based on
assemblages of branched glycerol dialkyl glycerol tetraethers (brGDGTs),
membrane lipids produced by bacteria, has the potential to expand understanding
of past continental temperatures across a variety of climatic regimes, time
scales, and depositional environments. brGDGTs represent an important climate
archive because they are widespread and abundant in lakes, they exhibit
structural differences related to water temperature and pH, and they can be
preserved for long periods of time (millions of years) in lake sediments.
However, it has not been rigorously assessed if brGDGTs provide a universal
method for past temperature reconstruction and the potential influence of
environmental parameters other than temperature and pH has not yet been
evaluated. Through conducting fundamental field and laboratory experiments, the
investigators will elucidate the structural response of the brGDGTs to
environmental stresses and investigate the impacts of oxygen exposure,
degradation, and microbial community structure on brGDGT distributions. This
research represents necessary, fundamental work to validate the use of the
brGDGT paleothermometer in lakes. Investigators will partner with the Eureka!
Program of Girls, Inc. of Holyoke, MA to offer hands-on summer workshops in
environmental geochemistry, as part of a month-long summer science camp designed
to encourage middle and high school girls to pursue careers in STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Branched glycerol dialkyl glycerol tetraethers
(brGDGTs) are ubiquitous compounds, found in a variety of terrestrial
environments includes soils, rivers, and lakes. Previous research, including
work done by the investigators, has established that the degree of methylation
of these compounds is sensitive to temperature, auguring the use of brGDGT
distributions as a proxy for past temperature changes. However, a number of
challenges and unresolved issues limit the application of a brGDGT thermometer.
These include unknown biological source(s), a lack of first-principles evidence
that brGDGT structures respond to environmental forcings, and evidence for
diagenetic alteration and/or sensitivity to oxygen exposure. This project aims
to address some of these fundamental challenges via both a field and laboratory-
based approach. In a lab setting, researchers will maintain and manipulate
mesocosm experiments to determine whether brGDGT methylation and cyclization
responds to temperature and pH. In the field, they will monitor brGDGT fluxes in
a target lake and conduct controlled degradation experiments. Lipid analyses
will be paired with Illumina MiSeq sequencing in order to understand how
microbial community structure influences brGDGT distributions. Finally, they
will conduct exploratory statistical analyses on a set of lake sediments to
study how brGDGT distributions behave in different sedimentary and climatic
regimes. The results of this project will constitute a fundamental advance in
the understanding of brGDGTs and improve the ability to use them as a
paleothermometer.