* 1603741
* RUI: SusChEM: Increasing Soil Enzymatic Function with Targeted Microbial Inocula
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Jennifer Krumins, Montclair State University
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 08/31/2021
* USD 320,180.00

1603741&lt;br/&gt;Goodey, Nina&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work leverages
a recent key discovery, the existence of highly functional contaminated soils,
that is, where bacterial communities have adapted to the contaminants. Liberty
State Park, a brownfield site in Northern New Jersey, is one example.
Understanding the underlying science of enhanced biochemical function within a
contaminated site is an essential step in maximizing restoration potential. The
goal of this project is to better understand the high enzymatic activity which
has developed and apply this knowledge to optimize functional soil treatment and
inform engineering solutions in a cost effective, sustainable manner
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;First, finding the mechanistic basis for the high
enzymatic activities will be a novel and exciting contribution to ecological
engineering with far reaching implications for the restoration of contaminated
sites. Second, the proposed experiments will use a factorial design to determine
whether: 1. the abiotic properties of the soil itself, or, 2. the microbial
communities of the soils are more important to improved function. Third, this
work employs targeted microbial communities originating from contaminated,
undisturbed soils, in soil restoration. Measurements of extracellular enzyme
activity serve as a proxy for overall soil health and function. The specific
objectives of this project are: 1. Elucidate the factors driving enzymatic
activity in contaminated soil by studying contaminated soils with unusually high
enzyme activity in comparison to less functional, contaminated soils, and, 2.
Determine the ability of microbial inocula to improve the functionality of
contaminated, low functioning soils, and characterize the time course of
functional transformation. Understanding the mechanisms behind the unusually
high enzymatic activities will guide efforts to find functional and metal-
resistant microbial communities. This will facilitate soil seeding and have
direct applications to a highly cost-effective approach in restoration ecology
and phytoremediation. The findings of this research and the predictive model
will inform practitioners and engineers about successful microbial community
compositions and time to functional transformation. The PIs will use the
opportunity to extend their mentorship and expertise in training to the Liberty
Science Center, situated next to Liberty State Park. As part of this grant, the
PIs will work with education colleagues at the Science Center to develop
workshops and outreach activities for student visitors.