* 1603832
* Haptotactic and topographical scaffolds to speed nerve regeneration
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2016,12/31/2020
* Rebecca Willits, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 12/31/2020
* USD 448,984.00

PI: Willits, Rebecca K&lt;br/&gt;Proposal #:
1603832&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Peripheral nerve injuries commonly result from
acute trauma, and Shwann cells (SCs), which migrate into the injury site to
assist in the breakdown and clean up process at the wound site, are critical to
repair. Though the importance of SCs is known, the combination of structural,
chemical, and signaling motifs required to prompt SC migration remains poorly
understood. This project tests the hypothesis that the magnitude and slope of a
laminin peptide concentration gradient on aligned polymer nanofibers will
synergistically enhance the rate and extent of SC migration. Determining the
combination of peptide factors and concentration profile data that will
accelerate SC migration into the peripheral nervous system defects and
ultimately the restoration of function are critical to the next generation of
rationally engineered scaffold materials. Results will yield a series of test
materials that are unprecedented in their ability to controllably vary the
spatial arrangement and concentration of two peptides on films. The identified
concentrations can be easily translated to neural conduits. Educational and
outreach impact is achieved through enhanced graduate student training,
extensive involvement of high school and undergraduate students in research
activities and dissemination of materials developed through K-12 programs and
the Akron Global Polymer Academy that collectively reach hundreds of students
and dozens of teachers each year. This award is co-funded by the Biomaterials
program in the Division of Materials Research through the BioMaPs
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Schwann cell (SC) infiltration into the injury
site is known to be critical to a robust regenerative response in peripheral
nerve repair. However, the precise combination of structural, chemical, and
signaling motifs required to induce or direct endogenous SC migration into
defect sites remains poorly understood. This project utilizes aligned, nanofiber
mats possessing well-defined peptide concentration gradients to probe the role
of laminin-based peptides in inducing directional SC migration. Preliminary data
using discrete concentrations of the integrin-mediated adhesion sequence, GRGDS,
and YIGSR indicate that SCs align in the direction of the nanofibers. Unique
chemical functionalization methods will be used to control the spatial
distribution of multiple peptides, including homogeneous or gradient
concentration profiles on aligned electrospun nanofiber scaffolds. Peptide
concentration gradients on nanofibers have not been demonstrated previously. The
research planned tests the hypothesis that the magnitude and slope of a laminin
peptide concentration gradient on aligned PCL nanofibers will synergistically
enhance the rate and extent of SC migration. Two specific aims are designed to
yield an optimized peptide concentration profile for inducing directional SC
migration and ultimately nerve regeneration. Aim 1 is to fabricate and
characterize substrates possessing variable slopes and magnitude of laminin-
peptides. Then the rate and extent of SC proliferation and migration as a
function of laminin-peptide slope and concentration will be characterized. Aim 2
is to fabricate and characterize aligned nanofibers possessing defined gradients
of various laminin-peptides. Then the synergistic effects of contact guidance
through topography and haptotaxis arising from the peptide gradients on directed
SC migration will be quantified. Finally, the response of neurons to the
scaffolds with enhanced SC migration will be examined. Elucidating the
combination of peptide factors and concentration profile data that will
accelerate SC migration into the peripheral nervous system (PNS) defects and
ultimately the restoration of function are critical to the next generation of
rationally engineered scaffold materials. In addition to the quantitative
cellular response, results will yield a series of test materials that are
unprecedented in their ability to controllably vary the spatial arrangement and
concentration of two peptides on films. The identified concentrations can be
easily translated to neural conduits. Educational and outreach impact will be
achieved through activities directed at K-20. Graduate students involved will
receive interdisciplinary training in biomaterials, advanced nanofiber
manufacturing and molecular and neurobiology. Undergraduate students from within
and without the University of Akron will be involved through activities
associated with an NSF REU in Polymer Science and Polymer Engineering.
Considerable high school involvement is achieved through an Enhanced Science
Inquiry Program with a nearby Catholic high school, which has led to mentoring
and lab experiences for a large number of high school participants. Many of the
techniques and outcomes from the research are being directly incorporated into
undergraduate and high school (e.g., AP Chemistry and Biology) courses. The
materials will be disseminated through K-12 programs and the Akron Global
Polymer Academy that collectively reach hundreds of students and dozens of
teachers each year.