* 1604293
* Nanocrystal Precursors to Doped Cesium Metal Halide Perovskite Photovoltaics
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2016,12/31/2020
* Aaron Fafarman, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 12/31/2020
* USD 310,118.00

The sun represents the most abundant potential source of sustainable energy on
earth. Solar cells for producing electricity require materials that absorb the
sun's energy and convert its photons to electrons, a process called
photovoltaics. Recently, materials based on inorganic-organic halide perovskite
materials have achieved promising solar energy power conversion efficiency
approaching that of silicon solar cells, and can be made from earth-abundant
elements using lower-cost, solution based fabrication methods. However, present
organic-inorganic perovskite photovoltaic devices degrade in the presence of
moisture in air, and the organic component is one reason for this lack of
stability. The goal of this project is develop new class of perovskite solar
cell materials that are made entirely of inorganic, nanometer sized crystals.
The innovative aspect of this approach is that by fusing together different
types of nanocrystals which contain the elements cesium and chloride, the
stability of the perovskite in moisture will be much improved. As part of the
educational activities associated with this project, solar photovoltaic concepts
will be integrated into hands-on demos at Philly Materials Day in Philadelphia,
PA, as part of an effort to reinforce state education standards in STEM
teaching.

The overall goal of this research is to employ chemically-induced sintering of
colloidal nanocrystals to produce doped, polycrystalline thin films of cesium
metal halide perovskites for use in solar photovoltaic devices. Cesium lead
iodide and cesium tin iodide perovskite phase materials share many attributes
with the hybrid organic/inorganic methylammonium lead iodide perovskite
materials for solar photovoltaics. However, relative to organic metal halide
perovskite materials, the all-inorganic cesium perovskites are both less
volatile and less chemically reactive, but are still not stable in the presence
of atmospheric moisture. It is hypothesized that doping with chloride will
stabilize the cesium lead iodide in the perovskite form. To carry out the
chloride doping, a hetergenous-phase reaction is used to sinter solid films of
mixed cesium lead chloride and cesium lead iodide nanocrystals. By this
approach, non-equilibrium, mixed nanocrystal thin films can be synthesized. This
nanocrystal-based approach also makes it possible to follow the progress and
products of the synthesis reactions with in-situ, temperature-dependent
absorption spectroscopy to detect both mixing and phase-separation at
microscopic levels, allowing for elucidation of kinetically vs.
thermodynamically controlling processes. The analytical approaches proposed here
present an opportunity to mechanistically understand the intrinsic miscibility
of two dissimilar halide perovskite phases to promote the overall phase
stability of mixed crystal perovskite thin films.