* 1604170
* Novel Polymer Adsorbents for Selective Peptide and Small Protein Separations from Blood
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2020
* Roberto Guzman, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 05/31/2020
* USD 317,733.00

Proposal Number: 1604170, Guzman&lt;br/&gt;Novel Adsorbents for Selective
Peptide and Small Protein Separations from Blood &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Small
biomolecules or biomarkers from human blood or other biological fluids such as
urine are usually found in trace amounts. Their identification and purification
is in general hindered by the high concentration of human albumin and other
proteins found in blood and biological fluids. The effective recovery and
identification of these biomolecules from complex biological mixtures has been
until now a considerable challenge. The methods developed in this research will
allow the effective isolation of bioactive peptides, hormones, and biomarkers
that can be used in biomedical areas. This research will enable medical
applications that isolate and remove toxins from biological fluids and then
identify biomarkers for early cancer detection. In this research, selective
adsorbents with polymers that do not allow the adsorption of large proteins will
be synthesized. The adsorbents will be modified with chemical groups that will
permit only the selective adsorption, from complex mixtures of targeted
bioactive peptides, hormones and biomarkers that are found only at low
concentrations. The technology will be tested in samples from biological fluids
such as blood, urine and saliva. Studies will be conducted to obtain higher
purification rates for targeted biomolecules. This will translate into lower
operation costs in the development and discovery of new biomarkers and in the
detoxification and cleaning of human blood. This project will be
interdisciplinary in nature, the engineering, biology, and chemical knowledge
used and gained in this research will be of interest to many disciplines. This
program will involve undergraduate and graduate students from different
disciplines with interest in chemistry, molecular biology, medicine, material
sciences and chemical engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite many efforts to
develop efficient protein purification techniques, the isolation of peptides and
small proteins on a larger than analytical scale remains a significant
challenge. There is currently no similar separation product commercially
available. The primary objective of this research will be the development and
characterization of a chromatographic adsorbent that allows separation of
peptides and biomolecules by simultaneous specific adsorption, and size
exclusion using polysaccharide matrices modified with permeation control
polymers. This will be accomplished by grafting in chromatographic matrices two
different heterogeneous ligands, one, a polymer such as polyethylene glycol that
permits the permeation of only certain molecular size range compounds, and a
second one, an affinity ligand such as a chelating agent or an ion exchange
group that preferentially binds target biomolecules of that specific molecular
size range that could cross the restricted polymer barrier. This method will
eliminate competition for adsorptive sites on the matrix surface, between large
and small molecules, thus increasing adsorption rate and capacity and effective
separations and purifications of desired biomolecules. To effectively
characterize the properties of these new matrices, systematic dual surface
synthesis functionalization protocols will be developed using polyethylene
glycol of different sizes and densities as the permeating polymer and chelating
and ion exchange groups as affinity ligands.