* 1604605
* SusChEM: Investigation of a Core-Shell Redox Catalyst Platform for Oxidative Dehydrogenation of Ethane
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* H. Henry Lamb, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 07/31/2021
* USD 554,153.00

The project will investigate the oxidative dehydrogenation (ODH) of ethane to
produce ethylene - a high volume chemical intermediate. A novel approach is
employed that utilizes a core-shell catalyst design in combination with a
chemical looping redox cycle to achieve ODH without direct feed of oxygen. The
combined approach potentially eliminates a costly and energy-intensive process
for separating oxygen from air, while also reducing carbon emissions. The work
will provide multi-disciplinary educational opportunities for graduate and
undergraduate students, as well as outreach activities to high school students
and teachers for stimulating interest in STEM careers.

The core-shell redox catalyst is both an active catalyst and an effective
lattice oxygen ion donor for ethane ODH in a chemical-looping scheme. The work
plan tests three key hypotheses: 1) Chemically and structurally compatible
primary (cobalt/iron) oxides and perovskites can be assembled into a stable
core-shell arrangement for ethane ODH under a cyclic redox mode; 2) The surface
properties of the core-shell redox catalyst can be tailored by tuning the metal
cation oxidation state and defect structure of the mixed ionic-electronic
conductor (MIEC) shell, rendering a highly effective catalyst for ethane ODH in
the absence of gaseous oxidants; 3) Ethane ODH reaction occurs primarily on the
perovskite surface via homolytic C-H bond cleavage through a modified Mars-van
Krevelen mechanism. To test these hypotheses, phase-compatible core and shell
materials will be identified and then assembled into core-shell particles. The
effects of perovskite A-site and B-site substitutions on ODH activity and
selectivity will be investigated and correlated to the defect structure and
cation oxidation state of the shell material. Kinetic and mechanistic aspects
will be investigated over pellets and thin films replicating the core-shell and
shell structures using in-situ Raman and FT-IR/DRIFTS, a molecular beam reactor
coupled with an X-ray photoelectron spectrometer, and pulse isotope studies. The
studies will potentially result in fundamentally new materials and schemes that
can significantly improve the efficiency for ethylene production from natural
gas while reducing emissions.