* 1604163
* Numerical and Experimental Study of the Electrohydrodynamic Atomization of Highly Conducting Liquids, Including Dissipation Effects
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Manuel Gamero, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 08/31/2019
* USD 180,208.00

PI: Gamero, Manuel&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1604163&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of the proposed research is to advance theoretical understanding of the
fluid dynamics involved in the process known as electrospraying. In this
process, often utilized for the manufacturing of well-controlled nanodrops or
nanofibers, highly conducting fluids pass through a cone-jet orifice. The
proposed research is motivated by recent experimental data showing that energy
dissipation is important in electrosprays of highly conducting fluids,
especially when nanoscale drops are formed. Manufacturing and nanotechnology
have been both identified as areas of National need. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of this project is to obtain a fundamental understanding of the
electrospraying of highly conducting liquids in the cone-jet mode, with the
novel inclusion of thermal effects. The importance of cone-jets of highly
conductivity liquids resides in its unique ability for generating uniform sprays
of nanodroplets, which are of great interest in manufacturing, spacecraft
propulsion and hypervelocity impact research. Although electrospraying in the
cone-jet mode has been analyzed on the bases of the leaky dielectric model,
recent experimental work has demonstrated that energy dissipation is significant
in the highly conductivity, nanometric regime, making it necessary to supplement
the mechanical leaky dielectric model with an equation of conservation of energy
to resolve the temperature field. Accounting for the actual variation of
temperature is important because of the strong temperature dependence of key
parameters like viscosity, electrical conductivity, and surface tension. This
project will formulate and numerically solve a 2-D, axisymmetric
electrohydrodynamic model of the transition region of cone-jets that retains
thermal effects, and measure cone-jet characteristics (including the I(Q) law,
and the dissipation of energy) with the goal of validating the model. The
experimental measurements, in particular the measurement of energy dissipation,
must be done in a vacuum environment using a combination of time of flight and
retarding potential analyzers. The project includes two broader impact
components: fundamental research while promoting teaching, training and
learning; and promoting the participation of underrepresented groups. The
proposed research will be infused into middle and high school students through:
a) a collaboration with the local K-12 school district including the development
of activities such as laboratory open-houses and occasional lectures on physics
and technological applications associated with the proposed research; and b)
summer internships for high school students to work on the NSF project.