* 1604857
* Base Stable Bipolar Membranes with Electronically Conductive Interlayers for Environmental Applications
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Dominic Gervasio, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 08/31/2019
* USD 232,075.00

1604857&lt;br/&gt;Farrell&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Membrane systems are gaining in
there applicability to many environmental engineering science solutions. The
goal of this research is to develop bipolar membranes suitable for use in
environmental applications. Bipolar membranes are a technological marvel and
have p-n junctions similar to those in transistors. This process will remove
salt from the water and will eliminate the use of acids and bases for ion
exchange regeneration, thereby eliminating a major source of salts in public
water supplies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although bipolar membranes have been
commercially available for more than 20 years, they have not gained widespread
usage due to the limitations of commercially available membranes. Commercially
available bipolar membranes are not well-suited for environmental applications,
and can be improved by increasing their stability in high pH solutions and
decreasing the voltage required for water splitting at low current densities.
Membranes developed for alkaline fuel cells have shown exceptional stability at
high pH values and may be suitable for producing bipolar membranes for
environmental applications. Replacing the catalyst layer with an electrically
conductive interlayer in the center of a bipolar membrane may decrease the width
of the p-n junction and decrease the water splitting voltage at low current
densities. This research will investigate the use of highly stable poly(biphenyl
alkylene) anion exchange membranes and electrically conductive interlayers for
use in bipolar membranes. With only 1 volt of applied polarization, bipolar
membranes can split water into H+ and OH- ions at rates that are more than 7
orders of magnitude greater than the rate in bulk water. Despite their
commercial availability since 1977, bipolar membranes have not attained
widespread industrial use. Bipolar membranes have been studied at the laboratory
and pilot scale for a wide variety of applications, including: production of
mineral acids from salt solutions, recovery of organic acids from fermentation
broths, pH control in biochemical processes, recovery and purification of
pharmaceuticals, de-acidification of fruit juices, and energy storage and
conversion. Two impediments to greater use of bipolar membranes are the low
stability of strong-base anion exchange membranes under alkaline conditions and
that commercially available membranes are not optimized for the requirements of
many potential applications. The PIs hypothesize that the base stability of the
anion exchange component of bipolar membranes can be improved using alkaline
stable hydroxide conducting membranes developed for use in alkaline fuel cells.
Additionally, we propose that a new type of bipolar membranes with an
electronically conductive interlayer region will be useful in a variety of
industrial applications where commercially available membranes are ill-suited.
The research proposed here will develop alkaline stable bipolar membranes with
electronically conducting interlayer regions that are suitable for use in water
treatment applications. Aside from the scientific impact of this research will
be the production of better bipolar membranes that will be useful in a wide
variety of applications. The area where bipolar membranes can make the biggest
impact is in water treatment. Bipolar membrane electrodialysis can be used to
both desalinate water and to provide the acid and bases that are commonly used
in water treatment applications, such as: ion exchange regeneration,
coagulation, scale inhibition, decarbonation and pellet softening. Eliminating
the use of acids and bases in water treatment will alleviate the problem of salt
accumulation in groundwater and other public drinking water supplies in arid
regions. The project will support the training and development of one doctoral
student and several undergraduate students. In addition, post-doctoral scholars
from Mexico supported by the CONACyT program will be integrated in this
research. Finally, an education and diversity plan will focus on recruiting
students from under-represented groups and integration of research results into
the Fundamentals of Electrochemistry Class that is currently being taught.