* 1604630
* SusChEM: Co-firing Biomass and Coal under Pressurized Oxy-fired Combustion Conditions
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2022
* Eric Eddings, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 06/30/2022
* USD 537,078.00

1604630 &lt;br/&gt;Eddings, Eric G.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The use of biomass as a
co-firing fuel with coal is a viable option for reducing net CO2 production from
coal-fired power generation. Oxy-combustion is also considered a potential near-
term option for enhancing carbon capture and storage (CCS), by producing a high
concentration CO2 stream that can be more readily recovered due to combustion of
fuels using oxygen and recycled flue gas (primarily CO2). Circulating fluidized-
bed (CFB) boilers are well-suited for utilizing low- and high-quality coals, and
can adapt to a wide range of biomass feedstocks. Pulverized-coal (PC) boilers
represent the most widespread type of coal-fired combustion system used for
power generation, and have been the subject of many biomass co-firing
demonstrations. In addition, the use of oxy-combustion at high pressures allows
for improved thermodynamic efficiencies for power generation with CCS, as well
as increased partial pressure of CO2 to facilitate CCS. Thus, the integration of
these various technologies provides a great opportunity to address the pressing
need of greenhouse gas control. The University of Utah, Zhejiang University and
the University of Wyoming have considerable research experience, in both
pulverized-coal (PC) and circulating fluidized-bed (CFB) systems, to investigate
fundamental aspects related to the integration of oxy-fired combustion with co-
firing of biomass and coal under high-pressure operation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will utilize bench-scale high-pressure
reactors to perform research under both CFB and PC-fired combustion conditions.
The project focuses on fundamental investigations of 2 key research areas that
must be addressed before widespread adoption of biomass/coal co-firing in high-
pressure, oxy-fuel PC and CFB combustors can be realized. These areas are: 1)
fundamental characteristics of biomass/coal co-pyrolysis and co-combustion under
pressurized oxy-fuel conditions, and 2) mineral matter transformations during
pressurized oxy-fuel co-firing of coal and biomass. The work represents the
nexus of 3 different technologies: coal/biomass co-firing, oxy-fuel combustion
and high-pressure combustion. While there have been some studies published on
each of these technologies, or combinations of two of them, there is no
fundamental information in the literature on the combination of all 3
technologies. This project will address this scientific void through a detailed
investigation of these combined technologies for both PC-fired and CFB
combustion scenarios. The research will lay a foundation for the expansion of
biomass utilization in power generation, particularly under high-efficiency
conditions, which would make a significant contribution to reductions in the
world's greenhouse gas emissions. Since China is currently a world leader in the
implementation of CFB technology for electric power generation, and is also one
of the world leaders in the number of new PC-fired power generation systems
being constructed each year, their participation will provide a potential
pathway for commercial adoption of the proposed technologies