* 1604820
* An overlooked source of N-nitrosamine precursors: Examining the role of biofilm in chloraminated drinking water distribution systems
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Julian Fairey, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 07/31/2020
* USD 331,806.00

Disinfection by-products are chemicals which are formed during drinking water
treatment and are usually associated with the process of disinfection.
Disinfection by-products have been a major focus of research in the US and
around the world for the past 40 years. This research project is significant
because it will demonstrate that biofilms which coat the water distribution
pipes are an important source of a particular class of disinfection by products
known as N-nitrosamines. This family of disinfection by products, at least some
of them, are known human carcinogens. A novel N-nitrosamine formation pathway
will be investigated involving a previously unidentified intermediates in water
treatment systems which use chloramine disinfection. Further, strategies to
control biofilm growth and facilitate biofilm detachment will be systematically
evaluated to determine the conditions required to achieve bacterial stable
water, while controlling formation of N-nitrosamines.

The research objective of this proposal is to test the hypothesis that biofilm
extracellular polymeric substances (biofilms) in chloraminated drinking water
distribution systems are important N-nitrosamine precursors. N-nitrosamines are
a highly toxic, non-halogenated group of disinfection by-products formed
primarily in drinking water distribution systems which use chloramine, a common
secondary disinfectant used to curb formation of regulated disinfection by
products. A recent study using EPA Method 521, which can quantitatively
determine seven different N-nitrosamines, were shown to comprise only
approximately 5% of the total N-nitrosamines formed in drinking water
distribution systems. This result implies that other important N-nitrosamines
may have been overlooked. Biofilm extracellular polymeric substances contains
functional groups such as secondary amines, known to react with chloramines to
form N-nitrosodimethylamine (NDMA), the most prevalent of the EPA Method 521
species. This study will utilize a total N-nitrosamines assay to assess the
contribution of biofilm-derived materials to the overall precursor pool.
Preliminary data demonstrate that chloramination of exopolysaccharide isolates
yielded total N-nitrosamines with a direct dose-response relationship. Pure and
mixed culture biofilms, relevant to drinking water distribution systems, will be
characterized using a combination of traditional methodologies and next
generation sequencing methodology. These systems will then be chloraminated to
elucidate the role of extracellular polymeric substances in the formation of an
expanded list of formation products in the N-nitrosamine family. The proposed
research will evaluate the following three objectives: 1.) Characterize biofilm
dynamics in simulated drinking water distribution systems. Pure and mixed
culture biofilm will be grown in batch and annular reactors, respectively. The
biofilm EPS composition (e.g., exopolysaccharides and extra-cellular proteins)
and bacteria species will be characterized. 2.) Measure N-nitrosamine yields
from chloramination of biofilm-derived materials and precursor isolates.
Attached and detached pure and mixed culture biofilm will be chloraminated to
assess the formation of the EPA Method 521 species and total N-nitrosamines.
Biofilm isolates and known NDMA precursors will be assessed similarly and a
series of abiotic experiments will be completed to help reveal the underlying
reaction mechanism. 3.) Assess the impact of free chlorine on biofilm
characteristics and formation of N-nitrosamines. Free chlorine burns will be
simulated in biofilm annular reactors at different disinfectant concentrations,
durations, and temperatures. Biofilm characteristics and N-nitrosamine
precursors will be assessed before, during, and after the free chlorine
addition. This research marks the first investigation into the role of biofilm,
ubiquitous in all drinking water distribution systems, as N-nitrosamine
precursors. Results from this study will form a scientific basis to justify a
nationwide occurrence survey of total N-nitrosamines in chloraminated drinking
water distribution systems. The objective of the education and outreach plan is
to engage graduate students and high-performing engineering undergraduates from
underrepresented groups in the research activities, create scientifically
accurate animations of the elucidated reaction mechanisms, and disseminate the
research findings to a wide range of stakeholders.