* 1604272
* Exploiting Vapor Pressure Gradients to Suppress In-Plane Frost Growth
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2019
* Pengtao Yue, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Ying Sun
* 07/31/2019
* USD 328,298.00

1604272&lt;br/&gt;Boreyko, Jonathan B.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ice formation can
heavily compromise the mechanical integrity and energy efficiency of systems
such as aircraft, marine structures, power grids, wind turbines, and HVAC
systems. The economic cost of ice formation amounts to billions of dollars every
year. Active methods of removing ice include spraying chemicals or using
electric heating, but such techniques are environmentally and energetically
costly. Surfaces that could, by themselves, suppress the growth of ice for many
hours or even days would therefore be highly advantageous, but to date, no such
surface exists. This proposal seeks to develop smart surfaces that suppress the
growth of ice without any mechanical or electrical intervention, leaving the
majority of the surface dry even under chilled and humid conditions. The
proposed surface will have miniscule structures that will guide the deposition
of water in such a way as to reduce ice formation. System optimization will be
obtained by modeling the thermodynamics and fluid dynamics of vapor transfer in
vapor-liquid-ice multiphase systems, which could also shed fundamental insight
on the behavior of mixed-phase clouds. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of
this proposal is to gain a fundamental understanding of the localized pressure
gradients and resulting source-sink interactions between ice, water, and water
vapor and to exploit this knowledge to passively suppress the in-plane growth of
frost. Using a combination of experimental, theoretical, and computational
techniques, the following research tasks are proposed: (1) Characterizing Inter-
Droplet Frost Growth: In-plane and out-of-plane inter-droplet ice bridging
between a frozen droplet and supercooled liquid droplet will be characterized
using a custom-built humidity chamber and hydrophobic surfaces bonded to Peltier
stages. The resulting data will be correlated with an evolving-boundary
computational model. (2) Creating a Dry Zone around Ice: When a water droplet is
frozen before surrounding condensate has a chance to grow appreciably, a stable
dry zone forms between the ice droplet and the condensation. An isolated droplet
will be frozen just above the dew point and then the humidity will be raised to
observe and model the resulting dry zone. (3) Suppression of In-Plane Frost
Growth: With the knowledge gained from the previous two tasks, a controlled
array of microscopic stripes of ice will be formed on a chemically and/or
physically patterned surface, such that the dry zone about each stripe of ice
will overlap to keep the vast majority of the surface dry from condensate and
frost. A fuller understanding of inter-droplet evaporation and ice bridging in
mixed-phase water systems will clarify the thermodynamics and fluid dynamics of
frost growth on surfaces and give experimental insight to the Wegener-Bergeron-
Findeisen process of glaciation in mixed-phase clouds. Furthermore, the proposed
research will map out the critical phase space where the vapor gradients result
in ice bridging versus dry zones.