* 1604360
* Developing Active Artificial Hair Cell Sensors Inspired by the Cochlear Amplifier
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2016,03/31/2020
* Pablo Tarazaga, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 03/31/2020
* USD 333,680.00

PI: Tarazaga, Pablo &lt;br/&gt;Proposal No: 1604360 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research will develop a new approach for amplification of sound with
potential applications to hearing impaired. The device will sense incident sound
and amplify it in a new way such that lower threshold is detected, sharper
frequency sensitivity and superior dynamic range are also expected.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of proposed research program is to develop
piezoelectric-based, active artificial hair cells (AHCs) capable of mimicking
the important aspects of nonlinear cochlear amplifier. They will possess a lower
threshold of detection, sharper frequency sensitivity, and larger dynamic range
than a traditional, passive transducer. The proposed work will examine a variety
of feedback control schemes to achieve a cochlea-like response from
piezoelectric-based, cantilever beam sensors. The work will explore using self-
sensing methods to transition from lab experiments to practical sensors.
Scalability analysis is expected to guide the design and fabrication of
miniaturized active AHCs at scales suitable for use in practical applications.
An array of active sensing elements for transducing multiple frequency signals
will be built and tested. These sensors could also serve as a tool for auditory
researchers to gain insight into a healthy cochlea. While the importance and
general behavior of the cochlear amplifier is well established, there are
unanswered questions over how this amplification arises. Various control laws
can be tested on artificial hair cells to test different theories and develop
insights into the functioning of biological cochlea. It is anticipated that this
work will help establish improved cochlear implants, thereby improving the
quality of life of over 30 million Americans who suffer from permanent hearing
loss. Potentially the active artificial hair cells could lead to new cochlear
prosthesis and restore hearing function. This research program will offer an
excellent learning and education for underrepresented undergraduate students.