* 1604984
* Accelerating Multimetallic Catalyst Design for Electrochemical CO2 Reduction using Quantum Chemical Modeling and Machine Learning
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Hongliang Xin, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 06/30/2020
* USD 398,942.00

1604984&lt;br/&gt;Xin, Hongliang&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work is a
computational study aimed at identifying novel multimetallic nanomaterials for
the efficient electrochemical conversion of carbon dioxide (CO2) to value-added
chemicals and fuels. This has the dual benefit of reducing the emissions of the
greenhouse gas CO2 and moving closer to a sustainable energy future based on a
closed loop carbon cycle fueled by a combination of solar energy and
electrochemical conversion processes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prior research has
demonstrated that copper (Cu) nanocubes exhibit remarkable selectivity towards
carbon-carbon bond formation, but with electrical efficiency too low to be
commercially viable. The study is based on the hypothesis that multimetallic
nanocubes consisting of precisely mixed, low-cost metals can convert CO2 to
useful chemicals and fuels at higher efficiency and selectivity than the Cu
nanocubes alone. The researchers bring together expertise in density functional
theory calculations and ab initio molecular dynamics - aided by advanced
machine-learning algorithms - to predict materials combinations that lower the
over-potential for electrochemical reduction of CO2 to ethylene and ethanol. The
research is based on a three-step approach that first unravels the active site
and reaction mechanism of CO2 reduction on Cu nanocubes, then creates predictive
models linking nanoparticle composition and structure to the surface reactivity
by machine-learning models, and lastly, develops an integrated framework for
accelerating catalyst discovery. The broader impact of the work will be enhanced
through educational outreach activities and open-source access to the tools
developed during the course of the project.