* 1604971
* Operando Electron Microscopy of Nanoparticle Surfaces and Interfaces During Catalysis
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2021
* Peter Crozier, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 07/31/2021
* USD 399,877.00

The project advances transmission electron microscopy as a tool for elucidating
the structure of supported metal catalysts under reaction conditions. Catalysts
consisting of metal nanoparticles on oxide supports often undergo changes in
structure and composition in reactive gas environments that are difficult to
infer using indirect methods, thus relegating catalyst design to trial-and-error
approaches. The project will exploit new developments in the field of in situ
aberration corrected transmission electron microscopy, which allows catalytic
conversions to be measured simultaneously with atomic resolution observations of
catalyst structure, thereby opening the door to the design of more efficient
catalysts for a broad range of commercially important catalytic
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A catalyst sample holder has been developed that
allows high-resolution electron microscopy to be conducted in the presence of
flowing gas mixtures of the types used in commercially important reactions,
especially those relevant to low-temperature hydrogen fuel cells. The
simultaneous measurement of gas composition (via both a residual gas analyzer
and electron energy loss measurements in the microscope) and associated imaging
of catalyst structures, under both reactive and non-reactive conditions, will
allow the construction of a database of catalyst images that can be related to
catalyst activity. Emphasis will be placed on reactions such as CO oxidation,
water-gas shift, and CO preferential oxidation on Cu or Pt nanoparticles
supported on cerium dioxide. Those systems are believed to involve concerted
reactions at the nanoparticle-support interface; hence, special attention will
be directed to obtaining images of the structural motifs associated with the
interfacial regions. For comparison, corresponding experiments will be run on
the same metal particles loaded on non-interactive supports. It is anticipated
that the database of images will provide valuable information to guide the
development of more accurate models of catalyst structures under working
catalyst conditions, improved computational models of catalytic sites and
associated reaction mechanisms, and information needed to predict more active
metal-support combinations. The project will also involve a comprehensive set of
educational and outreach efforts designed to excite students at all levels in
scientific opportunities associated with electron microscopy.