* 1604886
* SusChEM: Collaborative Research: Development of Multifunctional Reactive Electrochemical Membranes for Biomass Recovery with Fouling Reduction, Water Reuse, and Cell Pretreatment
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Danmeng Shuai, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 08/31/2020
* USD 166,000.00

CBET 1603609/1604776/1604886 Zhang, W.; Chaplin, B; Shuai, D.&lt;br/&gt;Title:
Multifunctional Electroreactive Membranes for Efficient Biomass
Separations&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative research project, involving
the New Jersey Institute of Technology, University of Illinois-Chicago, and
George Washington University, will address a key research issue to enable the
production of fuels and chemical products from biomass resources such as algae.
Alga microorganisms are cultivated in fermenters, often in dilute concentration
in an aqueous phase. Dewatering of the biomass or algae and recycle and reuse of
the cleaned-up water are key fundamental research issues that impact commercial
competitiveness. The PIs will research and design efficient, scalable, and
multifunctional reactive electrochemical membranes (REMs) to harvest value-added
products derived from the biomass (e.g., biofuels and specialty chemicals) in a
sustainable manner. Biomass separation using membrane filtration is currently
characterized by high operational cost due to severe membrane fouling and the
need for frequent backwashing to remove the foulants. The proposed research will
use the hybrid membranes to mitigate membrane fouling and to remove the toxic
inhibitors that will promote water reuse. The research outcomes will advance the
fundamental science and engineering of biomass separations, and potentially lead
to critical, transformative technologies for biomass and food processing,
drinking water treatment, and biomolecule purification in the pharmaceutical
industries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This principal investigators will use algae as
a model biomass organism; and will focus on characterizing membrane fouling,
water reuse for algae regrowth, and electrochemical pre-treatment of algal
cells. Research tasks will include (1) synthesis and characterization of a suite
of tailored monolithic or nanofibrous REMs for algal recovery; (2) evaluation of
algae separation efficiency, permeate water treatment, and anti-fouling
properties of REMs; (3) elucidation of algae cell disruption efficiency and the
underlying mechanisms of electrochemical oxidation using microfluidic
experiments; and (4) experimental and theoretical assessment of membrane fouling
and regeneration strategies. The fundamental knowledge generated by this project
will lead to transformative solutions that address the grand challenges at the
energy-water nexus. First, the research will provide fundamental guidelines to
the design of REMs with excellent filtration performance, flexible design, and
durability of operation. Secondly, the research will promote water and nutrient
reuse in waste streams or cultivation media, which reduces the water and energy
footprints of renewable energy production. Finally, the project will train and
mentor at least three Ph.D. students and a large number of undergraduate and
senior high school students that will be recruited from underrepresented groups
in STEM at the three collaborating institutions for research experiences.