* 1604119
* Nano-Bio Interactions at the Surface of Pulmonary Surfactant Films
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Yi Zuo, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 08/31/2021
* USD 300,771.00

PI: Zuo, Yi #1604119 The rapid development of nanotechnology and a widespread
proliferation of nano-enabled consumer products post an increasing concern of
the potential adverse environment, health, and safety (EHS) impacts of
nanoparticles (NPs), which feature a characteristic size less than 100 nm. Most
NPs are lightweight and respirable. Once inhaled, NPs can penetrate into the
lungs and interfere with the respiratory function. The entire surface of the
lungs is lined with a lipid-protein pulmonary surfactant (PS) film which serves
an important physiological function of host defense and surface tension
reduction. Interactions between inhaled NPs and the PS film hence represent the
initial nano-bio phenomena in the lungs. Such interactions determine the fate of
the inhaled NPs and their potential therapeutic or toxicological effects. This
proposal will investigate the detailed mechanism of NP-PS interactions using
novel experimental and computational techniques developed in the PI's
laboratory. These techniques allow high-fidelity simulations of air pollution
scenarios in which NPs are inhaled and deposited at the surface of the PS film.
Using these model systems, potential environmental hazards of NPs and nano-
enabled products, such as NP-containing sprays and paints, will be thoroughly
evaluated. The PI will specifically focus on studying the potential risk of
respirable NPs for infants and children whose fragile respiratory system makes
them more vulnerable to NP exposure than adults. The proposed study will help
provide a useful metric for regulating and overseeing commercial applications of
nanotechnology towards a safer and sustainable development.

The research goal of this proposal is to study the detailed biophysicochemical
mechanisms by which airborne engineered nanoparticles (NPs) interact with
natural pulmonary surfactant (PS). This research is highly novel due to the
following two main perspectives. First, NP-PS interactions will be studied using
a combined approach of multiscale in vitro and in silico simulations. The in
vitro study relies on biophysical simulations using a novel experimental
methodology recently developed in the PI's laboratory. With this in vitro model,
nano-bio interactions at the PS film will be mimicked with fully controlled NP
aerosol dosimetry and under physiologically relevant respiratory conditions. The
in silico study relies on high-fidelity molecular dynamics simulations which
allow probing the detailed molecular mechanism of NP translocation across the PS
film. Second, the PI will carry out the first comprehensive study of the
biomolecular corona bound to NPs in contact with lung fluids, i.e., the so-
called PS biomolecular corona. With correlated high-precision mass spectrometry
and molecular dynamics simulations, the proposed project will reveal the
biochemical composition and biophysical conformation of the PS biomolecular
corona with unprecedented details. This research is expected to significantly
advance current understanding of nano-bio interactions in the respiratory system
and to provide novel insight into the EHS impacts of nanotechnology.

The broader impacts of this proposal are rich and multifarious. In vitro and in
silico simulations developed in this proposal are cost-effective means of
exploring the EHS impacts of nanotechnology. The proposed study will complement
the current nanotoxicological knowledge obtained from cell culture and animal-
models. The biophysicochemical mechanism revealed by this study has clear
transformative values for designing NP-based pulmonary drug delivery and for
better understanding the pathophysiology of respiratory diseases related to air
pollution and particle insult. In collaboration with local healthcare providers,
the PI is engaged in activities of increasing the public awareness of the
potential risk of respirable NPs for infants and children. Given the unique
location of the University of Hawaii, the PI is dedicated to promoting
participation of Native Hawaiians, Pacific Islanders, and students from other
underrepresented groups and low-income families. The PI will also develop
undergraduate and graduate engineering curricula with interdisciplinary
components, and help enhance the infrastructure for research and education.