* 1604211
* Exploring Receptor-mediated Endocytosis of Bioparticles through Multiscale Modeling
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2020
* Jin Liu, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 05/31/2020
* USD 309,941.00

PI: Liu, Jin&lt;br/&gt;Propsal #: 1604211&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Internalization
of bioparticles bound to a cell's surface (endocytosis), such as viruses and
drug carriers, through receptor-mediated endocytosis (RME) plays essential roles
in fundamental understanding of viral infections and targeted drug deliveries.
RME of bioparticles is a highly complex and multiscale process that is difficult
to investigate through scale-specific techniques. The goal of this three-year
project is to establish an interdisciplinary research program in investigating
RME of bioparticles through multiscale modeling and simulations. Model
simulations will be used 1) to make energy calculations, 2) to investigate the
effects of particle size/shape, ligand density/type and molecular interactions
on the overall process and 3) to explore applications in brain drug delivery
across the blood-brain barrier and herpes simplex virus prevention. Findings
will have broad scientific and technological impact in the fields of virus
infection and intracellular/transcelluar targeted drug delivery using
nanocarriers, nutrition uptake, contrast-based imaging and cancer
progression/metastasis. Results may lead to a rational design and engineering
for effective drug delivery and novel strategies for viral intervention and
inhibition. Educational impact is advanced through the unique interdisciplinary
training students will receive and opportunities provided for K-12 via summer
camps, lab experiences and collaboration with a local science center. This award
is cofunded by the Mathematical Biology program in the Division of Mathematical
Sciences through the BioMaPs program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Internalization of
bioparticles, such as viruses and drug carriers, through receptor-mediated
endocytosis (RME) plays essential roles in fundamental understanding of viral
infections and intracellular/transcellular targeted drug deliveries. RME of
bioparticles is a highly complex and multiscale process, which is difficult to
investigate through scale-specific techniques (both experimentally and
numerically). The goal of this three-year project is to establish an
interdisciplinary research program in investigating RME of bioparticles through
multiscale modeling and simulations. The research objectives are: 1) to develop
a 3D mesoscale stochastic model for binding and internalization of bioparticles,
the mesoscopic model is a combination of a stochastic binding model with a
mesoscopic membrane model based on the discretization of Helfrich Hamiltonian on
a curvilinear space using Monte Carlo method; 2) to implement coarse-grained
molecular dynamics simulations to investigate the molecular events in RME and
then develop the multiscale model by coupling the atomistic simulations with the
mesoscopic model through sequential and concurrent methods; and 3) to perform
free energy calculations using our multiscale model and investigate the effects
of particle size/shape, ligand density/type, as well as the molecular
interactions on the overall process of RME, and explore the applications in
brain drug delivery across blood-brain barrier and herpes simplex virus
prevention. The multiscale model will provide a unified and coherent description
of the process by accounting for effects from both mesoscopic and atomistic
effects. The simulations will bring critical, new insight and a deeper
understanding of the mechanism of RME. Innovations of the proposal include: 1)
the integration of atomistic simulations with mesoscopic model, 2) the
combination of the membrane model with the stochastic binding model that enables
exploration of endocytosis with extreme deformations and 3) the coarse-grained
force field in atomistic simulations that enables the capture of structural
(conformational) information for protein-protein interactions during RME. The
multiscale models, together with the free energy calculations, create natural
links between different functional biological scales and enables direct and
indirect correlations between modeling results and experimental data. Findings
will have broad scientific and technological impact in the fields of virus
infection and intracellular/transcelluar targeted drug delivery using
nanocarriers, nutrition uptake, contrast-based imaging and cancer
progression/metastasis and results may lead to a rational design and engineering
for effective drug delivery, and novel strategies for viral intervention and
inhibition. The students supported by the grant will have opportunities to
receive a unique interdisciplinary training across the mechanical engineering
and bioengineering, learn the cutting-edge multiscale numerical modeling
techniques, which enable them to become leaders in the bio/nanotechnology field.
The involvement of under-represented minority students will be coordinated with
existing LSAMP and SWE programs. The findings from the proposed research will be
broadly disseminated to K-12 students through outreach activities in WSU and
collaboration with local science center, including participation in summer camps
and creation of a 3D visualization platform for interactive exploration and
modeling of biomolecular events with atomic-scale resolution.