* 1604536
* GOALI: Single droplet level understanding of phase inversion emulsification to enable continuous processing
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2021
* Chieh-Min Cheng, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 06/30/2021
* USD 338,229.00

CBET - 1604536&lt;br/&gt;PI: Lee, Daeyeon&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Emulsions are
composed of liquid drops that are suspended in an immiscible liquid, such as oil
drops in water. The drops are the dispersed phase, and the immiscible liquid is
the continuous phase. Emulsions are used in the manufacture of many products,
including foodstuffs, nutrients, drugs, and pesticides. Phase inversion
emulsification (PIE) is a process for generating a new emulsion by inverting the
phases of an existing emulsion. PIE is especially useful when it is difficult to
generate the desired emulsion by other methods. For example, Xerox uses PIE to
manufacture latex particles, which are used to produce toners for printing and
photocopying. This GOALI project, which is a collaborative effort between the
University of Pennsylvania and Xerox, will explore a variation on PIE called
flow-induced PIE. In flow-induced PIE, phase inversion takes place by flowing an
existing emulsion through microchannels that contain abrupt variations in their
cross-sections, such as constrictions or expansions. Under proper conditions, an
emulsion of oil drops in water flowing through the channel is inverted into an
emulsion of water drops in oil. Experiments will be designed to explore effects
of channel geometry, flow rates, wettability of the channel surface, and
composition of the liquid phases on the phase inversion process. The flow-
induced PIE process will allow products to be manufactured in a continuous
process with reduced energy consumption, higher efficiency, and reduced
environmental impact. The project will provide opportunities for students at
various academic levels to participate in research. Students from
underrepresented groups will be encouraged to participate through several
programs at Penn, including the Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority
Participation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A series of experiments will be conducted to
determine effects of initial emulsion morphology and chemistry as well as
channel geometry on the mechanism and efficiency of flow-induced PIE. The effect
of surface wettability of the channels on the phase inversion process will be
determined. Hydrodynamic parameters such as shear and extensional deformation in
the microchannels will also be examined. The use of a microfluidic platform will
enable the formation of model emulsions with controlled properties and the
direct observation of PIE during flow. Emulsion droplets with precisely
controlled size, size distribution and interfacial chemistry will be used to
understand effects of emulsion morphology and chemistry on flow-induced PIE.
Alternative arrangements that can promote flow-induced PIE will also be
explored, including flow through a microfluidic device containing pillar arrays,
which serves as a model porous medium.