* 1604475
* Collaborative Research: Ultrahigh-Resolution Analyses of Organic Constituents in Shale Well Fluids and their Environmental Persistence
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Michael Gonsior, University of Maryland Center for Environmental Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 06/30/2020
* USD 232,967.00

1604475 / 1604432&lt;br/&gt;Gonsior / Mouser&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Horizontal
drilling coupled to hydraulic fracturing well completion techniques has opened
up vast shale gas resources in the US and has become increasingly important as
an energy source both in the US and globally. In 2012, shale gas was the largest
source of US natural gas, contributing 9.7 trillion cubic feet of natural gas,
40 % of the total natural gas production; however, this technique requires the
use of large volumes of water combined with a variable combination of chemical
additives, each composed of numerous constituents that are primarily organic-
based. This project focuses on the characterization of fracking fluids and their
potential to adversely impact both surface and ground
water.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will be the first to determine a detailed
molecular characterization of organic matter in shale well fluids and track
carbon composition evolution during the first three years of operation at a
scientific test well site in West Virginia using ultrahigh resolution mass
spectrometry. This unique opportunity will generate a comprehensive database of
organic constituents entering an unconventional shale gas well drilled into the
Marcellus shale and returning to the surface after increasing residence time
within the formation. Additionally, the environmental fate will be assessed for
potentially hazardous organic compounds present in shale wastewaters. This study
will aid in evaluations of potential health impacts of spills during different
stages of well operation. It will further guide evaluations of wastewater
treatability and solutions for surface spill responses. The goals of the project
are: (1) To characterize in detail the molecular composition of shale gas fluids
throughout the first three years of a scientific well operation using targeted
and non-targeted analytical methods; (2) To evaluate the photochemical and
microbial degradation of organic constituents along with detailed molecular
characterization of changes including the production of metabolites; (3) To
undertake meaningful laboratory-based experiments to understand microbial
degradation pathways and to evaluate a potential increase in toxicity, and, (4)
To study the photochemical degradation of organic compounds in hydraulic
fracturing fluids. The diversity, toxicity and persistence of organic
constituents in shale wastewaters have a direct impact on communities relying on
water resources in areas being developed for unconventional shale energy.
Detailed analyses of the transformation pathways of organic chemical additives
and organics leached from shale will guide a scientifically based discussion
about the potential health impacts accidental surface spills and subsurface
contamination may have to surrounding ecosystems. Graduate and undergraduate
students will have the unique opportunity to participate in research and
training during drilling and fracturing campaigns planned at the Marcellus Shale
Energy Environmental Laboratory, located in West Virginia, over the coming
years. This will engage students in direct communication, observation, and
sampling efforts during different phases of unconventional shale gas development
through the established university-industry collaboration. Research education
will focus on a graduate student located at University of Maryland Center for
Environmental Science, Chesapeake Biological Laboratory (CBL), a graduate
student at Ohio State University as well as undergraduate internships over the
summer months (Sea Grant Maryland Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU).
The CBL Visitor Center will host displays about the importance of shale well
fluids related water issues and wastewater treatment. In partnership with the
CBL visitor center here in Solomons, Maryland, we will host a summer workshop
for 7-12th grade school students.