* 1604022
* Collaborative Research: Understanding GrIS moulin hydrology and links to ice motion
* GEO,OPP
* 01/01/2017,09/30/2022
* Timothy Dixon, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Colene Haffke
* 09/30/2022
* USD 429,113.00

The Melting of the Greenland ice sheet is not a simple issue of warmer air
temperatures melting the surface ice, which then flows into the ocean. Surface
meltwater can flow deep into the glacier through natural pipes known as moulins.
These subsurface channels not only transmit water to some outlet, where it flows
into the ocean, but may also influence the downslope sliding of the glacier
toward the ocean. To better understand the controls that govern glacier sliding,
the PI?s propose to conduct field and model studies on the Greenland ice sheet.
The PI?s will instrument a number of moulins with pressure sensors. Glacier
velocity will be measured with GPS sensors. Discharge will be monitored through
dye tracing. Simulations will be conducted to integrate the observations with a
number of simple ?conduit? models in the hope of providing a better and more
comprehensive understanding of the processes that govern glacier
sliding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Beyond the training of graduate and undergraduate
students, the PIs will work with a journalism student at the University of
Arkansas to produce a documentary about their field experience. This
collaboration provides a unique opportunity to communicate to the general
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is thought that increased channelization reduces
subglacial water pressure act to buffer the Greenland Ice Sheet (GrIS) against
large increases in ice velocity. However, few measurements of water pressure
have been made in channelized subglacial drainage systems to test this
hypothesis. The PI?s will obtain synoptic supraglacial stream discharge data,
moulin water level and ice velocity at two moulin sites along an ice flow line
in the Paakitsoq Region of the GrIS. Data will be analyzed, and used to
parameterize model experiments, to determine the degree to which: 1) local
versus regional inputs of melt water control moulin water levels; 2) changes in
effective pressure that occur along ice flow paths affect local relationships
between subglacial water pressure and ice velocity.&lt;br/&gt;