* 1604547
* GOALI: Rewiring Escherichia coli for the efficient synthesis of chondroitin polysaccharides
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2016,10/31/2022
* Oliver Yu, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 10/31/2022
* USD 482,000.00

1604547 &lt;br/&gt;Koffas, Mattheos &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is a growing
interest in developing methodologies for the robust, high-yield production of
bioengineered natural polysaccharides that can be used as nutraceuticals or
pharmaceuticals, such as chondroitin sulfate. Such methods, using recombinant
microorganisms will allow, for the first time, the production of animal-free
polysaccharides and will eliminate the risks associated with animal-derived
products that include viral infections, product inconsistencies and possible
adulteration as well as reliance on environmentally non-friendly processes. This
project is a translational and multi-disciplinary research effort with the
ultimate goal to facilitate the efficient and safe production of kilogram
quantities of non-animal sourced bioengineered chondroitin sulfate. It seeks to
unravel the role of precursor availability on the production of large molecules
and to translate this knowledge to a highly efficient production platform of
polysaccharides. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project objective is to enhance the
production levels of non-sulfated chondroitin through standard metabolic
engineering methods, stoichiometry-based modeling and metabolic pathway
balancing (specific aim 1). In specific aim 2, the investigators will
demonstrate CRISPR interference (CRISPRi) as a metabolic engineering tool,
enabling inducible knockdown and tunable repression of multiple genes
simultaneously for controlling metabolic fluxes in E. coli. In specific aim 3, a
scalable methodology will be developed for in vitro enzymatic production of USP
chondroitin sulfate A (CSA, chondroitin-4-sulfate) using chondroitin substrate
harvested from E. coli fermentation. The societal impact of the proposed project
is expected to be broad, as the importance of having a non-animal-derived
chondroitin cannot be overstated. Recombinant protein biotherapeutics have had a
revolutionary impact on healthcare. A number of both basic and applied research
areas are expected to be impacted as a result of this project, including: (i)
identification of metabolic steps that play a key role in biosynthesis of
chondroitin in E. coli; (ii) application of CRISPRi for metabolic engineering,
further facilitating its application as a synthetic biology tool, where it could
also be utilized for construction of complex gene circuits, logic gates, and
biosensors (iii) the synthesis of bioengineered chondroitin sulfate will become
reality and will pave the way for the animal-free synthesis of several other
polysaccharides of pharmaceutical importance. The proposed project will be
performed in a scientifically diverse environment with graduate students working
together with industrial investigators to perform the experimental tasks with
the aid of undergraduate students. In addition, a focused outreach effort by the
PI and co-PI will include their continued participation in the Rensselaer Summer
High School Research Program and the Scientific Research Program in Shaker High
School as well as enrollment in new outreach opportunities such as the New
Visions Math, Engineering, Technology and Science program.&lt;br/&gt;This award
by the Biotechnology and Biochemical Engineering Program of the CBET Division is
co-funded by the GOALI Program of the Division of Industrial Innovation and
Partnerships.