* 1604421
* A Multiscale Approach to Characterizing Interfacial Carbohydrate-Active Enzymes
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2016,02/28/2023
* Matthew Lang, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 02/28/2023
* USD 559,492.00

The project investigates the molecular underpinnings of how enzymes break down
insoluble cellulosic biomaterials to soluble fermentable sugars like glucose and
how to make them more efficient to enable industrial-scale biofuel production.
The results of the study will aid the development of lower-cost bioprocesses for
producing renewable fuels from cellulosic biomass while providing a broad range
of educational and outreach activities promoting training and general awareness
of the potential that biofuels offer toward a sustainable and renewable energy
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study will examine the relationship between
non-productive stalling and binding interactions of cellulases with varying
surface chemistry to crystalline cellulose surfaces with the goal of engineering
more active enzyme variants. Specific aims toward achieving this goal involve:
1) design and production of cellulase variants with non-native surface chemistry
using both cell-based and cell-free protein expression systems, 2) estimates of
the binding affinity of cellulase variants to crystalline cellulose and its
relationship to ensemble-averaged bulk cellulase specific activity, and 3)
determine the interfacially bound single-molecule surface motility for cellulase
variants and correlating single-molecule events to bulk ensemble binding and
specific activity measurements. High throughput cell-free protein expression and
combinatorial cellulose hydrolytic activity assays will be carried out to
identify improved cellulase variants. Single-molecule cellulase binding and
motility measurements will be conducted using an optical tweezers force
spectroscopy technique. Together with ensemble-averaged bulk measurements, the
study will provide new insight into both the protein surface residues and
discrete single-enzyme biomechanical steps involved in the non-productive
interfacial binding and catalytic activity of crystalline cellulose surface
bound cellulases, thereby charting a genetic engineering path that enables a
lower cost and more efficient bioconversion process for making cellulosic
biofuels. The researchers will engage students at all levels as well as high
school teachers in age-appropriate activities ranging from in-depth training in
cellulase engineering and single-molecule biophysics for graduate and
undergraduate students to demonstration programs for younger students and
generating biofuels awareness through field-trips to local energy
industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is co-funded by the Division of
Materials Research through the BioMaPs funds.