* 1604085
* Collaborative Research: Forum for Arctic Modeling and Observational Synthesis (FAMOS)--Phase 2: Focus on High and Very High Resolution
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Andrey Proshutinsky, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Anderson
* 08/31/2020
* USD 712,962.00

This award is to support a US-led international forum for the exchange of ideas,
modeling skill and knowledge on the Arctic Ocean. The goal is to improve our
understanding of oceanic and sea-ice processes and mechanisms driving Arctic
Ocean changes. Although its future focus will depend to a large degree on the
decisions of the participants as their research develops, there are three broad
areas of interest now identified: the development and analysis of modeling and
observing at high and very high spatial and temporal resolution, identification
of uncertainties and errors in models, and recommendations for improvements of
existing models. A coordinated international community approach to the
investigation of Arctic Ocean variability is the best way to assess uncertainty
in results and conclusions made by different modelers, scientific groups, or
institutions. Moreover, it ensures leveraging of research talent and
expenditures in other parts of the world. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of
this project that will have broader impacts will be is a synthesis that
integrates observational and modeling efforts toward the overall goal of
developing advanced Arctic models able to accurately simulate the past, describe
the present, and predict future Arctic conditions. One of the largest broader
impacts of the activity is educational, because the forum specifically targets
the development of young scientists participating in the project, provides
guidelines for critical analysis of the existing models, and fruitful
improvements and developments of the Arctic models by a new generation of Arctic
modelers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this award is to employ high
and very high resolution models and observations to investigate the role of sub-
grid processes in regional ocean and sea ice models of the Arctic seas. The
project will be focused on targeting important scientific problems and enhancing
collaboration and coordination among arctic marine modelers, theoreticians, and
observationalists. This work will be managed in teleconferences, virtual
workshops, newsletters, and annual meetings with one-day schools for young and
developing arctic researchers. The project will support synthesis across the
suite of Arctic models and observations by: (i) Conducting coordinated research
on modeling with resolutions resolving small scale processes (for example,
resolving eddies and internal waves); (ii) Holding scientific meetings and
schools for new investigators including virtual teleconferences; (iii) Creating
teams of modelers, theoreticians, and observationalists to work on topical
issues of Arctic sea ice and oceanic dynamics and thermodynamics; (iv)
Conducting collaboration with other similar projects focused on other aspects of
arctic/global climate (atmospheric, terrestrial, cryospheric); (v) Disseminating
findings to broader communities; and (vi) Training a new generation of ocean and
sea-ice observationalists and modelers. The most significant contributions are
likely to be results of internationally coordinated development and analysis of
modeling and observing at high and very high resolution; identification of
uncertainties and errors and causes of these errors and model discrepancies, and
recommendations for improvements of existing regional coupled ice-ocean models
and Global Climate Models, by implementing new physics for Arctic processes.