* 1604691
* SusChEM:Direct CO2 to jet fuel production in a fast growing cyanobacterium
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Nanette Boyle, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 07/31/2021
* USD 325,373.00

PI Name: Nanette R. Boyle&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
1604691&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The global demand for energy is rising, and one of
the sectors projected to see the most growth is the transportation industry.
Some of the increased demand can be replaced by electric vehicles running on
renewable electricity. However, the aviation, shipping and long-haul trucking
industries will still require liquid fuels. To address the increased demand for
liquid fuels from sustainable resources, photosynthetic bacteria will be
genetically engineered to convert carbon dioxide directly to limonene, a
hydrocarbon which can be further processed into jet fuel. Limonene is one
molecule in an important class of biologically-produced hydrocarbon molecules
called terpenoids, which have desirable properties as fuels, pharmaceuticals,
and as feedstocks for a variety of commercial chemicals. The goal of this
project is to optimize the metabolic pathways within photosynthetic bacteria to
enhance the flux of carbon dioxide into limonene production. The educational
activities associated with the project will mentor a team of college and high
school students to participate in the International Genetically Engineered
Machines (iGEM) competition, a widely known and effective program for promoting
active learning in the context of the scientific and societal aspects of the
field of molecular biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will
engineer a photosynthetic bacterium, Synechococcus sp. PCC 7002, to act as a
photocatalytic factory for the production of the monoterpene limonene directly
from carbon dioxide. In bacteria, all terpenoids are produced through the
methylerythritol 4-phosphate (MEP) pathway. The proposed research has three
objectives designed to enhance this pathway. Objective 1 will seek to improve
the production of limonene by engineering the increased availability of
isopentenyl diphosphate (IPP) and dimethylallyl diphosphate (DMAP). This will be
accomplished by replacing the known rate-limiting enzymes with genetic material
sourced from high terpenoid-producing organisms, including Populus trichocarpa
(terrestrial plant) and Botryococcus braunii (alga), to circumvent endogenous
regulation of these rate-limiting enzymes. Objective 2 will further improve
limonene production by knocking out a suite of genes to divert flux toward
terpenoid metabolism, as predicted by stoichiometric metabolic modeling. Top-
performing strains will be selected based on superior limonene productivity, and
isotope assisted metabolic flux analysis (13C-MFA) will be used to identify
unknown bottlenecks and side product formation. Intracellular metabolic fluxes
will be measured by using isotope-assisted metabolic flux analysis (isotope MFA)
of the wild type and top-performing limonene-production strains. This will allow
for the rational design of metabolic engineering strategies to further increase
MEP pathway flux. Objective 3 will investigate the effect of nutrient limitation
and altered carbon storage ability on limonene production. For example, a mutant
that lacks the ability to synthesize glycogen, the main carbohydrate storage
product in Synechococcus, may not perceive nitrogen-deprivation stress. As a
result, the mutant maintains photosynthetic activity in the absence of cell
growth and division, and spills energy by excreting organic acids, including
terpenoid precursors. Isotopic 13C-MFA will be used to identify metabolic
bottlenecks in the glycogen-deficient mutant that prevent the over-accumulating
organic acids from entering terpenoid metabolism. These findings will suggest
design engineering strategies to complete the redirection of flux from glycogen
towards limonene. Overall, the proposed work will create a strain with enhanced
carbon flux through the MEP pathway that can be used as a photosynthetic
platform strain for the production of any terpenoid, thus introducing a new
model organism for producing this wide and diverse class of chemicals. The
platform strain will be shared freely amongst the academic community to enable
faster development of production strains and increased knowledge of
Synechococcus.