* 1604314
* Elucidating Physicochemical Processes Affecting Transport Phenomena Resulting from Hydraulic Fracturing of Natural Gas Reservoirs
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Cass Miller, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 08/31/2019
* USD 340,000.00

1604314&lt;br/&gt;Miller, Cass T.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The use of hydraulic
fracturing has allowed for the extraction of natural gas from previously
inaccessible sources; however, hydraulic fracturing has also raised concerns due
to the potential for contamination from migration of fluids from injection
sites. The objective of the proposed project is to improve understanding of the
physicochemical processes associated with the transport of hydraulic fracturing
fluids through porous media and fractured media. This approach will allow a more
detailed assessment of the potential adverse effects to the
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will investigate the relationship
between fluid composition and physical properties, sorption of hydraulic
fracturing chemicals to solid media (i.e., proppants and shale), and the flow
and transport of multicomponent, non-Newtonian fluids in porous and fractured
media. Aqueous solutions of common fracturing chemicals will be characterized
with respect to density and rheological properties. Batch tests will be
conducted to measure the sorption of fracturing chemicals to relevant solid
materials. Micro-models will be used to elucidate fluid flow characteristics on
the pore/fracture scale. Flushing experiments will be conducted in one- and two-
dimensional, homogeneous and heterogeneous systems. Experiments will investigate
the pressure-flow rate relationship for non-Newtonian fracturing fluids with a
range of fluid compositions, and the transport of individual species within the
fluid. Rigorous theoretical models will be developed in conjunction with the
experimental work using the thermodynamically constrained averaging theory
framework. The experimental portion of the project will provide a comprehensive
dataset at relevant temperatures and pressures regarding: (1) the effect of
fluid composition on physical properties, (2) the sorption of hydraulic
fracturing chemicals on relevant solid media, (3) the flow behavior of
multicomponent, non-Newtonian fluids in realistic porous and fractured media
systems, and, (4) dispersion of dissolved species in non-Newtonian fluids. The
experimental work will be conducted in conjunction with modeling using the
thermodynamically constrained averaging theory approach. This method will result
in the development of a macroscale model that is consistent with thermodynamic
principles, and which allows for explicit identification of subscale processes
and relationships between variables of interest. The development of such a model
will greatly improve upon the existing state of modeling such systems, direct
further experimental and computational work, and provide a consistent framework
with which to better probe the fundamental aspects of complex fluid behavior in
porous media. The project will disseminate the finding of the research by
developing a web site, holding public forums, and participation in the UNCs
Institute for the Environment IDEA program. In addition, the PI will: (1)
contributions to education through course content, student research, and science
outreach; (2) participation of underrepresented researchers and linkages to
minority recruitment programs; (3) broad dissemination of findings in
environmental engineering, environmental chemistry, and contaminant hydrology
journals; (4) digital archiving and dissemination of unique data sets and video
images of experiments; and, (5) expanded ties with international collaborators
that work on complementary aspects of multiphase systems. In addition, the
physical processes and chemical components chosen for this study are common to
environmental remediation applications and will improve understanding of all
such systems.