* 1604903
* Understanding how the rheological behavior of biological fluids is related to health
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Michael Solomon, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 08/31/2020
* USD 315,000.00

PI: Schultz, William&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
1604903&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal is based upon the hypothesis that
health is reflected by changes in biological fluids, most important and
accessible of which is saliva, and these changes affect the rheological
properties of biofluids. This hypothesis further stipulates that rheological
characterization of saliva, and quantification of its properties, can provide
information about a person's health. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Saliva rheology is
similar to that of water, making measuring non-Newtonian properties difficult.
Capillary Break-up Rheometry (CBR) is commonly used to determine extensional
parameters of such fluids. It is proposed to re-examine CBR foundations with
differential one-dimensional models to eliminate the large correction factors
required when measuring the radius-thinning rate at the filament midpoint.
Unlike previous methods, new analysis recognizes curvature gradients that drive
the flow and therefore the free surface profile evolution is required to
accurately determine extensional properties. This analysis is consistent with
filament evolution all the way through beads-on-a-string formation that they
have been observed in Newtonian and preliminary saliva demonstrations. Next the
spatially-varying surface tension in Newtonian analysis is used to study the
role of surfactants in filament dynamics as well as the more prominent
extensional viscoelastic properties of long-chained molecules (such as mucins)
or by surfactants (such as in soap films) that could be interpreted as
stickiness. Unlike saliva viscoelasticity, the role of surface activity in
saliva filament formation and its implications on health diagnosis have not yet
been considered. Characterizing saliva rheological properties could guide the
development of more effective saliva substitutes, stimulants, and hydrating
liquids for xerostomia or dysphagia. The co-PIs will collaborate with U. Ghana
Biomedical Engineering Department to study dysphagia problems prevalent in local
populations. Techniques developed through this project can help to characterize
other biological and industrial fluids. There are also plans to engage in
activities to promote women in engineering including educational outreach to
over 200 4th through 6th grade girls through the University of Michigan FEMMES
program and involving undergraduate women in research.