* 1604902
* Exploring the links between biodiverse foods, nutritional quality, and food security
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Tony Goldberg, CUNY Hunter College
* Standard Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 08/31/2018
* USD 224,640.00

The Directorate of Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences offers postdoctoral
research fellowships to provide opportunities for recent doctoral graduates to
obtain additional training, to gain research experience under the sponsorship of
established scientists, and to broaden their scientific horizons beyond their
undergraduate and graduate training. Postdoctoral fellowships are further
designed to assist new scientists to direct their research efforts across
traditional disciplinary lines and to avail themselves of unique research
resources, sites, and facilities, including at foreign locations. This
postdoctoral fellowship award supports a rising interdisciplinary scholar at the
intersection of the anthropological sciences, environment and human health. In
the tropics, reliance on wild food systems and unsustainable hunting threatens
food security and livelihoods long-term, and increases risk of disease
transmission from wildlife to humans. Despite the risks to human health and food
security, the issue of wild game hunting remains a target of conservation, but
is rarely considered in public health and development strategies. The aim of
this research is to understand the role of nutrition and culture in driving
consumption of bushmeat (meat from non-domesticated mammals, reptiles,
amphibians and birds hunted for food in tropical forests) in West Africa. The
postdoctoral research fellow, a woman in environmental science, will be trained
in nutritional ecology and cultural anthropology. Through combined field and
laboratory research, the fellow will be introduced to unique research resources,
sites, and facilities that will foster international collaborations between
institutions in the United States and Nigeria. These activities will provide
unique mentoring and training opportunities for students and Nigerian
scientists. This research will further the progress of science by deciphering
the role of dietary quality of bushmeat, and bringing the issue into the scope
of development and public health policy. Results will have implications for
national health, prosperity, and welfare beyond this study system. For example,
understanding the drivers of bushmeat consumption assists policy in developing
complementary food sources and preventing emergence of infectious diseases from
wildlife. Research activities in the field will have both direct and indirect
benefits to human health, endangered species, and vulnerable habitats.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research integrates methods from nutrition and
ecology, with both quantitatively and qualitatively driven methods from the
social sciences, to measure the unique role of bushmeat in determining dietary
choices and maintaining food security in Nigerian hunting communities. The
project will generate original data through: 1) comparative nutritional assays
of wild and domestic animal food resources; 2) quantitative analyses of semi-
structured surveys of household dietary diversity and food insecurity; and 3)
qualitative analyses of focus group discussions, key informant interviews,
participant observation, and storytelling to assess the cultural contexts of
hunting and consumption. Nutritional composition will be related to dietary
choices and food security across multiple cultural contexts to provide new
insights into interactions between human culture and nutritional science. Wild
meat consumption is a pressing environmental and health concern, and findings
will provide the basis for integrative recommendations that will inform food
security, public health, and conservation policies. The project involves
international collaboration at multiple levels, and is co-funded by the NSF
Office of International Science and Engineering.