* 1604742
* Biohybrid Strategies for Decellularized Tissues
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2019
* John Fisher, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 05/31/2019
* USD 307,374.00

PI: Fisher, John P&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1604742&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;When
replacing malfunctioning or diseased tissues, cardiovascular surgeons often use
biomaterials that contain a natural tissue component such as decellularized
pericardium, which serves as an extracellular matrix (ECM) for the implant. To
preserve mechanical properties, one common treatment of the tissue is through
chemical fixation, such as soaking in glutaraldehyde (GA). However, GA treatment
often leads to detrimental calcification of the implant. The goal of this
proposal is to eliminate the need for GA treatment by coating the ECM with a
novel biodegradable polymer coating (poly(propylene fumarate) or PPF) that will
provide a reinforced substrate with many desirable properties. Mechanical
properties and degradation times are tunable. Local bioactivity can be enhanced
by embedding growth eluting microparticles in the PPF. Thus, the resulting
hybrid material will exhibit diminished calcification and immune response from
the host and be resistant to rapid degradation while at the same time
encouraging native tissue ingrowth. Successful development of this novel
material would significantly improve the material options available and
revolutionize expectations for many cardiovascular repair operations.
Educational Impact is advanced through the development of a new Biomaterials and
Biofabrication (B&amp;B) Workshop whose objective is to introduce undergraduates
with engineering and science backgrounds to a diverse research environment
involving biomaterials and biofabrication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of this three year project is to develop novel hybrid materials to create a
replacement for malfunctioning or diseased tissues. Many of the tissue based
prosthetics used in cardiovascular surgery employ glutaraldehyde (GA)-treated
pericardium. Pericardium possesses advantageous mechanical properties, but GA
treatment invariably results in detrimental calcification of the implant. This
study tests the hypothesis that by treating pericardium extracellular matrix
(ECM) with a physical coating of the synthetic polymer poly(propylene fumarate)
(PPF), the resulting hybrid materials will not only exhibit diminished
calcification and immune response upon implantation, but will provide a platform
suitable for controlled regrowth and maintenance of the tissue. The study will
additionally test the hypothesis that the biologic and activity of the platform
may be enhanced through the addition of growth factor eluting poly(lactic-co-
glycolic acid) (PLGA) microparticles. The ideal composition of both components
(PPF and ECM) to obtain appropriate mechanical properties and degradation for a
patch model will be determined and a 3D printing resin based on these
formulations will be used to investigate the in vitro response to a random
organization of the ECM. The performance of PPF-reinforced ECM and 3DP PPF-
reinforced ECM will be evaluated in a rat subcutaneous model. The hybrid
materials will be assessed for cellular ingrowth, newly produced proteins and
signaling factors, as well as possible calcium deposits. The Broader Impacts of
the project include the development of a new class of hybrid biomaterials and
the elucidation of new strategies and technologies within regenerative medicine.
The proposed hybrid material will provide a substrate that encourages native
cellular ingrowth and deposition of new ECM. A novel material with a decreased
immune activity and subsequent calcification rate would significantly improve
the material options available and revolutionize expectations for many
cardiovascular repair operations. Educational Impact is advanced through the
development of a new Biomaterials and Biofabrication (B&amp;B) Workshop whose
objective is to introduce undergraduates with engineering and science
backgrounds to a diverse research environment involving biomaterials and
biofabrication.