* 1604773
* Collaborative Research:  Rocky Mountain-Great Plains Graduate Research Workshops in Combinatorics
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2019
* Jason Williford, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 04/30/2019
* USD 10,357.00

The Rocky Mountain-Great Plains Graduate Research Workshop in Combinatorics
(GRWC), will be held in Laramie, WY (2016), Denver, CO (2017) and Ames, IA
(2018), building upon successful NSF-funded workshops in 2014 and 2015. Each
workshop will involve approximately 39 graduate students and postdoctoral
researchers, and 10 or more faculty members in an intense two-week collaborative
research experience. Participants will work to solve important, relevant
problems from graph theory, enumeration, combinatorial matrix theory, finite
geometry, and other modern sub-disciplines of combinatorics. Students will
prepare open problems prior to the workshop under the guidance of faculty
mentors from the organizing committee, which consists of faculty from Iowa State
University, the University of Colorado Denver, the University of Denver, the
University of Nebraska Lincoln, and the University of Wyoming. These problems,
presented at the workshop by their proposers or hosted on the workshop's secure
problem wiki, will be worked on by small groups of participating students,
postdocs, and faculty. For more information about the GRWC, including a detailed
description of the workshop format, please see the workshop website at
http://sites.google.com/site/rmgpgrwc

The goal of the collaborations at the heart of the GRWC is to produce high-
quality, publishable research on a variety of topics. Another longer-term goal
of the workshop is to help student participants expand their professional
research networks. A strong research network is often a crucial part of building
a generative and sustainable research program, and establishing these
connections at an early career stage can have a long-term positive effect on the
quality, impact, and depth of a professional's research portfolio. Participation
in the GRWC will allow students to cultivate a large professional network of
peers from the combinatorics community with whom they will be able to interact
and collaborate throughout their careers. The GRWC will also offer professional
development workshops to help students and postdocs prepare for job searches and
future careers in academia, industry, or government.