* 1604446
* Advanced radiation models to enable direct comparisons between computed and measured temperatures and compositions in laminar and turbulent flames
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2019
* Daniel Haworth, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 07/31/2019
* USD 210,000.00

1604446 - Haworth&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Combustion will continue to play a
central role in propulsion and power generation for the foreseeable future. This
includes engines for light- and heavy-duty road vehicles (cars and trucks).
Aggressive fuel economy and emissions targets have been established to
simultaneously reduce energy consumption and pollutant emissions, including
greenhouse-gas emissions. At the same time, alternatives to petroleum-derived
fuels (e.g., biofuels) are being introduced to reduce the carbon footprint of
combustion-based energy systems. Predictive mathematical/computational tools are
urgently needed so that engineers can optimize future engines and other
combustion systems for maximum performance with minimum fuel consumption and
emissions, while enabling the introduction of future sustainable fuels. These
tools must include accurate representations of the key underlying physical
processes. Radiative heat transfer is important in combustion systems, by virtue
of their high temperatures, but has received relatively little attention to date
because of its extreme complexity. This project will develop advanced radiation
models that will be an important part of a new generation of predictive
mathematical/computational tools, which in turn will enable the introduction of
a new generation of high-efficiency, low-emissions, alternative-fuel
vehicles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;High-resolution optical diagnostics and numerical
simulations are increasingly being brought to bear to provide fundamental
insight into the underlying physical processes in engines and other combustion
systems, and to inform the development of reduced-order models that can be used
for device and system design. However, the connection between experiment and
numerical simulation/modeling remains somewhat primitive. For example, extensive
simplification and modeling are required to provide quantitative values of
temperature and equivalence-ratio distributions from measured radiative
intensities for nonintrusive optical diagnostics techniques. At the same time,
increasingly sophisticated models for spectral radiative heat transfer are being
developed for computational fluid dynamics (CFD)-based simulations of turbulent
reacting flows, and these models provide an ideal starting point for directly
computing the radiative intensity signals that correspond to various optical
diagnostics techniques. By the end of this project, two important diagnostic
techniques will have been developed/advanced for applications to harsh high-
pressure combustion environments such as those in piston engines, simulation
models will have been extended to directly compute radiative intensity signals
corresponding to these diagnostic techniques, and a proof-of-concept of the
advantages of making direct comparisons between computed and measured radiative
intensities (versus derived quantities, such as temperature and equivalence
ratio) will have been completed.