* 1604042
* Collaborative Proposal:  Rates and mechanisms of lead phosphate formation, aggregation, and deposition for more efficient corrosion control
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2021
* Yandi Hu, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 06/30/2021
* USD 194,531.00

1603717 / 1604042&lt;br/&gt;Giammar / Hu&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Aging
infrastructure has been identified as an issue that faces the Nation in the
coming years. One such issue is legacy lead pipes used in drinking water
distribution systems. The proposed project will advance the scientific and
engineering basis for effective control of lead corrosion by developing a better
and thorough understanding of lead-phosphate chemistry. The research is driven
by: (a) evolving regulations for lead in drinking water, and, (b) unresolved
scientific questions regarding the rates and mechanisms of lead phosphate
nucleation, growth, aggregation, and deposition. The project will fill important
knowledge gaps regarding the formation and stability of lead phosphate minerals
and the molecular-level interfacial processes controlling lead phosphate
precipitation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;State-of-the-art techniques will enable in
situ quantification of the homogeneous (in solution) and heterogeneous (on
substrates) nucleation of lead phosphates and their aggregation and deposition
on pipe surfaces. The ability to observe and predict nucleation and to
distinguish between homogeneous and heterogeneous nucleation is a remaining
frontier in environmental chemistry. Advances in the understanding of colloidal
and interfacial processes involving phosphate minerals can contribute to the
fields of geology, materials science, and biomedical engineering as well as
environmental engineering. The project will characterize the composition,
structure, and in situ changes of the corrosion products that develop on
existing scales after phosphate addition. This new knowledge will have direct
relevance to lead corrosion control in water distribution systems, and it is
also relevant to lead mobility in natural and engineered soil and aquatic
systems. The team?s complementary expertise will help the project advance the
infrastructure for environmental research by bringing nano-chemistry and
mineralogy techniques to bear on important environmental engineering problems.
The project objectives are to: (1) identify factors that control the homogeneous
nucleation and aggregation of lead phosphates in solution and quantify the
effects of water chemistry on those processes, (2) determine the rates of
heterogeneous nucleation and deposition of lead phosphate particles on scales
that form on pipe surfaces, and, (3) enable science-based optimization of
phosphate application strategies that can be tailored to a particular water
chemistry and scale type. The approach will build from fundamental studies of
processes in solution and on surfaces, and, the consideration of processes
occurring in intact pipes. This integrated approach will link advances in
fundamental knowledge with important translational outcomes. A multi-scale
approach will use atomic- and molecular-scale characterization techniques to
yield mechanistic insights needed to interpret colloidal and interfacial
processes responsible for the macroscopic uptake or release of lead from pipes.
In addition to the potential impact of a better understanding lead (Pb) and
phosphate chemistry, the proposed research will be integrated with educational
activities that involve curriculum enrichment, student training, and outreach to
K-12 students and the professional engineering community.