* 1604927
* Collaborative Research: Understanding ion solvation effects in nonaqueous oxygen electroreduction reactions
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Bryan McCloskey, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2019
* USD 202,352.00

Title: Collaborative Research: Understanding Ion Solvation Effects in Nonaqueous
Oxygen Electroreduction Reactions&lt;br/&gt;Bryan D. McCloskey/ Venkatasubraman
Viswanathan&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1604927/1604898&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Of
all battery chemistries currently being explored to power next-generation
electric vehicles, metal-air (O2) couples possess some of the highest known
theoretical specific energies and volumetric energy densities. In particular,
the aprotic nonaqueous Li-O2 battery has recently received significant attention
because of its superior specific energy. Yet many of the challenges facing Li-O2
battery development remain unsolved. One of these challenges involves
understanding the link between electrolyte composition and the discharge/charge
electrochemical processes. The proposed research will address the fundamental
dependence of the Li-O2 electrochemistry mechanism on both cation and anion
solvation, thereby providing a better understanding of how to improve the
performance of high-energy nonaqueous Li-O2 and other metal-O2 batteries. If
successful, Li-O2 batteries could advance and accelerate the adoption of
electric vehicles for reduced emissions, improved efficiency, and domestic
energy security. The PIs are committed to broad dissemination of their results.
As such, they will develop online video modules to make publicly accessible the
prospects of this exciting new area of energy storage. The online modules will
be structured for simple incorporation into energy and electrochemical system
courses, including those taught by the PIs. The PIs will also develop a broader
and more engaging educational content on electrochemistry/batteries with a
vision to run a massive online open course. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall
objective of the proposed research is to elucidate the effect of ion solvation
on the fundamental oxygen electrochemistry in nonaqueous electrolytes, with a
particular emphasis on oxygen reduction in Li+-bearing electrolytes. Recent
studies have identified the importance of electrolyte composition on both the
ultimate oxygen reduction product formed and the mechanism by which it forms.
For example, a 2 e- oxygen reduction to form lithium peroxide, Li2O2, is found
to occur in nonaqueous Li-O2 batteries, whereas a 1 e- reduction process to form
sodium superoxide, NaO2, occurs in Na-O2 batteries. Furthermore, the Li-O2
discharge mechanism was recently shown to be affected by a delicate interplay
between anion and solvent selection, as the Lewis acidity and basicity of both
components affected the lifetime of oxygen reduction intermediates in solution.
The PIs used this knowledge to improve the discharge capacity (or usable energy)
of a Li-O2 battery four-fold. However, the understanding of the complex role of
electrolyte constituents (ions, additives, and solvents) on electrode reactions
and ion solvation is not complete. This understanding potentially has far-
reaching implications in many other electrochemical systems (e.g., CO2
reduction, Li-S batteries, and other metal-air batteries). The proposed research
tasks will leverage unique experimental and theoretical capabilities developed
by the PIs to study Li-O2 batteries, including Differential Electrochemical Mass
Spectrometry (DEMS) to quantify Coulombic efficiency of batteries employing
different electrolyte compositions, and nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy
to probe cation and anion solvation in these electrolytes. The theoretical
capabilities to describe non-equilibrium charge transport, and solution and
surface electrochemistry, will be based on density functional theory
calculations. Through a well-developed theoretical and experimental framework,
the PIs will identify novel electrolyte compositions that can trigger solution
electrochemistry, thereby improving discharge capacity while maintaining
chemical stability. The PIs will then experimentally link ion solvation effects
in the most promising electrolyte compositions to stability and capacity
enhancements.