* 1604647
* GOALI: Collaborative Research: Interactions of Polishing and Incidental Nanoparticles in Chemical Mechanical Planarization Processes with Artificial Membranes and Human Cell Lines
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2016,06/30/2021
* Shyam Aravamudhan, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 06/30/2021
* USD 190,000.00

PI: Chen, Kai Loon&lt;br/&gt;#: 1605815&lt;br/&gt;COLLABORATIVE&lt;br/&gt;PI:
Aravamudhan, Shyam &lt;br/&gt;#: 1604647&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Chemical
Mechanical Planarization (CMP) is one of the important semiconductor
manufacturing processes used in the production of advanced electronic devices
such as computers, smart phones, and tablets. The CMP process uses huge volumes
(millions of tons) of silica, ceria, or alumina particles in the form of
abrasive slurries to planarize electronic circuits during the manufacturing
process. However, environmental safety and health (ESH) impacts from the release
of used CMP slurries containing nanoparticles into the natural environment and
workplace exposure are largely unknown. The objective of this research is to
study the ESH impacts and interactions of both pristine and used CMP
nanoparticles with artificial cell membranes and human cell
lines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Even though NPs are used in a large-scale in the CMP
process during the manufacture of integrated circuits, little is known about
their environmental and human health impacts, particularly the transformation of
nanoparticles during the CMP process and their corresponding workplace exposure,
fate, behavior, and toxicity. This is mainly due to the inability to obtain
access to the transformed nanoparticle slurries from the CMP process. The main
objectives of this project are to (1) systematically investigate, detect, and
characterize the transformation of nanoparticle slurries during the CMP
processes; (2) examine the influence of CMP and incidental nanoparticles to
attach to and disrupt artificial cell membranes and their ability to affect
human cell lines; and (3) determine the role of nanoparticle-membrane
interactions on nanoparticle toxicity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research has
the potential to be transformative because a strong understanding of the
biological interactions of pristine and transformed CMP NPs is not only relevant
to the electronics industry, but also has wider applicability for a number of
other nanoparticle applications, which routinely undergo life-cycle
transformations through different physical and chemical processes. The research
results will be disseminated through publications in peer-reviewed journals and
student presentations at national scientific meetings. They will also be
incorporated into undergraduate and graduate courses and community outreach
programs, including K-12 scientific activities for an inner-city Baltimore
elementary/middle school, NanoDay activities for the local community, NanoBus
after-school program, and community college engagement. Lastly, the active
involvement of an industrial partner will result in implementation of better
engineering controls and safer CMP processes.