* 1604876
* Bio-inspired efficient pulsatile locomotion
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Megan Leftwich, George Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 08/31/2020
* USD 288,377.00

PI: Leftwich, Megan&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1604876&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
focus of this proposal is to determine the mechanism for high-performance
swimming that is used by sea animals that move their flippers in a periodic
manner. It is proposed to take real life experimental data for the motion of sea
lions at the Smithsonian National Zoological park (SNZ) in Washington, DC, and
to mathematically describe the maneuvering motion of these swimmers in order to
design robotic prototypes. These prototypes will then be used in a laboratory
setting to take detailed measurements of the flow around them. Findings from
this research could lead to energy savings because of flow control around
submerged objects (e.g., ships, submarines, unmanned robotic vehicles).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To understand the hydrodynamics around a large animal, one
must first characterize its kinematics. Previous efforts to do so, which inform
this work, do not include quantitative descriptions of the relevant parameters
for a detailed, controlled hydrodynamic study. At this time, it is proposed to
conduct a comprehensive field study at the SNZ in Washington, DC. This study
will provide a digital catalog of sea lion maneuvers and a detailed mathematical
description of them. The study will initially focus on steady swimming behavior
(the "clap") before progressing to include turning, accelerating and other
advanced maneuvers. Both two- and three-dimensional data will be obtained using
three synchronized digital cameras. This required significant development of
markerless three-dimensional tracking techniques for large free-swimming bodies.
While methods exist for small-scale motion (insects) or highly predictable
motions (human walking), these tools are not available for general locomotion
with an unknown trajectory. Once the kinematic data are in place, a replicate
will be crated that will be a hydrodynamically quiet unsteady propulsor in a
laboratory setting. While observational data of swimming sea lions offer insight
into such propulsion, it is not sufficient to understand its hydrodynamic
effects on the surroundings. The work proposed here will lay the foundation for
the design and construction of a robotic sea lion fore flipper. Finally, high-
magnification images of the propulsive surface will allow the investigation of
its natural flow control abilities. Educational initiatives involve graduate,
undergraduate and high school students. In addition, through the Friends of the
National Zoo (FONZ) program, the PI will participate in educational programs at
the SNZ including lectures and the creation of educational displays and
interactive modules within the California sea lion exhibit. Finally, recent and
ongoing media interest in this work provides a platform for dialogs about fluid
dynamics with the general public.