* 1604150
* SHF: Small: Re-thinking Polynomial Programming: Efficient Design and Optimization of Resilient Analog/RF Integrated Systems by Convexification
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2016,03/31/2017
* Xin Li, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 03/31/2017
* USD 350,000.00

This project deals with a novel design and optimization framework to improve
performance of advanced analog and radio frequency (RF) integrated systems over
a broad range of applications, from consumer electronics to medical instruments
with potential impact on the semiconductor industry and national economy. In
addition, given its interdisciplinary coverage, the project offers opportunities
for training to both university students and industrial engineers, including
curriculum development, student advising, outreach activities and workshop
organization. It could improve the education infrastructure and generate high-
quality researchers and practitioners in related fields. These education
activities integrated with the proposed research tasks facilitate the transfer
of the new design and optimization techniques to the technical community, and
will potentially lead to a broader impact affecting the US semiconductor
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Aggressive technology scaling, large-scale
process variation, rapid introduction of new standards and increased number of
autonomous applications have made it necessary to develop resilient analog and
radio frequency (RF) integrated systems that can adapt to all variabilities
related to process, environment and standard. However, the design and
optimization of resilient analog/RF systems has been considered as a grand
challenge due to their irregular performance functions, discrete design spaces
and high system complexities. This project exploits a novel optimization
framework to efficiently design and implement resilient analog/RF systems. The
framework is based on recent results optimization theory, and is expected to
find the optimal design both efficiently (i.e., with low computational cost) and
robustly (e.g., with guaranteed global optimum). The project would apply this
technique to optimize resilient analog/RF systems that are composed of tunable
analog/RF circuits, on-chip sensors and on-chip controllers. Hence, the proposed
framework offers a novel infrastructure for analog/RF design enabling radical
improvements.