* 1604075
* Nanoscale Fluid-Structure Interaction: Hydrodynamic Synchronization of High-Frequency Nanomechanical Oscillators
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2021
* Kamil Ekinci, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 06/30/2021
* USD 341,432.00

PI: Ekinci, Kamil Proposal Number: 1604075

The focus of the proposed research is to investigate the fundamentals of the
interactions between two nanoscale structures that are placed close to each
other while a fluid is flowing around them. When one of these structure
oscillates, the other can be synchronized and also oscillate. Investigating this
process can have applications for the design of nanoscale devices of diverse
use.

The objectives of this proposal are: i) to study the fundamentals of
hydrodynamic coupling between high-frequency nanoscale oscillators; and ii) to
determine whether or not such oscillators can be synchronized hydrodynamically.
The underlying premise is straightforward: a solid body oscillating in a fluid
generates an oscillatory velocity field, which subsequently exerts an
oscillatory force on a nearby body; and vice versa. At the high-frequency limit,
however, the fluid dynamics of this problem becomes complex because of phase
lags, the interplay between potential and viscous components of the flow, and
the hydrodynamic added masses. The proposed study is primarily experimental and
will rely on nanomechanical cantilevers. The first part of the study aims to
develop a physical understanding of coupled hydrodynamics of nanocantilevers
oscillating in water. This will be accomplished by measuring the hydrodynamic
forces between nanocantilevers using elaborate optical and electronic
techniques. In the second part, the nanocantilevers will be turned into
independent oscillators via feedback, and the experiments will elucidate the
hydrodynamic conditions under which these two autonomous oscillators will
synchronize. Simple physical models, guided by the experiments, will be
developed. Synchronization is a complex phenomenon, which can enable nanodevice
arrays, if properly implemented. By employing synchronized arrays of
nanomechanical sensors, one can increase the sensitivity and efficiency of
utilizing nanooscillators as sensors. These devices can find applications in
biomedical sciences, healthcare, homeland security and environmental monitoring,
providing unprecedented sensitivities at the level of single molecules. The
education and outreach objectives can be summarized as follows: i) recruitment
of minorities to participate in the exciting and rapidly expanding field of
nanofluidics; ii) outreach to high school students to encourage future careers
in science and engineering; iii) course development at the undergraduate level
to encourage freshmen to pursue majors in science and engineering; iv) graduate
student education through state-of-the-art research and courses