* 1604423
* Accumulation of particles and organisms in density stratified fluids with applications in algal blooms
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Pavlos Vlachos, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 07/31/2021
* USD 435,000.00

CBET - 1604423 PI: Ardekani, Arezoo

Many aquatic systems, including oceans, often have regions where the water
density varies with depth owing to variations in temperature and salinity. These
regions of water density stratification are associated with formation of algal
blooms and accumulation of marine snow particles. This project comprises
computational and experimental studies to test the hypothesis that density
stratification leads to enhanced horizontal clustering of particles and
organisms, especially those with elongated shapes. Furthermore, the project will
investigate whether density stratification suppresses convection plumes that can
disperse algal cells, leading to accumulation of cells. The equations that
govern the motion of fluid and particles will be solved numerically and results
will be compared with experiments to visualize the motion of algal cells and
particles in water with density stratification. Some algal blooms are toxic, and
they pose serious problems in coastal waters, including reduced oxygen content,
increased marine animal mortality, and increased fouling of marine equipment.
This project will help uncover the mechanisms of algal bloom formation, which
could lead to new strategies to control it. The project will provide
opportunities for students at various academic levels to participate in
research, and results of the project will be incorporated in fluid mechanics
courses taught by the investigators.

The lead investigator for this project has recently shown that water density
stratification affects not only the dynamics of suspensions of algal cells, but
also the motion of individual cells and marine particles. The goal of the
proposed research is to quantify effects of density stratification, turbulence
and shear, motility and shape of microorganisms on microstructure formation and
accumulation of planktonic species by developing a large-scale computational
framework to fully resolve the corresponding flows. Three-dimensional Direct
Numerical Simulations of the nonlinear equations governing organism and particle
transport will be implemented to gain new insights into the mechanisms governing
the distribution of planktonic organisms and particles at pycnoclines.
Experiments involving particle image velocimetry of algal cells and particles in
density stratified liquids with an imposed turbulent flow will be used to obtain
parameters needed for the computations and to validate computational results.