* 1604907
* Towards a collaborative research infrastructure for fundamental studies of turbulent fire phenomena
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Arnaud Trouve, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* John Daily
* 08/31/2020
* USD 269,952.00

1604907 - Trouve&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The general objective of the research
project is to build an international collaborative framework between
computational and experimental researchers in the fire science community around
the topic of the experimental validation of computer-based fire models. The fire
science community is small, fragmented and geographically dispersed. The present
project is an effort to meet the resulting organizational challenge, to promote
high levels of integration and coordination, and to provide a critical mass of
researchers for topics central to computational fire research. The project will
build on established programs in the U.S. aimed at producing computer models for
engineering analysis of building fires, e.g., the Fire Dynamics Simulator
developed by the National Institute of Standards and Technology and FireFOAM
developed by FM Global. The project will contribute data and software modules to
a new open-access web-based repository, develop physics-based guidelines for
computational best practices, and produce a new series of online tutorials for
graduate-level students. The project will also advance fundamental knowledge and
develop engineering-level tools for the generic problem of fire spread along
solid flammable materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is proposed as part
of a new initiative led by the International Association for Fire Safety Science
(IAFSS) called "the IAFSS Working Group on Measurement and Computation of Fire
Phenomena" (or the MaCFP Working Group). On the technical side, the project will
focus on the problem of turbulent wall flames supplied with fuel vapors produced
by the thermal degradation of solid flammable materials. The project will
include performing both fine-grained (research-level) and coarse-grained
(engineering-level) large eddy simulations. Coarse-grained simulations will
require the development of new wall models for turbulent boundary layer flames.
The simulation software adopted in the project is the free open-source fire
model called FireFOAM. On the organizational side, the project will support the
MaCFP Working Group effort, develop an open-access web-based digital archive of
well-documented numerical simulations corresponding to selected target
experiments, help identify key research topics and knowledge gaps in
computational and experimental fire research, develop best practices in
computational fire research, contribute to the organization of the new MaCFP
workshop series, and help develop an international network of fire researchers
and a community-wide forum for discussion and exchange of information.