* 1604026
* Effects of particle shape and fluid shear on the kinematics and mass transfer of large particles in turbulent flow
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Evan Variano, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 08/31/2020
* USD 310,000.00

PI: Variano, Evan&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1604026&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of the proposed research is to experimentally and theoretically explore the
physics of turbulent flows with high concentration of particles. The proposal
focuses on the complex, and at the same time common in engineering applications,
case of non-spherical particles that move on the flow field because of the
combined effectws of drift and of inertia. Such flows are prominent in the
chemical process industry (e.g., fluidized bed catalytic reactors, pneumatic
transport) and in the environment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Particles large enough
to exceed the Stokesian limit will be measured in turbulent flow. The general
objective is to better understand particle motion for cases in which inertia is
non-negligible, and the specific objective is to understand how particle shape
influences response to fluid shear. Laboratory measurements will reveal particle
acceleration, rotation, and mass transfer between individual particles and the
surrounding fluid. One group of particles will be manufactured with transparent,
refractive-index-matched materials and internal tracers, thereby enabling
optical measurements of their rotation and translation in three dimensions. A
second group of particles will fabricated from a new type of neutrally-buoyant
silica-sucrose glass that was designed to slowly dissolve, thereby enabling
measurements of the mass exchange between particles and fluid. The shapes that
will be studied are cylinders and cones; additional shape features resembling
tails and fins will be added to help evaluate the role of particle alignment
with local coherent structures in the turbulent flow. Extending beyond the
Stokesian limit can reveal new phenomena because inertia adds complexity to the
interaction of particles with local shear. The proposed project will explore the
inertial regime, providing observational evidence of how large particles
interact with turbulence. Numerical methods cannot easily simulate the motions
of interest, and thus the proposed laboratory techniques were developed to
rapidly explore a large range of shapes. Particles of the type examined herein
appear in many areas of science and engineering, and the proposed work will
advance study in these areas by providing the first detailed description of the
relevant physics. An example engineering opportunity lies in the design of
small-scale robotic vehicles. The results herein will enable the design of
navigation and sensing strategies, and determine how vehicle shape would
influence these strategies. Related opportunities in the fields of biology and
biomechanics include an improved description of animal behavior in turbulent
environments, especially for mid-size aquatic organisms that balance swimming
with drifting. Educational impacts will include the production of a series of
videos that will be distributed online. These videos will provide a unified
demonstration of particle motion across size, shape, and buoyancy regimes in
both turbulent and laminar flows, in the spirit of the classic National
Committee for Fluid Mechanics films.