* 1604527
* Collaborative Research: GOALI: Metabolic Engineering of Next Generation CHO Hosts for Monoclonal Antibody Production
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2022
* Michael Betenbaugh, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 07/31/2022
* USD 200,000.00

1604426/1604527&lt;br/&gt;Young, Jamey D./Betenbaugh,
Michael&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) and other protein
therapeutics are among the most expensive of all drugs to manufacture. Making
these therapies more affordable and available to the public will improve both
the health and quality of life of millions of patients in the U.S. and around
the globe. The proposed research aims to identify strategies for improving mAb
production by engineering the metabolism of Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells.
CHO cells are used to produce 60-70% of all protein therapeutics in the US. The
studies will use a CHO cell line provided by Janssen R&amp;D that is capable of
high mAb productivity. High-producing cell lines of this kind are not typically
available to academic labs, and therefore this collaboration provides a unique
opportunity to test the proposed metabolic engineering strategies in an
industrially relevant host line. This work is significant because it will enable
novel approaches for enhancing the productivity and consistency of mammalian
cell bioprocesses, thus lowering drug development and manufacturing costs of
therapeutic antibodies. This project will also provide the unique educational
opportunity for a graduate student and post-doctoral researcher to engage in
collaborative research with industry scientists, culminating in a 3-month
internship in which the graduate student will perform experiments in a Janssen
R&amp;D facility. Such an experience will provide these trainees with ideal
preparation for a career in the biotechnology industry or in a government or
academic lab. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The accelerating trend toward highly
targeted monoclonal antibody (mAb) therapeutics has led to a critical need for
enhanced productivity in mammalian cell bioprocesses. Previous NSF-sponsored
research has found that high-producing CHO cell lines consistently exhibit
enhanced citric acid cycle (CAC) activity compared to low- or non-producing
hosts. However, the extent to which this metabolic phenotype is required to
drive high-yield protein expression is still unclear, and it is unknown whether
CAC flux can be rationally engineered to promote increased mAb production. The
long-term goal of this research is to identify metabolic engineering strategies
that promote a high-productivity metabolic phenotype in mammalian hosts leading
to increased product yield and quality. Because this phenotype is expected to
involve up-regulation of mitochondrial oxidative metabolism, the overall
objective of the current application is to engineer CHO cells to enhance CAC
flux while assessing the impacts on mAb titer, cell specific production rate
(CSPR), and glycan profile. First, an industrial CHO host line provided by
Janssen R&amp;D will be engineered to constitutively up-regulate oxidative CAC
metabolism. A specific mitochondrial regulatory protein will be overexpressed
and 13C metabolic flux analysis (MFA) will be applied to guide local pathway
engineering to further enhance CAC flux. Second, an inducible expression vector
will be used to dynamically redirect carbon flux into CAC during stationary
phase. The working hypothesis is that induction of mitochondrial metabolism at
the onset of stationary phase will enhance CSPR while enabling the culture to
reach peak cell density during exponential phase, thus maximizing final mAb
titer. Third, IgG glycan profiles will be assessed to determine how manipulating
CHO central metabolism impacts product glycosylation. The rationale for the
proposed research is that it will determine whether central carbon metabolism of
CHO cells can be engineered to drive increased mAb production while maintaining
consistent product quality.&lt;br/&gt;This project is co-funded by the
Biotechnology and Biochemical Engineering Program of the CBET Division, by the
GOALI Program of the Division of Industrial Innovation and Partnerships and by
the Systems and Synthetic Biology Program of the Division of Molecular and
Cellular Biosciences.