* 1604398
* Characterization of the Dynamic Behavior of Particle Contact Angle at an Oil/Water Interface
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Gordon Christopher, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 08/31/2020
* USD 336,094.00

CBET - 1604398&lt;br/&gt;PI: Snoeyink, Craig&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Immiscible
liquid drops that are coated with small colloidal particles are known as
colloidosomes. They are used in a variety of technological applications,
including drug delivery, tissue engineering, and food preservation. Water
colloidosomes in air are used in gas sensing and as ball bearings. The goal of
this project is to develop a new experimental technique to determine how the
contact angles between the surfaces of the particles and the interface influence
the dynamics of the interface and the overall behavior of the colloidosomes. The
results will be useful to practitioners to design better and more robust
colloidsomes for use in biomedical, sensing, and consumer products. The project
will provide opportunities for students, especially those from underrepresented
groups, to participate in the research, and the researchers will develop a class
in soft matter for a summer camp for grade five through eleven
girls.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three-dimensional particle locating Bessel Beam
microscopy will be built into an interfacial rheometer to allow real-time
monitoring of the three-dimensional position of colloidal particles at an
interface under highly controlled interfacial deformations including steady and
oscillatory shear. Images obtained from the microscope will be analyzed to
determine the position and orientation of nonspherical particles with twenty
nanometer resolution. The effects of particle shape, interfacial microstructure,
and interfacial flow on the contact angle distribution and particle dynamics
will be determined. This method represents a significant improvement over
current contact angle measurement techniques, because it will provide real-time
data on the locations and orientations of densely packed particles under well-
controlled interface deformations.