* 1604167
* Cavity QED of electron spins in diamond
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Hailin Wang, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 07/31/2020
* USD 350,000.00

Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;In a quantum communication network, information
is carried by light pulses containing single photons and is processed by
individual quantum systems or quantum bits, such as single atoms or single
electron spins. This new information processing paradigm can enable secure or
unbreakable communication and can tackle computational problems that would
otherwise be impossible with conventional computers. A key requirement for
developing this new paradigm is the control of interactions between light and
quantum systems at the level of single photons and single quantum bits. This
experimental project uses individual electron spins in a thin diamond membrane
as quantum bits. Strong interactions between single photons and single spins are
enabled by confining the photons in an optical micro-resonator with a dimension
less than 50 micrometers. The primary goal is to use a single electron spin to
control the quantum state of a single photon, thus realizing an optical switch
that can operate at the level of single photons. These switches can serve as an
important component in a quantum network. This research project also provides
excellent training opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students in
areas including nanophotonics and nanofabrication as well as quantum science and
technology. This training prepares the students for careers in academia,
industry, or government.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;This project develops a unique composite cavity QED system,
in which an electron spin in a thin diamond membrane couples to the evanescent
field of an optical whispering gallery mode in a silica microresonator via a
resonant Raman transition. Fundamental optical interactions at the level of
single electron spins and single photons are explored in a solid state
environment. The research activity focuses on the experimental demonstration of
the Duan-Kimbe scheme, which realizes a pi-phase shift for a single photon,
conditioned on the quantum state of an atom. This cavity QED process takes place
in the limit that cooperativity, a dimensionless parameter characterizing the
strength of atom-photon or spin-photon coupling, exceeds 1, but does not require
strong coupling at the single-photon level. The near term objective is to
achieve single-spin-induced optical transparency and to realize a photonic
switch that can control the quantum state of a single photon through its
interaction with a single electron spin. These switches can enable the
generation and distribution of quantum entanglement in a quantum network,
potentially playing a significant role in the development of quantum information
technologies.