* 1604542
* SusChEM: Photothermally-Enabled Multifunctional Membranes for Improved Foulant Resistance during Reverse Osmosis
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Young-Shin Jun, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 07/31/2020
* USD 326,786.00

1604542 Jun

Fresh water demands of growing populations are driving the search for advanced
membrane technologies for desalination and water reuse projects. The longevity
of these membranes is strongly related to their resistance to fouling. In this
work, the PIs will develop two new multifunctional membranes which have the
potential to minimize fouling and, therefore, extend the lifetime of the
membranes.

The proposed photothermally-active nanostructure-enabled reverse osmosis
membranes are highly innovative, potentially transformative, and, quite
promising for water treatment. For the first time, gold (Au) nanostars- and
chemically exfoliated-MoS2-enabled photothermally-active membranes will be
tested for their bactericidal efficacy as well as their inorganic and organic
fouling resistance. In particular, this work investigates the unexplored
potential of inexpensive and earth-abundant MoS2 as a replacement for expensive
materials to achieve water sustainability. Because chemically exfoliated-MoS2 is
a highly promising 2D optical and electronic material, new information about
water chemically exfoliated-MoS2 interfacial reactions will also help design
safer and more sustainable nanomaterials. Furthermore, the proposed research
will elucidate scientific principles underlying the in situ nucleation and
growth of gold (Au) nanostars and their photothermal effects on membranes. It
will define the substrates and nanostructures surface chemistry (i.e., their
chemical nature, surface charge, hydrophilicity, and morphology) in highly
saline solutions. These lessons can also advance our understanding of the
complex fouling behavior of other membrane systems. In addition, the wide array
of nanoscale characterization techniques for nanostructures in solution and on
substrate surfaces can lead to novel synthetic routes for size- and shape-
controlled nanomaterials. Creating unique nanostructures that can be light-
activated to maximize bactericidal functionality is an innovative and
transformative approach towards addressing a major global challenge. The
proposed teaching and outreach plan will provide educational and research
opportunities for middle school, undergraduate, and graduate students.