* 1604890
* SusChEM: Integrated Materials and Process Systems Development for Sustainable Carbon Capture
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Omar Farha, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 08/31/2020
* USD 450,000.00

Proposal Number: 1604890, PI: Hupp, J.&lt;br/&gt;Title: SusChEM: Integrated
Materials and Process Systems Development for Sustainable Carbon
Capture&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A vision receiving serious attention for slowing
the increase of CO2 emissions in the atmosphere is to capture the CO2 at large
point generation sources especially electric power plants and store it in stable
geological formations. Before CO2 can be sequestered, it must be separated from
the other species in the power plant's flue gas which contains primarily
nitrogen and water vapor, with other trace gases. Economical carbon capture and
sequestration (CCS) from power plant flue gas could thus be part of the mid-term
solutions to mitigate climate change while renewable energy technologies
continue to be installed in the nation's power grids. This project will develop
new porous materials capable of removing CO2 from flue gas, as well as process-
level technology using these materials, with the long-term goal of lowering the
cost and energy requirements for carbon capture. The research will also be
effectively integrated into education and outreach activities, including
training of graduate students in a highly interdisciplinary environment to help
them to develop a broad outlook and to develop good teamwork and communication
skills; recruiting of undergraduate students to the research team and pairing
them with graduate student mentors; developing outreach material on the research
about sustainable carbon capture; and involving underrepresented minorities in
STEM and women in the forefront research area of CCS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
premise of this project is that game-changing improvements of adsorption
separation processes for CCS will require simultaneous development of new
materials and specially designed processes that take advantage of these new
materials. The primary objective of the research is to investigate and to
develop a novel and systematic framework of integrating the design of metal-
organic framework (MOF) sorbent materials and the design of adsorption processes
for carbon capture in a sustainable way. The project's fundamental research will
design, synthesize, and characterize new MOF materials including novel zeolitic
imidazolate frameworks (ZIFs) with high selectivity for CO2 over nitrogen and
water vapor, together with suitably high absolute capacity for CO2. Overcoming
the effects from competitive adsorption of water will be a primary focus. Using
state-of-the-art process-level modeling, the project team will optimize
adsorption processes around the new class of sorbents and explore the real
efficiency limits of MOF-based adsorption processes that meet desired CCS
technical and economic criteria. Adsorption processes are already used in large-
scale applications, such as air separation, with high reliability. Discovery of
new and efficient adsorbents for CO2 capture and new, optimal process
configurations for these sorbents would be a step-out development in CCS.