* 1604069
* WERF:Biofilm-Enhanced Anaerobic Membrane Bioreactor for Low Temperature Domestic Wastewater Treatment
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Lutgarde Maria Raskin, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 08/31/2020
* USD 315,000.00

1604069&lt;br/&gt;Skerlos&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sustainable water management is
increasingly important for utilities and is driving efforts to reduce energy
consumption and residuals production in domestic wastewater treatment without
compromising effluent quality. Compared with conventional aerobic biological
treatment, anaerobic biological treatment produces methane (a renewable energy
source), generates a fraction of the residuals and provides substantial energy
savings. At the same time, membrane bioreactors have become increasingly popular
for domestic wastewater treatment because they provide superior effluent quality
and play an important role in water reuse. The objective of this proposal is to
fundamentally change reactor designs so that they can treat domestic wastewater
at low temperature with low flow rates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Anaerobic Membrane
Bioreactors combine the benefits of anaerobic biological treatment (energy
production) and membrane separation (excellent effluent quality). However,
previous research by the PIs has shown that conventional Anaerobic Membrane
Bioreactors are not suitable for temperatures typically found in the United
States during much of the year (e.g., below 15 oC) primarily due to net positive
greenhouse gas emissions. Their research has also shown that anaerobic biofilm
systems coupled with membrane filtration, i.e., Biofilm-Enhanced Anaerobic
Membrane Bioreactors), have the potential to overcome low temperature
limitations of Anaerobic Membrane Bioreactors. This proposal ambitiously but
realistically calls for the first Biofilm-Enhanced Anaerobic Membrane
Bioreactors to be researched and validated, achieving high quality effluent,
reduced greenhouse gas emissions, and net positive energy production. The
research proposed here, has four science and engineering objectives: (1)
Establish operating parameters and characterize performance of the Biofilm-
Enhanced Anaerobic Membrane Bioreactors at 15°C and 8-h hydraulic retention
time. (2) Reduce hydraulic retention time and temperature, and, examine sulfate
impacts on system performance. (3) Understand mechanisms for methanogenic
activity within the Biofilm-Enhanced Anaerobic Membrane Bioreactor system. (4)
Conduct Life Cycle Cost and Life Cycle Environmental Assessments to verify the
economic and environmental sustainability of the technology. The research
objectives will bring a unique design perspective to Anaerobic Membrane
Bioreactor research that combines aspects of system design (e.g., hydraulic
retention time, biofilm attachment media, low energy membrane filtration, etc.),
with microbial analyses (e.g., high throughput DNA and RNA sequencing,
monitoring of functional gene expression, etc.) and treatment performance
analysis (e.g. chemical oxygen demand, volatile fatty acid, sulfate, biogas
production, biogas methane content, etc.). The design process will be driven by
the results of Life Cycle Environmental Assessments and Life Cycle Costs, which
will maximize environmental improvements while minimizing cost. The overall
systems-based design approach will ultimately ease the transfer of Biofilm-
Enhanced Anaerobic Membrane Bioreactors technology into practice. This research
represents a novel Anaerobic Membrane Bioreactor technology with the potential
to bring an economically viable treatment technology to domestic wastewater
treatment in temperate climates while producing net positive energy and net
negative greenhouse gas emissions. Research results from lab scale efforts
supported in this grant will be transferred directly to a local Anaerobic
Membrane Bioreactor pilot plant with significant potential to lead to further
developments and piloting of Biofilm-Enhanced Anaerobic Membrane Bioreactor
technology, including the transition into practice through interactions with
industrial partners and consulting firms. Additional broader impacts from this
work include: (1) integration of research and education through involvement of
undergraduate students in research and system design/fabrication, (2)
incorporation of research findings in courses taught by the PIs, (3) knowledge
transfer through partnership with utilities, corporations and consultants, and,
(4) dissemination of research results through conference presentations, peer-
reviewed journal articles, and seminar and symposium presentations. The PIs also
intend to work with the UM Living Building Challenge student team on their
home/neighborhood-scale wastewater treatment prototypes.