* 1604351
* Collaborative Research: Computations, Modeling and Experiments of Self and Directed Assembly for Nanoscale Liquid Metal Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2021
* Lou Kondic, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 06/30/2021
* USD 227,814.00

PI: Kondic, Lou / Rack, Phillip D. Proposal Number: 1604351 / 1603780

The goal of the proposed research is to investigate the behavior of nanoscale
liquid metal drops on surfaces with a comprehensive approach of simulations,
modeling and experiments. Placing such nanodrops on different surfaces in a
controlled way is important for manufacturing surfaces with unique material
properties that can be used in microelectronic devices, in solar panels, in
spectroscopy and even in radiation treatment for cancer.

The proposed work explores competing capillary, viscous and inertial forces in
the collapse versus breakup of nanoscale liquid metal filaments, liquid metal-
substrate interactions, and thermal effects where nanoscale thermal gradients
will be imposed via templating and temperature dependent material properties.
The transformative aspect of this proposal resides in providing new insights
into the emerging field of complex and multi-component nanoparticle synthesis
with enhanced functionality. Research efforts put forward in this proposed work
focus on developing direct numerical methods for solving fully 3D Navier-Stokes
equations in combination with targeted experiments. Specifically, accurate
numerical methods will be developed based on the multi-material Volume of Fluid
approach, also incorporating triple junctions and moving contact lines, as well
as the potentials describing liquid-solid interactions. To challenge the
computations, the physical experiments are designed to interrogate various
metal/alloy-substrate combinations which will probe the relevant hydrodynamic
and chemical instabilities. A distinguishing feature of the proposed project is
the immediate and direct comparison of numerical results with the experimental
ones. The theoretical, computational, and experimental work will drive each
other, with theoretical predictions directly checked by experiments, and
subsequently these experiments will be used to develop more accurate theoretical
description of the instabilities and transport of nanoscale liquid metals. The
results of this research will be of interest to a wide community exploring
experimental and computational fluid dynamics and more generally to the
researchers considering various aspects of nanoscience. The broader impact of
the proposed work resides in providing new insights into the emerging field of
complex and multi-component nanoparticle synthesis with enhanced functionality.
The proposed work is expected to have an impact on a number of applications.
Examples include metal-particle based plasmonic structures for enhanced solar
cells and waveguides, where it is of interest to have a substrate covered by
ordered arrays of metallic nanoparticles. The proposal also includes the
development of software that will be available to researchers in the community,
and educational activities for graduate and undergraduate students.