* 1604471
* Solid Polymer Thin Film Electrolytes to Enable 3D Lithium Ion Batteries
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Wyatt Tenhaeff, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 06/30/2020
* USD 306,445.00

1604471 PI: Tenhaeff&lt;br/&gt;Title: Solid Polymer Thin Film Electrolytes to
Enable 3D Lithium Ion Batteries&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The miniaturization of
microelectronic devices and microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) has enabled
the development of multi-billion dollar industries that commercialized
remarkable technologies, including distributed sensors, implantable biomedical
devices, wearable electronics, and "the internet of things". Three-dimensional
lithium ion batteries (3D batteries) are envisioned as incredibly flexible
energy storage devices to power the next generation of ubiquitous
microelectronic devices and MEMS. The fabrication of 3D batteries requires
breakthroughs in the preparation of ultrathin, solid-state electrolytes. This
project focuses on the understanding and controlling polymer thin film synthesis
via initiated chemical vapor deposition (iCVD) to enable precise fabrication of
electrolyte materials for 3D batteries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A key scientific
objective of the proposed project is to understand how the chemical, physical,
and electrochemical properties of ultrathin polymer electrolytes must be
synthetically controlled via iCVD to achieve stable, reversible electrochemical
cycling in solid-state 3D lithium ion batteries. These ultrathin polymer
electrolytes will be subsequently integrated into two-dimensional thin film
batteries in order to further understand materials requirements imposed by the
energy storage electrodes and thin film processing. The ultimate objective is to
fabricate complete, full 3D battery cells and study the influence of 3D
architectures on electrochemical performance and correlated effects.
Optimization of materials and cell designs will be performed to maximize 3D
battery performance. New insights into fundamental structure-property-function
relations emerging from the proposed study may have significant potential to
advance the fabrication of 3D batteries as well as a wide range of other
devices. The PI plans to train graduate students, engage undergraduate students
in research, and develop a new iCVD module for the undergraduate Reaction
Engineering and Reactor Design course. A proposed outreach effort will focus on
engaging underrepresented minority students from the Rochester City School
District.