* 1604433
* Collaborative Research: Computational and Experimental Investigation of High-Flux Heating of Supercritical Fluids in Microscale Geometries
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2016,02/28/2021
* Brian Fronk, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Ying Sun
* 02/28/2021
* USD 156,308.00

At a sufficiently high temperature and pressure, fluids become supercritical.
When a supercritical fluid is heated, it does not undergo a change in phase from
a liquid to vapor like in familiar boiling processes. Rather the fluid undergoes
a continuous transition from "liquid like" to "gas like" properties without the
formation of bubbles. During this "pseudo-critical" transition, the fluid can
absorb a great quantity of heat per degree of temperature increase, which
potentially enables new high-intensity heat transfer technologies without the
instabilities, critical heat flux, and maldistribution issues that cause
challenges in two-phase boiling solutions. By harnessing the unique properties
of supercritical fluids, it may be possible to further develop higher power,
compact computer chips and more efficient high temperature solar thermal
systems. To explore these possibilities, the research team will study a new
thermal management framework employing supercritical carbon dioxide (sCO2) in
the pseudo-critical region in microscale flow geometries. Under these conditions
sCO2 has extremely high volumetric heat capacity and thermal conductivity,
enabling management of high heat fluxes (~500 W cm-2). New engineering resources
and models formulated in this study will enable rapid adoption of supercritical
cooling in real-world technologies. Additionally, improved understanding of
microscale supercritical fluid transport can yield advances in diverse
technologies including enhanced oil extraction, near-zero global warming
potential (GWP) supercritical refrigeration and power cycles, and
solvent/impregnation processes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will
conduct an integrated experimental and computational investigation to elucidate
the complex governing phenomena during heating of sCO2 and general supercritical
fluids at pseudocritical conditions in microscale geometries. Local fast-
response temperature measurements and infrared thermal imaging will resolve the
existence of, and quantify the effects of key supercritical phenomena at this
scale, including pseudo-boiling, intrinsic flow pulsations, heat-transfer
enhancement and/or deterioration due to sharp property variations, pin-fin wake
interactions, and conjugate heat transfer effects. Experiments will be conducted
with supercritical CO2 at high pressure (75 &lt; P &lt; 200 bar) and heat
fluxes, and microfabrication techniques will be leveraged to explore advanced
geometries of interest for electronics cooling and solar thermal applications.
Extensive detached eddy simulation (DES) computations will be performed to
provide detailed local flow data to complement experiments, and enable
generalization beyond specific working fluids and operating conditions. DES
represents a new approach to study supercritical convective transport that
captures key unsteady turbulent phenomena in the channel bulk, unlike Reynolds
averaged formulations employed in previous studies, but without the extreme
computational costs of LES/DNS that also fully resolve near-wall regions. Once
experimentally validated, simulations will be employed to extend results to
supercritical flows with diverse configurations and geometries. In these studies
individual fluid property trends will be modulated independently to isolate and
quantify critical effects that have previously only been characterized through
lumped parameter descriptions. This approach will enable generalization of
results to the broader family of supercritical flows, rather than just specific
fluids employed in experiments. Integration of detailed experimental and
computational data will yield consolidated analytical transport models,
facilitating rapid translation of fundamental research to practical thermal
management technologies.