* 1604468
* Turbulent-convection experiments at extreme conditions using cryogenic nitrogen
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Devesh Ranjan, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 08/31/2021
* USD 332,545.00

PI: Ranjan, Devesh Proposal Number: 1604468

Natural convection occurs when fluid is heated and starts to rise. The focus of
the proposed research is to investigate natural convection at extreme conditions
in terms of the parameters that are important to the process. Applications are
found in several important natural and engineering flows. Large scale natural
systems such as the Earth's atmosphere - its oceans as well as the Earth's
mantle - and the interior of stars such as the Sun, are all affected to various
degrees by natural convection.

The simplified physical model used to understand this ubiquitous heat transport
mechanism is Rayleigh-BÃ©nard (RB) convection, which is a fluid flow driven by a
temperature difference between the top and bottom plates of an experimental cell
with adiabatic sidewalls. Despite the long history of the subject and the recent
progress in theoretical, numerical and experimental domains, many questions
remain unresolved. A fundamental question concerns the heat transfer scaling in
highly turbulent convective flows and in particular regarding the transition to
the asymptotic regime of enhanced heat transfer. Other questions are related to
the flow structures at these extreme flow parameters, and in particular about
the existence of irregular polygonal structures that resemble those observed
just above the onset of convection. This project aims to explore RB convection
at extreme parameters by using liquid or gaseous nitrogen close to its
coexistence curve, from 77K at 1 atm to its critical point (about 126K and 34
bar/500psi) in a facility at Georgia Institute of Technology. The proposed
research will provide visualization of the flow structures at conditions for
which none exist. Available experimental results at these extreme conditions
appear to be in conflict, and the proposed work promises to settle the issue. In
addition to graduate and undergraduate educational activities, there is a plan
to continue collaborating with Guerilla Science, a professional outreach
organization based in NYC and London, with which the PIs developed and run a
fluid dynamics-inspired competition. The goal is to attract young students to
engineering.