* 1604491
* Tailoring the Ionic Liquid Environment in Nanopores for Green Reaction Engineering
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Barbara Knutson, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 08/31/2020
* USD 324,000.00

1604491&lt;br/&gt;PI: Rankin, Stephen E. &lt;br/&gt;Title: Tailoring the Ionic
Liquid Environment in Nanopores for Green Reaction
Engineering&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ionic liquids (ILs) are salts with a low
melting temperature such that they can be used as solvents at or near room
temperature. ILs are considered green solvents because of their low volatility,
but also have unique and tunable properties that allow them to be used in
applications where few alternatives are available, such as the solubilization
and catalytic conversion of lignocellulosic biomass to commodity chemicals.
Recently, molecular and nanometer-scale structural and dynamic features of ILs
have been identified that indicate coexisting domains of both charge and
polarity, which may explain why they are able to dissolve amphiphilic polymers,
such as cellulose and lignin. Introducing a surface leads to density and charge
layering at the interface giving rise to oscillatory surface forces and the
ability to precisely tune surface properties. The proposed work focuses on
tuning these surface properties for ILs in contact with metal complexes confined
in nanopores to provide a local environment for high catalytic performance and
stability. Nanoporous supports provide control in localizing a catalyst,
creating a distinct environment for tuning reactivity and controlling the
partitioning of substrates, reactants and products. This project will translate
the unique local solvent and layered electronic properties of confined ILs to
heterogeneous catalysis, addressing the major limitations of the commercial
applications of ILs. The relationship between the solvent environment in the
confined pore and the corresponding catalytic activity will be applied to
challenging aqueous-based catalysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The dehydration of
D-glucose to 5-hydroxymethylfurfural (HMF) will be used as a model reaction. The
following tasks are proposed: (1) Construction, characterization and control the
local environment of ionic liquids and tethered imidazolium-based ionic liquids
in nanoscale pores as a function of pore size. Surfactant templated silica thin
films with oriented, tunable nanopores (2-20 nm) will serve as the platform for
characterization of the local environment and subsequent catalysis in ionic
liquids. (2) Design of IL/metal ligands and their corresponding silanes to
translate homogeneous catalysis in ILs to effective, stable heterogeneous
catalysts in nanoscale pores. The dehydration of glucose to HMF using non-toxic
aluminum-based catalysts will be investigated, with a goal of improving its
catalytic performance to make it a viable alternative to traditional toxic
catalysts. (3) Demonstration of the catalysis of glucose to HMF from the aqueous
phase and development of a confined IL pore environment that minimizes catalyst
deactivation and leaching due to water uptake.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research project has the potential to generate innovative green/sustainable
chemistry and engineering technologies for a broad range of applications in
catalysis, energy storage, photovoltaics, gas separations, and carbon dioxide
capture. Multi-faceted plans to develop a video-based communication program
(video-CATS) are included, which will train students on how to communicate
science for the benefit of society to a diverse audience.