* 1604751
* Evaluating Stability and Environmental Safety of Nanocomposites
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2020
* Alexander Orlov, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 05/31/2020
* USD 298,832.00

PI: Orlov, Alexander&lt;br/&gt;# 1604751&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nanomaterials and
nanostructures are already revolutionizing many areas of the US manufacturing.
Several composite products containing nanomaterials are also being introduced
into a consumer market. However, developing new Nano products, while ensuring
safety of consumers, is a very critical task to safeguard competitive and
sustainable development of the US nanomanufacturing. The objective of this
project is to address the knowledge gap in stability and rate of release of
Carbon Nanotubes (CNTs) encapsulated in polymers under the influence of
environmental factors. This information will be vital in designing stable and
safe nanocomposites while reformulating the ones potentially posing the health
risks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polymer materials reinforced with these
nanomaterials are now at the verge of transforming many industries. These new
nanocomposites benefit from many unique properties of CNTs, which can deliver
extraordinary stiffness, reduction in weight, increased strength and resilience.
Although CNTs are considered potentially hazardous, they are often viewed as
safe when encapsulated into the polymer matrix. However, systematic research to
confirm the abovementioned paradigm is lacking, despite the potential risks of
released nanomaterials to human health and environment. Our preliminary data
indicate that there is substantial degradation of CNTs -polymer composites due
to exposure to environmental factors, especially UV radiation and moisture,
leading to potential pathways for CNTs release. In the proposed research the PI
will conduct a systematic study of stability of nanocomposites exposed to single
and multiple environmental factors, while accurately quantifying the rates of
nanomaterials release. A very distinct aspect of the proposed research is a
comprehensive evaluation of nanocomposites in terms of their performance and
functionality (mechanical testing), long term stability (environmental exposure
and spectroscopic/microscopy characterization) and toxicity measurements. These
three aspects will give an unprecedented level of detail to evaluate
environmental and health risks of nanocomposites with the most promising
functional properties. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will significantly
impact nanotoxicology, environmental engineering, materials science and green
chemistry/engineering areas through evaluation of various strategies for
delivering functional nanocomposites with reduced health and environmental
impacts. These approaches are designed to make timely contributions to a basic
understanding of the environmental health and safety of nanotechnology. They
will also make a notable contribution to ensuring the competitiveness of the US
nanomanufacturing industry. During the course of this project students will gain
fundamental and applied knowledge in many areas of science and engineering
encompassing environmental health and safety of nanotechnology. By utilizing
innovative on-line tools we will reach underrepresented groups, including
students from minority and economically disadvantaged communities as well as
females. All these activities will establish a good foundation to achieve
notable broader impacts of this proposal.