* 1604183
* Collaborative Research: Understanding, Mitigating, and Controlling Frost Formation Through the Use of Biphilic and Hybrid Surfaces Under Static and Dynamic Conditions
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Amy Betz, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Ying Sun
* 08/31/2020
* USD 220,743.00

#1604183&lt;br/&gt;Betz, Amy R.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Frost formation is a common
occurrence that penalizes energy consumption; it builds up in freezers, covers
car windows, and prevents heat pump air-conditioners from properly functioning.
It also has harmful effects in applications such as airplane safety and
reliability. This research will investigate new surfaces that combine water-
attracting and water-repelling regions to prevent and control frost formation.
During the frost formation process, water coexists as vapor, liquid, and solid
phases. By using surfaces with resilient and optimally positioned interlaced
patterns of water-attracting and water-repelling regions, the transport of the
water is controlled before it freezes. Preliminary results show that controlling
the transport of water in the liquid and vapor phases can significantly increase
the amount of time it takes for freezing to occur and even prevent frost
altogether for certain temperature ranges. Even after water initially freezes on
a surface, frost continues to grow three-dimensionally leading to thick build-up
of frost. The growth of the frost layer is predominately dependent of water
vapor transport. A surface that can selectively attract and repel water vapor
has the potential to change the frost growth pattern and to limit the thickness
of the frost layer. The objective of this work is to investigate various
patterns of water-attracting and water-repelling regions on surfaces and on fin
structures and to discover the widest temperature range possible were frost can
be completely prevented as well as determine how frost formation can be
optimally controlled for significantly less energy consumption in applications
in which the conditions are beyond frost prevention. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will fundamentally investigate new mixed hydrophilic and hydrophobic
surfaces that generate and coalesce supercooled water droplets, that is, water
droplets that remain in the liquid phase at and below freezing temperature. The
interlaced coatings pragmatically relocate these droplets on the heat transfer
surfaces. These new concepts mitigate frost growth, control frost loading, and
maximizes energy conversion efficiencies. The investigation will be approached
collaboratively: Kansas State University will develop the surfaces and study the
droplets in quiescence conditions while Auburn University will characterize the
resilience of the anti-frost properties of the new surfaces under convective
dynamic conditions on fin structures. The objective of this research is to
advance the understanding of how these coatings affect the frost nucleation and
structure during growth. A major innovation from the proposed research will be a
robust surface that provides significantly reduced frost layer, which will
greatly minimize thermal resistance and air flow blockage. This will immediately
augment the energy conversion efficiencies of refrigeration systems and air-
cooled condensers. The experimental results from this work will be also used to
strengthen the models developed by the research team for designing frost
mitigating surfaces.