* 1604756
* GOALI: System Transition toward Sustainability under Uncertainty: Theoretic Framework and Engineering Method Development
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2021
* Yinlun Huang, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 07/31/2021
* USD 356,341.00

1604756 &lt;br/&gt;Huang, Yinlun&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this
project is to develop a theoretic framework for modeling technology-driven
transition toward sustainability for industrial systems and derive optimal
development strategies under uncertainties. Sustainable development is a process
that targets a future state of sustainability for industries, the environment,
and societies. Sustainable development is the pathway to sustainability, which
is chiefly featured by a system's transition from one state to another toward
sustainability goals. This project is designed provide scientific answers to the
following questions: Is a preset sustainability goal achievable under known
constraints? If yes, how to manage the state transition process in an optimal
way? If no, then how to set an achievable sustainability goal, or how to
identify the main obstacle(s) so that the preset goal becomes achievable? In
this GOALI project, Wayne State University and BASF researchers will jointly
study key fundamental aspects of sustainable development of industrial systems,
namely triple-bottom-line-balanced development (economic, environmental, social)
and goal achievability under uncertainty. The theoretic framework and
engineering methodology to be developed should be valuable for studying a wide
spectrum of sustainability problems in any industry and beyond.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The specific objectives are to (i) develop a theoretic framework for
technology-driven system transition toward sustainability, (ii) generate a
unique engineering method for designing sustainable and controllable systems,
(iii) derive optimal development strategies that allow decision makers' active
participation, and (iv) construct a software tool embedding the design method,
which will be used to study sophisticated industrial sustainability problems
through collaboration with BASF. The project will use a vector analysis
technique to analyze the sustainability state transition problem, and to apply
the supervisory-regulatory control technique to formulate and manage the
sustainability state transition process. The project will generate educational
materials for enhancing an introductory course on sustainable engineering open
to all engineering students at WAyne State University. The methodology and the
tool will be disseminated through the Sustainable Manufacturing Advances in
Research and Technology (SMART) Coordination Network that the PI chairs, and the
AIChE Sustainable Engineering Forum, as well as publication. Short courses and
seminars will be arranged with industry. The developed case studies and computer
tool will be structured for use by the students in the NSF REU site program -
Summer Academy in Sustainable Engineering at Wayne State University.