* 1604666
* Collaborative Research: Next-Generation Simultaneously Ion- and Electron-Conducting Block Copolymer Binders for Battery Electrodes
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Rafael Verduzco, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2019
* USD 199,999.00

Rechargeable lithium ion batteries help to enable sustainable energy systems by
storing electricity generated by intermittent renewable resources such as wind
and solar energy, or by powering zero-emission electric vehicles charged by
electricity from renewable resources. Lithium-ion batteries are comprised of a
variety of materials for storing and releasing ions, transporting electrical
charge, and maintaining mechanical integrity. Binder materials, although
representing less than 10% of the battery by weight, are an important component
for maintaining adhesion between the different materials. This collaborative
project will develop a new class of binding materials based on polymers that are
both conductive and electrochemically active, enhancing both mechanical and
electrochemical properties. The scientific research will establish the
principles for the design of electroactive polymeric binders for lithium ion
batteries. The key innovation is that the polymer material will be designed at
the molecular level to enable these electroactive properties. When properly
designed at the molecular level, these polymers have potential to improve the
stability and performance of a wide range of battery electrodes. The educational
activities associated with this project will provide opportunities for community
college students to work on the development of conjugated polymers for energy
storage. Furthermore, outreach activities to K-12 students from diverse and
underrepresented groups are planned through Chemistry Open House, Empowering
Leadership Alliance, Schlumberger Energy Institute, and the Sally Ride Festival.

In lithium ion battery systems, polymeric binders provide adhesion with various
electrode components and stabilize contact with the current collector. However,
current binders are electronically inactive. Substantial improvements in
electrode performance and capacity may be possible through the molecular design
of electroactive polymeric binders. Towards this end, polymeric binders that are
ion-conducting, electron-conducting, and redox-active as well as mechanically
stable, are needed. The goal of this research is to develop and understand the
functionality of the polymer materials needed to enable these properties. The
research plan will consider polymers that contain electronically conductive
backbones, side chains for self-doping and ionic conductivity, and redox-active
carbonyl groups. The research plan has three objectives. The first objective is
to synthesize co-polymers that conduct both ions and electrons simultaneously,
and characterize their resulting structural, physiochemical, and electrochemical
properties. The second objective is to characterize the
electrochemical/mechanical properties of hybrid anodes containing a silicon base
material and polymer binders developed under the first objective. The third
objective is to incorporate redox-active groups into the polymer backbone and
examine their role on conductive polymer binder properties. Through this
approach, this work seeks to establish the fundamental properties that influence
conductivity, mechanical integrity, and electrochemical activity of the
polymeric materials to suggest design rules for electroactive binders that are
compatible with a broad range of electrode materials.