* 1604095
* Collaborative Research: SusChEM: Designing Catalytic Interfaces to Promote Selective Lignin Depolymerization
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Susannah Scott, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 07/31/2020
* USD 225,000.00

Lignin is one of the three major components of woody and grassy plant cell
walls, and its chemical make-up is not only carbon-rich but also resembles many
petroleum-based chemical precursors. This project addresses challenges presented
by the catalytic deconstruction of lignin into its constituent units in an
effort to generate renewable and low-cost aromatic chemicals. Specifically, the
aims are to understand how the catalyst interacts with portions of lignin that
are susceptible to cleavage. The catalyst contains copper nanoparticles
dispersed on a porous solid support, and in supercritical methanol (sc-MeOH) it
catalyzes the cleavage of solid lignin to energy-rich organic liquids without
forming char. Two key problems are movement of the bulky, poorly soluble polymer
and access to the internal surfaces of the catalyst. By tuning the reaction
conditions and the properties of the catalytic material, the interactions of the
catalyst with lignin will be optimized to enhance depolymerization and enable
economical production of renewable aromatic chemicals.

The goal is to develop innovative, sustainable, and scalable conversion
processes that generate platform renewable chemicals from lignin economically
using porous solid catalysts made with Earth-abundant materials. This project
will test two overarching hypotheses: 1) that lignin absorption into a porous
catalyst and its adsorption onto catalyst surfaces induce conformational changes
that increase interactions between the lignin and the catalyst; and 2) that
porous catalysts with appropriate internal structure and composition maximize
interactions of the key aryl ether linkages with catalytically active sites. The
research will involve: 1) ordered mesoporous catalysts with controlled and
systematically varied pore architecture and surface functionality (i.e.,
hydrophobicity); 2) lignin dimer and oligomer model systems that have controlled
and systematically varied chain length, proportion of linkages that are aryl
ethers, and spacers between aryl ether linkages, and 3) in-situ assessment of
adsorption modes and reaction kinetics. The plan to achieve these objectives and
test these hypotheses involves synthesizing both lignin â-O-4 model systems and
templated mesoporous catalysts with controlled and systematically varied
structures and compositions to probe solvent-lignin, solvent-catalyst, and
lignin-catalyst interactions; and 2) using advanced spectroscopic methods to
probe interfacial interactions between lignin and catalyst in order to
understand how they promote selective lignin depolymerization by hydrogenolysis
of aryl ether linkages. The research team will collaborate with the Institute
for School Partnership to develop outreach and education activities for
underrepresented and underprivileged 8th grade students in the St. Louis
community. Specifically, the outreach efforts will include an annual ?Researcher
for a Day? program for local underrepresented minority middle school students
through a campus visit, a campus tour, and lab demonstrations. A similar
activity will be offered through the SciTrek outreach program at UC Santa
Barbara.