* 1604531
* Collaborative Research: In vivo Deep Tissue Imaging with Ultrafast, Volumetric Super-Resolution Microscopy
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2021
* Leslie Ying, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 06/30/2021
* USD 269,700.00

Jia, Shu / Ying, Leslie &lt;br/&gt;1604565 / 1604531 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
work will advance the discovery and understanding of the brain, improve
healthcare, and enhance infrastructure for research and education. The project
will lay the foundation for a better understanding of neurodegenerative diseases
such as Alzheimer's in both biological and clinical investigations. The super-
resolution spectroscopy advances will provide fast, molecular level, non-
invasive, high specificity imaging tools for translational medical
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop a new volumetric,
ultrafast super-resolution microscopy to overcome technical barriers for in vivo
investigations of tissue and organ functions. Switching methods, such as
stochastic optical reconstruction microscopy (STORM) rely on imaging of single
molecules to reconstruct fluorescence images with sub-diffraction-limited
resolution. The roles of microglia in response to Ab (Amyloid beta) are
crucially involved in the diseased (AD) brain; and ultimately provide tools and
solutions for clinical investigations. The proposed super-resolution
investigation will provide new insights into the role of microglia to the
maintenance of brain function and in response to pathological insults. The
proposed work will pave the technological and intellectual foundation for deeper
understanding of the microglial response and influence to neurodegenerative
disorders.