* 1604087
* GOALI: Biocatalysis Development using High-throughput Droplet Microfluidics and Mass Spectrometry
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Robert Kennedy, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 08/31/2020
* USD 425,000.00

1604087&lt;br/&gt;Kennedy, Robert T. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
project is to develop a new approach to facilitate the development of faster,
greener, and cheaper ways of synthesizing drugs. The challenge in using enzymes
is that natural occurring enzymes do not often catalyze the exact reaction that
is needed for a pharmaceutical development project. The goal in this project is
to develop a high-throughput, highly miniaturized method of engineering enzymes
to perform desired reactions. It is anticipated that this technology can be used
to develop such biocatalysts in a few days for any desired chemical
transformation. This capability could greatly facilitate drug development
projects by making available tailor-made catalysts for any reaction in a time
and cost-effective manner. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Enzyme engineering for
pharmaceutical process chemistry and manufacturing has become a revolutionary
technology as enzymatic transformations potentially offer high yield,
selectivity and enantiomeric purity with low cost and green chemistry. The team
proposes development of a novel screening system to reduce the material use,
eliminate special reagents and improve the overall throughput in enzyme
engineering and screening. The three key modules include (i) cell-free protein
synthesis (CFPS), (ii) droplet microfluidics and (iii) mass spectrometry (MS).
CFPS offers the potential speed advantage as it bypasses the cell growth and
protein harvest steps. It can be completed with shorter cycle time, produces
purer proteins, and at the same time allows active monitoring, direct
manipulation, and rapid sampling. Droplet microfluidics offers a platform for
performing reactions and assays in nanoliter or less volume which is also
adaptive to be automated. MS allows the possibility for fast development of
label-free assays for a wide variety of potential substrates with minimal delay.
The proposed approach is transformative because it will allow virtually any
enzymatic transformation to be engineered in 10-fold less time by eliminating
the need to develop labels, coupled reactions, or using cells in the process.
The proposed technology will be useful also for other applications in chemical
process development.&lt;br/&gt;This award by the Biotechnology and Biochemical
Engineering Program of the CBET Division is co-funded by the GOALI Program of
the Division of Industrial Innovation and Partnerships.