* 1604249
* Collaborative Research: Nutritional Landscapes of Arctic Caribou: Observations, Experiments, and Models Provide Process-Level Understanding of Forage Traits and Trajectories
* GEO,OPP
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2023
* Jeffrey Welker, University of Alaska Anchorage Campus
* Standard Grant
* Colleen Strawhacker
* 12/31/2023
* USD 1,103,608.00

Terrestrial Arctic systems are the result of complex interactions between
climate, vegetation, herbivores, and humans that must be studied together to
understand their functional&amp;#8232;traits. While low temperatures and short-
growing seasons limit plant growth, enough plant biomass exists to support herds
of migratory caribou, on which Alaska Natives depend. Any changes in the plants
at the base of the food web can have cascading consequences for herbivores and
human consumers and their interactions. Today, the Arctic system is in the midst
of change resulting in new vegetation assemblages, changes in the nutritive
value of plant tissues, and ultimately in the diets of migratory caribou and the
humans that depend on them. This project examines the nutritional landscape of
the Central Arctic Caribou Herd as a unifying concept, describing the
nutritional landscape as caribou available protein (CAP) and caribou available
energy&amp;#8232;(CAE), integrative forage quantity measures that reflect
biomass, species composition, plant&amp;#8232;C and N content, digestibility,
and secondary compounds. The core objectives are gaining understanding of the
drivers of spatial and temporal patterns in the amounts of CAP and CAE across
the tundra; caribou use of this nutritional landscape; how the amounts of CAP
and CAE will differ in the future under likely climate scenarios and long-term
experiments, and the interactions between caribou and Native communities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this study involve several groups
of Alaskan stakeholders, including: harvesters of the North Slope community of
Nuiqsut, the worldwide caribou community, and students at multiple stages of
education. The project will embed a team member with hunters in
Nuiqsut,&amp;#8232;and develop an educational scientific documentary on the
caribou - Alaska Native interactions for&amp;#8232;high school students. The
group plans to employ village students and undergraduates affiliated with the
Alaska Native Science&amp;#8232;and Engineering Program to assist with
experimental work and vegetation collection at Toolik Lake. This research is
significant to ecologists from the Circumarctic Rangifer
Monitoring&amp;#8232;and Assessment Network, dedicated&amp;#8232;to caribou
conservation and sustainable management in the US, Canada, and Scandinavia, who
will use the data to consider how a suite of climate change scenarios affect
herd fecundity and population dynamics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual
merit of this project stems from the merging of five elements to understand
Arctic&amp;#8232;System function and response to climate change: (1) A
landscape-scale assessment of plant species, soil and plant C and N,
digestibility, and secondary compounds that will be used&amp;#8232;to calculate
the amounts of CAP (kg m-2) and CAE (kJ m-2); (2) analysis of how closely
caribou foraging is tied to the nutritional landscape throughout the year; (3)
analysis of samples&amp;#8232;from an existing long-term winter - summer climate
change experiment to provide data on how&amp;#8232;CAP and CAE will differ in
the future; (4) prediction of future nutritional landscapes
and&amp;#8232;caribou foraging interactions; and (5) observations of Alaska
Native hunter harvesting and attributes&amp;#8232;of the system that determine
their spatial and temporal patterns. These project components will enable an
integrative understanding of how an important herbivore, caribou, interact with
a landscape that is rapidly changing. This research: (1) examines the Arctic
System from primary production to secondary consumers and
the&amp;#8232;influence of climate change across multiple trophic levels; (2)
applies broadly by examining&amp;#8232;the most abundant large herbivore and its
food sources, both of which are distributed throughout&amp;#8232;the Arctic; and
(3) integrates experimental, observational, and modeling approaches to
understanding ecological systems and climate change. The integration of
observation, experimental data&amp;#8232;and modeling to describe current and
forecast future nutritional landscapes is intended to provide
a&amp;#8232;mechanistic understanding of Arctic System function and transform
the understanding&amp;#8232;of climate-vegetation-caribou-subsistence hunter
interactions.