* 1604374
* Multi-Stakeholder Decision-Making for the Development of Livestock Waste-to-Biogas Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Rebecca Larson, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 06/30/2020
* USD 300,000.00

1604374 PI: Zavala Tejeda&lt;br/&gt;Title: Multi-Stakeholder Decision-Making for
the Development of Livestock Waste-to-Biogas
Systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Livestock waste generated at U.S. animal feeding
operations is estimated to be 300 million tons per year. Most of this waste is
disposed of in lagoons or stored outdoors to decompose, leading to numerous
environmental issues such as greenhouse gas (methane and nitrous oxide) and
ammonia emissions, eutrophication of surface waters resulting from phosphorus
runoff, and human exposure to pathogenic bacteria. Biogas production from
livestock waste provides a promising alternative to address these issues while
providing a wide range of valuable byproducts such as electricity, bedding, and
organic fertilizer. The EPA's AgSTAR program reports that about 8,000 U.S. farms
could support biogas systems, providing about 1,600 MW of electricity (enough to
power one million homes) and reducing methane emissions by 1.8 million metric
tons (equivalent to taking 6.5 million cars off the road). Despite this
potential, the development of biogas systems has been limited by high technology
costs, competing prices for natural gas obtained from non-renewable sources, and
limited government policies and incentives. This project aims to develop
optimization models and the necessary solution approaches as a multi-stakeholder
decision making tool for developing biogas production systems from livestock
waste. The proposed work is cross-disciplinary, combining ideas from multi-
objective and stochastic optimization, social choice and economics, high-
performance computing, and agricultural and energy
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A key scientific objective of the proposed project
is the development of computationally efficient solution strategies for multi-
stakeholder, multi-objective optimization problems. The proposed project will
pioneer the incorporation of credible social objective metrics into optimization
models. The PIs propose new metrics for incorporating the impact of decisions on
multiple stakeholders into the model. The models developed will capture a wider
range of technologies and configurations not considered before. In particular,
the PIs will model interactions between waste transport, storage, and processing
systems, feedstocks and nutrient management systems, biogas and electricity
production and delivery systems, and district utility systems. The ability to
couple these systems will provide new opportunities to achieve economic
viability and to evaluate environmental and social impacts. The developed
frameworks will identify socially-optimal compromise solutions that factor in
the priorities of multiple stakeholders (urban/rural communities, environmental
groups, farmers, technology providers, and local/regional governments). This
will be achieved by using statistical metrics, such as the conditional value at
risk and the generalized entropy index. The use of these metrics will enable
policy makers to assess the impact of their decisions on stakeholder
satisfaction. The project team has access to real data sets and a group of
stakeholders for formulating realistic case studies that may have immediate
impact on the decision-making processes of the involved stakeholders. The PIs
plan to train a PhD student and develop new teaching materials for undergraduate
and graduate courses. They also propose outreach activities to increase public
awareness on the effects of methane emissions from animal farms and recruit
students from underrepresented minorities into STEM fields.