* 1604633
* New Directions in Ultrashort Pulse Laser Diagnostics: Towards Collision-Independent Multi-Species Detection and Imaging in Harsh Chemical Environments
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2020
* Waruna Kulatilaka, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* John Daily
* 05/31/2020
* USD 350,000.00

1604633 - Kulatilaka&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;State-of-the-art, nonintrusive optical
and laser-based diagnostic methods can unveil tremendous opportunities for
scientists and engineers designing next generation engines, power plants,
propulsion systems, chemical and plasma processing facilities, among many
others. The overarching goal of this research project is to develop novel
species measurement technique to characterize fundamental physical and chemical
processes in harsh environments such as those present in modern gas turbine
combustor and IC engines. The new techniques developed here have the potential
to uncover quantitative, spatially and temporally resolved key intermediate
species measurements in reacting flow systems by using the latest developments
in the ultrashort pulse laser technology. In addition to primary research
outcomes, graduate and undergraduate students including minorities and
underrepresented groups are trained in unique, next-generation laser
fundamentals and applications. Students work in multidisciplinary research
environments and often interact with outside research teams, preparing them for
successful future careers in optics and energy related technologies. Research
findings will be incorporated into ongoing curriculum and course development
work as well as our outreach activities for K-12 STEM groups, further enhancing
the broader impacts of this effort. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical
objective of this project is to develop an ultrafast-laser-based optical
diagnostic technique capable of measuring chemical species-with initial focus on
highly reactive atomic species-in harsh environments without taking in to
account complex quenching processes that limit the precision and accuracy of
such measurements. Space and time varying concentrations of quenching partners
are virtually impossible to quantify in such turbulent flow fields. Furthermore,
temperature- and pressure-dependent species-specific quenching cross section
data needed for corrections are rather limited and virtually impossible to
obtain in many practical situations. In recent years, significant advances have
been made in femtosecond-laser-based diagnostic tools for high-repetition-rate
imaging of atomic and molecular species in flames and plasmas. However,
molecular quenching effects have still prevailed in these diagnostics. In the
present work, innovative new nonlinear optical techniques are investigated to
elevate such diagnostics to the next level by measuring important atomic and
molecular species without the need of quenching corrections. The new diagnostics
will be evaluated in high-pressure conditions as well and complex reacting
turbulent flow conditions. Subsequently, they will be used to generate critical
data sets for chemical kinetics model validation in a selected set of turbulent
flames and to characterize a new type of 'wall-less' reactor designed for
chemical kinetics studies.