* 1604544
* Optochemical Control of the Neuron-Astrocyte Circuit
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Kira Poskanzer, University of California-San Francisco
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 06/30/2020
* USD 299,997.00

Astrocytes are star-shaped glial cells in the brain and spinal cord. They are
connective tissue cells of the nervous system that link nerve cells to blood
vessels and, by wrapping round brain capillaries, help to form the blood-brain
barrier. Understanding of astrocyte signaling seriously lags in comparison with
that of neurons, because the astrocytes are not electrophysiologically active.
It is not known what extracellular signals astrocytes respond to and how they
contribute to circuit function. The research proposed by Poskanzer has the
promise of elucidating these key questions. The research has high potential to
gain new insight and scientific knowledge. Neural circuits involve many cell
types, although the vast majority of circuit studies neglect to take into
account the non-neuronal glial cells in the brain. This proposal addresses gaps
in our understanding of glial cells in neural circuit function and harnesses the
power of light-activatable tools to tackle them. The PI applies a suite of
optochemical tools that allow spatiotemporally precise and physiologically
relevant release of neurotransmitter to astrocytes and neurons in cortical brain
circuits. Compounds promising for research will be made available to the
scientific community, and many collaboration opportunities are available at
USCF. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI proposes to use ruthenium-bipyridine (RuBi)
cages to deliver neurotransmitters to astrocytes by photo-activation and
monitoring the response from Ca++ activity in their branches by a genetically
encoded Ca++ indicator using a second laser. She will test the hypothesis that
astrocytes can respond to neurotransmitters and whether astrocytes can be
activated in vivo. This proposal investigates the very fundamental question of
how astrocytes respond to a range of neurotransmitters. Novel compounds will be
developed to deliver controllable concentrations of neurotransmitters to cells.
Calcium response will be monitored and astrocyte response will be studied as
concentration is varied. Following initial in-vitro testing in brain slices. She
will test the hypothesis that astrocytes can respond to neurotransmitters and
whether astrocytes can be activated in-vivo in mice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI
has a unique international collaboration with the Etchenique lab in Argentina
and is enthusiastic about introducing biology students to imaging techniques, as
evidenced by the relevant Cellular and Molecular Neuroscience course and the
position with the Woods Hole Marine Lab. Undergraduate students will be involved
through the USCF summer research program, and K-12 outreach through the science
and health education partnership.