* 1604076
* Collaborative Research: Glacier-Ocean Interactions at a Greenland Ice Shelf at Tidal to Interannual Time Scales
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2019
* Andreas Muenchow, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 07/31/2019
* USD 360,488.00

The rate of ice loss at the ocean margins of the great glacial ice sheets is the
largest unknown in predictions of future global sea level change. Many physical
processes at a range of time and space scales determine this mass loss, but
their relative roles in net loss or gain and trends are poorly understood. This
project will investigate the physics of glacier-ocean interaction for a specific
system, Petermann Gletscher (PG), using data to improve understanding of
processes at the marine margin of PG that drains a large fraction of the
Greenland Ice Sheet (GIS) into a deep fjord connected to Nares Strait via a
floating, up to 1800 feet thick, ice shelf. The ice shelf has undergone
significant retreat in the last few years, from 80 km long in 2010 to 50 km
today. Observations of warming of the deep water in Nares Strait and Petermann
Fjord, and of ice-shelf thinning during the decade preceding retreat, lead to a
hypothesis that increased basal melting contributes to loss of the ice shelf.
The project is motivated by three aspects of the Petermann Gletscher and Fjord
system: (1) its importance as a gateway for GIS mass loss; (2) comparison of
ocean dynamics in Petermann Fjord with previously studied southern Greenland
systems; and (3) the value of PG as a well-constrained system for studying
processes that contribute to mass loss from other northern Greenland and
Antarctic ice-shelf systems and their contribution to rising global sea level.
The project takes advantage of recent observations of this system, including
ongoing satellite-relayed data from sub-ice-shelf
moorings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project would contribute to the development
of a diverse STEM workforce through support for the training of two graduate and
three undergraduate students, including a student from an under-represented
group in STEM fields. The PI would continue his international collaborations
with Swedish, English, and Canadian collaborators that were developed as part of
the initial Petermann Gletscher study aboard I/B Oden in 2015. Outreach to the
general public would be facilitated through the PI?s website, blog, occasional
media interviews, and embedding national print journalists in the field work.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Time series analyses will characterize how sub-glacial
waters change along the central melt channel with the tides and seasons.
Description of the average state and interpretation of variations will be aided
by ocean survey data properties collected in the adjacent ocean by ship between
2003 and 2015. Both time- and frequency-domain statistical analyses will reveal
correlation time and space scales. More specifically, Fourier, wavelet, and
Hilbert transforms will be used to provide estimates of amplitude and phase at
discrete scales. Frequency-domain linear system analyses will reveal input-
output relations between multiple time series that represent forcings (e.g.,
atmospheric temperature and wind stress when sea-ice is mobile or absent, tides)
and responses (e.g., depth of surface mixed layer, heat content of the meltwater
plume, ice velocity and basal melt rate). Analyses of data from GPS and pressure
sensors at each mooring will determine the degree of floatation at each site as
the glacier transitions from &gt;365 m to &lt;100 m in thickness. Summer ocean
surveys describe the inflowing Atlantic waters that will become diluted by basal
melt and by direct injection of freshwater. Thermodynamic constraints on the
solid-to-fluid phase transition of glacier ice melted by the ocean result in a
characteristic relation of ocean temperatures and salinity (the Gade-line),
which is set by the latent heat of melting. A second mixing line arises from
ice-shelf surface melting and direct runoff into the fjord. In some fjord
systems, this component includes a substantial discharge of subglacial water
generated upstream of the grounding line. The proposed temperature-salinity
analyses will reveal the importance of this sub-glacial freshwater source along
the central melt-channel.