* 1604978
* Modification of Near-Wall, High-Reynolds Number Velocity Profiles With Polymer Solution
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Brian Elbing, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 07/31/2020
* USD 297,234.00

PI: Elbing, Brian&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1604978&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
addition of a very small amount of polymers to a fluid can result in a dramatic
reduction of friction for turbulent flows. It is proposed to conduct state-of-
the-art experiments in a newly built facility to obtain an extensive amount of
detailed data for the process at different conditions, and then develop a
predictive model for the polymer effects on the fluid velocity. Drag reduction
with polymers can be used to save energy for fluid transportation over long
distances, e.g., for oil pipelines. It can also reduce energy costs for ocean
faring vehicles (ships and submarines). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research is to investigate how drag-reducing polymer solutions modify the near-
wall region of a high-Reynolds number turbulent boundary layer. While this has
been thought to be understood for decades, recent numerical and experimental
data show significant deviation from the classical view. Available data shows a
non-universal behavior when the drag reduction is above 40%, which can only be
partially explained by a Reynolds number effect. Consequently, the behavior must
be dependent on polymer properties. Thus, this project will focus on
characterizing the near-wall region at various values of drag reduction,
Reynolds number and polymer properties (i.e., Weissenberg number, viscosity
ratio, and length ratio). The first objective is to perform this
characterization in a polymer ocean to eliminate the influence of a non-
homogeneous polymer concentration field. Then testing will be repeated with
polymer injection to assess the sensitivity of the profiles to the homogeneity
of the concentration field. Finally, the ultimate profile, an empirically
derived upper limit for the velocity shift, will be reexamined in both a polymer
ocean and with polymer injection to determine the validity of numerical and
experimental observations that the profile is not logarithmic. It will also be
examined under what conditions this profile can actually be exceeded. In
addition to graduate and undergraduate student participation, high-school
students will be engaged in research through the PI's involvement with the job-
shadowing component of Oklahoma State University's Upward Bound program, which
is focused on low-income and/or first generation high school students. Each
year, up to 3 of these students would work with the PI for 6 weeks.