* 1604116
* Establishing the principles and demonstrating the unique properties of novel reconfigurable nano- and microparticle structures bound by liquid bridges
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Orlin Velev, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 07/31/2021
* USD 351,531.00

CBET - 1604116&lt;br/&gt;PI: Velev, Orlin D.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many
technologically important materials are made by assembling colloidal particles
into structures that often start with simple chains or filaments. A variety of
techniques are available to assemble particles into chains, but so far it has
proven challenging to make permanent chains that are flexible. This project will
explore a new method for making highly flexible particle chains based on
capillary attractions between particles coated with liquid lipids, which is
broadly similar to the way sandcastles are bound by small volumes of liquid. The
particles assemble due to liquid bridges that form between them when they are
aligned by a magnetic field. Because the bridges are fluid, the resulting
filaments are extremely flexible. The goal of the project is to characterize the
capillary binding between colloidal particles and demonstrate that it can be
used to make new classes of nanoparticle assemblies in the form of filaments,
networks, and gels. Results of the project will provide new opportunities for
assembling soft multifunctional materials whose properties can be dynamically
controlled, such as temperature-responsive and self-repairing gels and novel 3D
printing inks. The unusual characteristics of the materials that will be made in
the project will provide a unique opportunity for science demonstrations to
high-school students how nanoscale structures affect macroscopic properties. The
project will provide training grounds for students to participate in hands-on
research in nanoscale engineering&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Super-paramagnetic
nanoparticles will be dispersed into aqueous solutions of fatty acid salts,
which completely wet the particle's surface. Fatty acid molecules condense onto
the surface to form liquid-like shells. The liquid-coated nanoparticles are
assembled by applying an external magnetic field to align the particles into
filaments, which remain intact after the external field is removed. The physical
properties of filaments and other structures formed by the nanocapillary binding
of isotropic and patchy particles will be investigated as a function of bridge
fluidity, type and composition of the surface-condensed lipid. The project will
focus on understanding the fundamental origins and measuring the magnitude of
the capillary bridging force, on characterizing and modeling the properties of
the assembled filaments, on using the assembly method to make hierarchical nano-
microstructures, and on developing novel thixotropic gels. Such gels, based on
silicone beads capillary bound by a liquid silicone precursor, will be tested as
new material for 3D printing of flexible, porous and biologically compatible
structures.