* 1604767
* Dynamics in thin sheets in flow: flipping, folding, bending and buckling
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2021
* Michael Graham, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 07/31/2021
* USD 320,929.00

CBET - 1604767&lt;br/&gt;PI: Graham, Michael D.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Flows
involving suspensions of particles in a liquid are frequently encountered in
manufacturing of many consumer products and in naturally occurring systems.
Understanding the detailed motion of the suspended particles can be used to
predict the material properties and behavior of the suspension as a whole. This
information can be used by engineering practitioners to design processes to
achieve desired properties in products ranging from familiar household goods to
highly specialized materials. This project involves numerical computations aimed
at understanding the motion of thin flexible sheets that are freely suspended in
a viscous liquid. When suspended in flow, the thin sheets, which are often the
precursors of the final material, can exhibit a variety of interesting motions,
all of which must be understood in order to form the sheets into desired shapes.
The project will use computational methods based on fundamental equations that
govern the motion of the fluid and the mechanical properties of the sheets to
analyze the motion of the sheets and the dynamics of the suspension. The project
will provide opportunities for students at various academic levels to
participate in research. Students, especially those form groups traditionally
underrepresented in science and engineering, will be recruited to the project
from programs at the University of Wisconsin. In addition, the investigators
will participate in developing hands-on demonstrations of fluid mechanics
principles in action for K-12 students through local Boys and Girls Clubs. They
will enlist and train undergraduate and graduate students to participate as
mentors for the youngsters.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Numerical methods that have
been used to analyze deformable particles in flow will be adapted for
calculating the dynamics of freely suspended flexible sheets in canonical flows
such as simple shear and extensional flow. The motion of the sheets and networks
of sheets will be correlated with their rest shapes and the characteristics of
the flow. The effect of bending stiffness and the possible formation of creases
will be investigated and exploited to determine whether the sheets can be forced
by the flow into forming structures such as simple cubes. Simple models of
bistable elastic structures in flow will be examined to quantify interactions
between sheet elasticity and flow. The results of the project will provide
useful information to help analyze fabrication of electronic and polymeric
materials that are processed as thin sheets.