* 1604908
* Dynamics of solvation effects on lithium-sulfur electrochemical processes in sub-nano confinement
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Juchen Guo, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Triantafillos Mountziaris
* 06/30/2019
* USD 329,695.00

1604908 PI: Guo&lt;br/&gt;Title: Dynamics of solvation effects on lithium-sulfur
electrochemical processes in sub-nano confinement&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lithium-
sulfur (Li-S) batteries have the potential of providing higher energy density at
a lower cost, when compared to the commercially available lithium-ion batteries.
In contrast to Li-ion batteries that involve only solid state lithiation-
delithiation reactions, Li-S batteries involve reactions in liquid electrolytes
capable of dissolving lithium polysulfide (LPS) compounds in order to overcome
the barriers posed by the highly insulating nature of sulfur. The performance of
Li-S batteries is currently limited by the difference in the time scales of Li-S
electrochemical reactions and LPS diffusion. The overarching goal of the
proposed project is to investigate new electrode designs that enable the
confinement of sulfur in sub-nanometer structures and eliminate the problems
arising from LPS dissolution. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key scientific objective
of the proposed project is to understand the effects of confinement on the
electrochemical behavior of sulfur in microporous carbon and single-walled
carbon nanonutubes in order to improve the performance of Li-S batteries. In
Li-S batteries, the lithiation-delithiation process requires a sequence of
solid-liquid-solid reactions. The liquid electrolyte must dissolve the
intermediate LPS compounds for high sulfur utilization, but some LPS is lost in
each cycle through diffusion away from the electrode. Sub-nano confinement could
overcome this challenge by blocking the solvent from entering the pores on the
sulfur electrode, so Li+ ions can only enter the pores through desolvation,
effectively immobilizing the Li-S reaction on the electrode surface. The
proposed research will examine the fundamental mechanisms of Li-S
electrochemistry with sub-nano confinement through a concerted experimental and
modeling effort. In addition to training graduate students, the PIs plan to
involve undergraduate students in research and propose an outreach effort
focused at engaging underrepresented minority students from the Rialto Unified
School District High Schools. The outcome of this research project may have a
broader impact on the field of sub-nano confinement in porous nanostructures.