* 1604224
* Quantifying Numerical Dissipation in CFD Codes
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Julian Domaradzki, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 06/30/2020
* USD 300,264.00

PI: Domaradzki, Julian&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
1604224&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results of numerical simulations for fluid flows
obtained using Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) are always contaminated by
errors caused by the representation of the governing equations through a set of
equations that can be solved numerically by computers. This project is about
predicting these errors and developing simulation procedures to account for them
in CFD software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Truncation errors in CFD can only be
neglected if all scales are well resolved by a given mesh and time-step size.
However, for most turbulent flows at high Reynolds numbers resolving all
physically relevant scales is not feasible computationally. Simulating such
flows often requires to model the contributions of unresolved scales by
turbulence modeling procedures, leading to Reynolds-averaged Navier-Stokes
(RANS) simulations or large-eddy simulations (LES), known as explicit turbulence
modeling. In recent years, it has been observed that the truncation errors at
spatial resolutions used in such methods may be of the same order as explicit
turbulence modeling terms, i.e., the truncation errors can be of a similar
magnitude as physical effects one attempts to model. Yet despite the observed
importance of the truncation errors in CFD quantifying their effects remains a
challenging, and largely unresolved task. The truncation errors can be analyzed
analytically, but the analysis is often limited to one dimensional model
problems because of the complications of three dimensionality, iterative
procedures, and nonlocal pressure effects make it impossible otherwise. Because
of that CFD normally employs a number of other, indirect verification/validation
procedures, e.g., comparison with experimental data or running simulations on
progressively refined meshes to establish mesh independent results. This
significantly increases required computational effort. It is thus clear that if
information about truncation errors were more easily accessible it would provide
an important means of improving all CFD analyzes. The primary goal of the
proposed work is to develop, validate, and implement in a software package a
general computational procedure that allows a CFD user to estimate dissipative
properties of the truncation error for an arbitrary CFD code in an arbitrary
simulation case, either as a concurrent part of a given simulation or as a post-
processing step. This research could impact the use of CFD for modeling flows in
many applications, e.g., around airplanes and ground vehicles; flows in internal
combustion engines, turbomachinery, and in rockets; blood flow in a human body;
heating, air conditioning, and ventilation flows in buildings; atmospheric and
oceanic flows responsible for weather, climate, and spreading of pollutants. In
addition to college student training, K-12 educational activities are planned
that take advantage of existing initiatives within the School of Engineering at
the University of South California.