* 1604617
* UNS:Plasmonic Nanoantenna-Based Multiplexing microRNA Assay at Zeptomolar Concentrations
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2016,12/31/2020
* Rajesh Sardar, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 12/31/2020
* USD 329,070.00

PI: Sardar, Rajesh &lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
1604617&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MicroRNAs are small nucleic acid strands that are
becoming important in understanding fundamental biological pathways and disease
diagnostics. The proposed work will attempt measuring them using a technique
that is expected to yield very high sensitivity in biological
samples.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MicroRNAs (miRs) are single-stranded RNAs, capable
of regulating genomic processes. Their measurement is useful in disease
diagnosis, including cancer. Thus circulating miRs have the potential to serve
as diagnostic markers. The current state-of-the-art miR assay is by qRT-PCR,
requiring reverse transcription, labeling and amplification. Preliminary studies
suggest that hybridizing miR to single-strand DNA (ssDNA) that is attached to
gold nanoprisms (GNPs) may induce a novel transduction mechanism via
delocalization of conduction electrons. This electronic effect can be
investigated utilizing localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) properties of
GNPs bound to solid substrates. It is found that GNPs undergo a large LSPR
wavelength shift upon ssDNA/miR hybridization, and is thought to be due to
electronic delocalization, and is an unexplored methodology for analyzing miRs
in biological fluids. Further, there is a potential to develop this new
methodology into a label-free, low cost multiplexing array. This proposal seeks
to validate the electronic delocalization hypothesis by investigating
spacing/electronic conjugation between ssDNA and the GNP surface, a single
mismatch at different positions in ssDNA/miR helix, chemical functionality
attached to ssDNA, and number of nucleotides in miR strands, for structural
characterization of the LSPR-based sensors. The proposed research will result in
LSPR-based miR sensors capable of assaying at ultralow concentrations in
biofluids (Objective 1) via UV-visible spectrometry by monitoring changes in the
LSPR peak. To achieve multiplexing capability, portability and long-term
stability, GNPs will be immobilized at the bottom of plastic multiwall plates.
In this way, each well can be treated as an independent miR sensor (Objective
2). It is expected that assay of 50 distinct miRs excluding positive and
negative controls directly from biofluids using a single 96-well plate, and will
be characterized in absorption mode by a standard plate reader. Such a design is
expected to impact both biomedical research and medical diagnostics. Research
activities will involve high school, undergraduate, and graduate students
through mentored projects, and the research data will be integrated into
existing courses. Nanoscience will be more broadly promoted to middle and high
schools through training school teachers in nanostructure synthesis and women in
science symposium