* 1604700
* Carbon-dioxide and Oxygen Counter-permeable Membrane Reactor for  Hydrogen/Syngas Production from Natural Gas
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Jerry Y.S. Lin, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 08/31/2021
* USD 323,679.00

The discovery of vast natural gas reserves in the U.S., consisting primarily of
methane, has led to a revolution in the US energy and chemical sectors.
Significant research activities are currently being devoted towards the
development of techniques for efficient conversion of natural gas to hydrogen or
syngas. Hydrogen is a clean fuel, while syngas, a mixture of hydrogen and carbon
monoxide, is an important feedstock for the synthesis of a large number of
chemical products. This project aims to develop a new membrane reactor for
oxidative steam reforming of natural gas to hydrogen or syngas. The new reactor
is based on novel ceramic membranes that allow selective counter-permeation of
oxygen and carbon dioxide. Preliminary data suggest that this approach leads to
improved yields, is more energy efficient, and allows for longer operation of
the reactor, due to reduced carbon deposits. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The use of
novel ceramic-carbonate dual-phase membranes for autothermal oxidative steam
reforming of natural gas to hydrogen or syngas has potential for significant
industrial impact. The dual-phase membranes offer significant advantages over
existing methods, due to improved energy and cost efficiency. The project will
focus on improving membrane performance to enable efficient counter-permeation
of carbon dioxide and oxygen during oxidative steam reforming of natural gas.
The project will involve experiments using a prototype membrane reactor and
modeling to understand the underlying chemical and transport mechanisms. The
ultimate objective is to optimize the operating conditions of the reactor for
production of either hydrogen or syngas. The simultaneous separation of carbon
dioxide and controlled addition of oxygen into the reacting mixture is an
innovative and potentially transformative idea that may lead to significant
improvements in energy and cost efficiency. The PI plans to train graduate and
undergraduate students in membrane science, chemical reaction engineering,
ceramic processing, separation processes, and ionic conducting materials.
Research results will be disseminated to the scientific community through
journal publications and conference presentations and will be included in course
materials and workshop lectures. The PI plans to incorporate results from this
project into a Science is Fun program to improve the awareness of K-12 students
on energy production, carbon dioxide emissions and membrane science, while
motivating their interests in pursuing a STEM career path.