* 1604925
* Collaborative Research: Advanced biomanufacturing of functional bionanoparticles for biomedical engineering applications
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Wilfred Chen, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 08/31/2021
* USD 278,823.00

1604826/1604925:Lei/Chen&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research on new nanomaterials has
undergone explosive growth in the past decade. However, the main challenges of
the transition from laboratory-scale to mass production, such as high throughput
manufacturing processes, uniformity, and methodology of monitoring the quality
of large-quantity products have been the bottlenecks to realize their tremendous
potential. The goal of this proposal is to design an advanced manufacturing
process to manufacture genetically engineered multi-functional bio-nanoparticles
(bio-NPs) and to examine and validate their utility for non-invasive imaging of
brain tumor cancer. If successful, this will provide an excellent demonstration
from NSF-style basic science to real-world applications. This project will
positively impact education of graduate, undergraduate and high school students
by integrating advanced biomanufacturing and bioimaging modules into their
educational and laboratory training. A new research-oriented course in
Biomanufacturing will be offered to students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
multidisciplinary project aims to synthesize novel nano-sized multi-functional
outer membrane vesicles (OMVs)decorated with engineered proteins through
fermentation of genetically engineered nano-vesicle-forming E. coli and then
apply the decorated OMVs for non-invasive bioimaging of brain tumor. To
accomplish this, recombinant DNA technology will first be used to design novel
genetically engineered protein multi-functional bio-NPs for capture and
detection functions for bioimaging. The bio-NPs are lipid-based OMVs with a
uniform size and the outer leaflet of the bilayer is decorated with novel
engineered protein fusion, endowing multi-functionality. The OMVs, co-displaying
multiple copies of super-active NanoLuc luciferase enzyme (~150-fold more active
than that of conventional firefly or Renilla luciferase), will contain (i) an
antibody-binding domain for anchoring antibodies of interest, and (ii) a thermo-
responsive elastin-like protein domain for simple purification of the OMVs via
size filtration. A fermentation process integrated with two-stage size
filtration will then be designed for production of multi-functional OMVs.
Finally, the project will validate the functionality of these OMVs for high
performance bioimaging of brain tumor. The proposed research will offer a new
perspective to biomanufacturing while the product can greatly promote global
public health. This novel scalable genetically-engineered manufacturing platform
can be generalized to prepare the OMVs with many other desired functions
suitable for a wide range of applications including bioremediation,
biocatalysts, biosensing, biomass conversion, vaccines, and drug delivery.