* 1604712
* Biorheology of the vitreous gel
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Scott Franklin, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 08/31/2022
* USD 384,357.00

CBET - 1604712&lt;br/&gt;PI: Das, Moumita&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The human eye is
filled with a vitreous gel that becomes progressively more fluid-like with age.
The gel is a composite material composed of a network of stiff collagen fibers
and flexible polysaccharide chains in an aqueous solution. This project will
explore the relationships between the structure of the gel and its mechanical
and thermodynamic properties in order to understand how changes in those
properties are correlated with vision impairment. The project will address these
relationships by studying a reconstituted gel made of the primary components of
the vitreous material. The team of investigators will use a variety of
experimental and theoretical methods to develop a quantitative understanding of
the mechanical properties of the network and the thermodynamics of the
reconstituted gel. The results of the study will provide insight into the
mechanical origin of vitreous related pathologies and may provide guidance into
effective therapeutic strategies to treat vision disorders. Results from the
project will be used in courses for university students in biophysics and
related fields. The team of investigators will participate in several outreach
activities that encourage the participation of students, especially those from
underrepresented groups, in science and engineering subjects. In addition, the
team will participate with high school teachers in summer workshops to emphasize
the importance of high-school mathematics as a foundation for success in college
studies and professional careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will
characterize experimentally the microrheology of the primary components of
vitreous gel using purified extracts of hyaluronic acid, type II heterotypic
collagen network, and reconstituted composites made of the collagen network and
hyaluronic acid. They will use a combination of experimental and theoretical
approaches to construct a mechanical phase diagram of reconstituted gel that can
be used to relate material properties to structure, micromechanics, and
concentrations of hyaluronic acid and collagen. They will construct a
thermodynamic phase diagram of the reconstituted gel using experimental and
analytical methods to investigate the sol-gel, gel collapse, and complex
coacervation transitions in mixtures of hyaluronic acid and collagen. Finally,
they will establish connections between changes in mechanical and thermodynamic
properties of the reconstituted vitreous gel and pathological changes that lead
to vision problems. The project will fill a gap in our understanding of how
material properties of vitreous gel are quantitatively related to its
macromolecular organization and to different types of environmental cues. It
will provide important insights into changes in the vitreous gel with age or
with onset of ocular pathologies. Results of the project may apply broadly to
other materials such as soft biological tissues and biomimetic hydrogels.