* 1604355
* Transforming Robot-mediated Telerehabilitation: Citizen Science for Rehabilitation
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Oded Nov, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 08/31/2021
* USD 311,000.00

1604355 - Porfiri&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Robotic devices have been playing an
increasingly central role in physical rehabilitation due to their capability to
support an increasing range of therapeutic treatments, minimize therapist time
commitment, and record the performance of patients. To further extend
rehabilitation treatments beyond clinical settings and enhance rehabilitation
progress, considerable effort has been devoted toward robot-mediated
telerehabilitation, which allows a physical therapist to remotely monitor and
supervise several patients simultaneously. However, the cost of these devices
and the repetitive nature of the prescribed exercises have significantly
hampered the practicality of robot-mediated telerehabilitation. This project
will open new directions for transforming robot-mediated telerehabilitation,
through the integration of therapeutic treatments with low-cost haptic devices
and interactive online citizen science activities. In the envisioned paradigm,
participants will contribute to citizen science by performing activities that
are part of their therapeutic regiment, and consequently increase the time spent
on otherwise-boring rehabilitation activities. This integration is expected to
not only contribute to scientific research but also increase patient self-
esteem. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research program seeks to advance upper limb
robot-mediated telerehabilitation for patients recovering from stroke by
empowering them through active science participation. The envisioned system
comprises a low-cost haptic joystick interfaced to a PC, which affords online
social interactions in a citizen science research project. Patients will
contribute to an environmental monitoring citizen science project developed by
the research team, by analyzing images acquired by an aquatic mobile robot in a
polluted canal in Brooklyn, NY, while interacting with other patients online. By
harnessing the motivation and interests of patients in science and the
environment, the proposed approach aims to maximize retention and efforts
towards rehabilitation. The analysis will be performed using a haptic joystick,
which provides a force-feedback to the patient while recording salient
rehabilitation performance indices for upper limb rehabilitation. The system
will be tested on both healthy subjects and patients undergoing rehabilitation
for post-stroke hemiparesis through a series of experimental studies that
elucidates the combined effects of force feedback and social interactions on
patient performance and satisfaction.