* 1604129
* Improving the survival of heterogeneous cultures of mesenchymal stem cells
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Kim O'Connor, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 07/31/2021
* USD 599,638.00

1604129&lt;br/&gt;O'Connor, Kim C.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Harnessing the
regenerative capacity of mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) has the potential to
improve the quality of human life by repairing tissue damaged by disease, trauma
and aging. A major challenge to realizing the therapeutic potential of these
adult stem cells is their rapid depletion upon implantation at the site of
tissue injury. MSCs exhibit significant cell-to-cell variation in their capacity
to survive upon implantation, but the molecular basis for this heterogeneity is
poorly understood. The objective of this project is to gain insight into the
molecular mechanisms underlying the heterogeneity in MSC survival. This project
helps to fulfill NSF's mission to advance the progress of science by generating
fundamental knowledge about MSC survival at the molecular level. This knowledge
has the potential to advance the stem cell field by developing novel methods to
improve MSC survival. Greater MSC survival will overcome a critical barrier to
achieve more effective MSC therapies. This study is broadly relevant to other
types of stem cells inasmuch as all stem cells are inherently
heterogeneous.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses a critical need to
improve the survival of mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) upon implantation. Rapid
depletion of the majority of implanted MSCs impedes their ability to regenerate
tissue upon engraftment. The PI has detected considerable cell-to-cell variation
in MSC survival. The objective of this proposal is to gain insight into the
molecular mechanisms underlying the heterogeneity in MSC survival. The central
hypothesis is that MSCs are an ensemble of distinct cell subsets with different
capacity to survive due to differential expression of key signaling molecules.
This project is innovative in exploiting cellular heterogeneity to obtain unique
insight into MSC survival on a molecular level. Aim 1 will evaluate a novel
cell-surface marker of MSC survival in vivo, using a xenoimplantation assay to
quantify survival kinetics. Aim 2 will employ bioinformatics to identify the
first genome-wide gene signature of MSC survival, which will culminate in a
binary classification model to predict MSC survival. This research is
anticipated to develop novel molecular-based strategies to increase survival.
Improving MSC survival is expected to have a positive impact on the therapeutic
efficacy of engrafted MSCs. In addition, complementary educational activities
will contribute to the training of a diverse STEM workforce, including students
underrepresented in STEM fields. The project will provide interdisciplinary
training for graduate and undergraduate students through a unique bioengineering
curriculum and collaborative research, a hands-on laboratory experience with
stem cells for middle school students, and other outreach activities. Project
results will be broadly disseminated to students, scholars and the general
public.&lt;br/&gt;This award by the Biotechnology and Biochemical Engineering
Program of CBET is co-funded by the Mathematical Biology Program of the Division
of Mathematical Sciences.