* 1604008
* Highly Active Nanostructured Electrodes for High Temperature, Degradation-Resistant Solid Oxide Reversible Cells
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2021
* Anil Virkar, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 05/31/2021
* USD 302,136.00

CBET - 1604008 &lt;br/&gt;PI: Virkar, Anil V. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
work deals with the stabilization of oxygen (i.e. air) electrodes for high-
temperature solid oxide electrolysis cells (SOECs), which are used primarily for
converting water to hydrogen. Such devices could be a key component of a
sustainable energy and chemicals future based on wind or solar energy. The
project will focus on synthesis of nanoparticle materials that have potential to
improve the efficiency and stability of SOECs. The proposed work addresses a
fundamental stability problem in solid oxide electrochemical cells that is
shared among a number of devices including solid oxide fuels cells operating in
the reversible mode and certain batteries. Thus, findings that will come out of
the study can potentially benefit energy storage and conversion devices more
broadly than SOECs alone.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SOECs typically operate at high
electrode overpotentials, which in turn, can result in build up of effective
oxygen pressure at the electrode-electrolyte interface, in some cases to the
point of bubble formation. The oxygen build-up can lead to internal cracking and
electrode delamination. Thi project is based on the proposition that
nanostructured electrodes consisting of ionically-conducting particles electrode
and electrolyte materials can substantially lower polarization resistance, lower
oxygen pressure (and the risk of bubble formation), and thereby suppress
degradation. To this end, nanostructured perovskite oxygen electrodes in the
range of 10-50 nm will be deposited on electrolyte discs and fuel electrode
supported cells by a variety of techniques, and then characterized for
polarization resistance using electrochemical impedance spectroscopy. The
measured polarization resistance will be used in combination with
microstructural analysis and calculations to predict degradation behavior that
will be compared with experimental studies.