* 1604983
* SUSCHEM: Effects of renewable biofuels on soot concentrations and soot particle nanostructure
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Lisa Pfefferle, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 06/30/2019
* USD 337,500.00

1604983 - McEnally&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biofuels can potentially meet America's
energy needs and they are a domestic source of energy that lessens dependence on
imported oil. They are green fuels that can reduce net emissions of carbon
dioxide. Most importantly for this project, they emit smaller amounts of most
pollutants when burned, especially soot particles. Soot emissions contribute to
particulate loadings in the atmosphere that produce chronic health effects and
cause millions of deaths worldwide each year. Moreover, soot particles absorb
sunlight and directly heat the atmosphere; recent evidence suggests they are the
second largest contributor to global warming. This project will generate
fundamental combustion data that engineers can use to design cleaner-burning
devices and that policymakers can use to select the biofuels that offer the
greatest benefits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, the combustion
behavior of biofuels will be studied by adding them in small amounts to a
baseline methane flame, then measuring the subsequent changes in species
concentrations and particle properties. This fuel perturbation strategy allows
all of the biofuels to be studied under the same combustion conditions, such
that their propensity to form soot particles and other pollutants can be
directly compared. Thus the measurements will produce a direct ranking of the
emission benefits of potential biofuels. Furthermore, the fuel perturbation
strategy requires only very small samples for testing, which is critical since
fuels are often only available in limited quantities during the development
phase. A good example are biodiesel fuels that will be generated from algal oils
in milliliter quantities by another research group at Yale. Particle
concentrations in the flames will be measured by laser-induced incandescence and
color-ratio pyrometry. Particle size and morphology will be measured by
collecting particles on thermophoretic probes and then analyzing them with
electron microscopy and other surface science techniques. Species concentrations
will be measured by extracting gas samples with a microprobe and then analyzing
them with on-line photoionization mass spectrometry. The species results will
provide insight into the oxidation and pollutant formation mechanisms for the
biofuels, and serve as data for validating computer simulations of these
mechanisms. A general understanding of these mechanisms will help identify which
of the many possible biofuels have the most attractive properties, and computer
simulations will lead to design tools that can be used by practicing engineers.