* 1604186
* Exchange-coupled magnetic metamaterials: fabrication, structure-property correlations, and applications
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Kannan Krishnan, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Yang
* 08/31/2020
* USD 449,993.00

Non-Technical Abstract

This project addresses the arrangement and properties of arrays of nanoscale
magnets fabricated by lithography methods. The fundamental physics component
will investigate, both by experiment and modeling, the stable magnetic
configuration of such arrays subject to different perturbations introduced by
different magnetic underlayers. It will also investigate the possibility of (a)
using such arrays for next generation magnetic recording media for information
storage, and (b) developing a magnetic approach for logic function in
information processing. We will study interactions that can provide much needed
additional freedom to engineer new properties, functionalities and applications.
This proposal will also enable the PI to combine the simultaneous advancement of
discovery with teaching, training, learning, and if appropriate,
commercialization. Technical Abstract

Single domain, nanoscale magnetic elements, fabricated by lithography, and
patterned into ordered arrays, form excellent magnetic metamaterials with
unusual properties. Typically, their behavior is dominated by macroscopic inter-
element dipolar interactions, but here in addition, we propose microscopic
exchange interactions to provide much needed additional freedom to engineer new
properties, functionalities and applications in three distinct areas: (1)
Geometrical frustration in a lattice of nanoscale ferromagnetic islands with
dipolar interactions, leads to the formation of a spin-ice configuration; here
we propose to investigate the materials physics and magnetic configuration of a
spin-ice metamaterial, including its thermodynamic phase transitions, coupled
through underlayers where the interactions between the nanoelements of the spin
lattice are dominated by lateral exchange bias (EB). The EB, along different
well-defined crystallographic directions, can also be added to the system at
different stages of the spin-ice configurational evolution. (2) Alternatively,
each element in the metamaterial can be a multilayer, with intra-element
exchange interactions; the magnetic performance of such exchange exchange-
coupled composite metamaterial, fabricated in large-area arrays by nanoimprint
lithography, will be optimized for bitpatterned media. (3) Magnetic quantum
cellular automata (MQCA) in specific nanomagnetic arrays to process information
and perform Boolean logic operations is a promising alternative to CMOS
technology. We will design and construct, for the first time, exchange-coupled
logic gates that perform elementary Boolean logic operations, based on a novel
design of sub-50nm nanomagnet elements; two representive gates (AND and OR),
will be demonstrated. Micromagnetic modeling and materials characterization,
both routine and advanced, using electrons, photons and scanning probes, will
provide fundamental insight into the structure- property performance
correlation, at appropriate length scales, of all these unique and tailored
metamaterials. This proposal will also enable the PI to combine the simultaneous
advancement of discovery with teaching, training, learning, and if appropriate,
commercialization.