* 1604061
* SusChem: Fabricate Membranes with Glassy Self Assembly Templating
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2016,08/31/2017
* Chia-Chi Ho, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Angie Lueking
* 08/31/2017
* USD 18,700.00

Proposal Number: 1604061; PI: Ho, Chia-Chi Title: SUSCHEM: A new method for
fabricating membranes based on Glassy Self-Assembly Templating and educational
training

Ultrafiltration and nanofiltration membranes have many applications in the
bioprocessing, food processing, biotech, and pharmaceutical industries. These
membranes are traditionally manufactured by air casting, immersion, or melt
casting of polymer solutions. In almost all cases however, the pores as defined
by the percolated nodules of polymer, are very polydisperse, geometrically ill-
defined, and the porosity is very low. As a result, most current ultrafiltration
membranes have relatively broad molecular-weight cut-offs and sub-optimal
hydraulic permeability. The project will research an improved membrane synthesis
method that can independently control the pore size distribution to make it more
uniform and also to control the surface of the membrane to make it more
tolerable to repel foulants. The methods are more environmentally benign than
current synthesis methods and are potentially scalable. The PI will leverage
existing University of Cincinnati programs to encourage undergraduate
researchers especially women into her laboratory. The PI will also impact
underrepresented pre-college students by working with area secondary education
teachers to improve interest in STEM topics.

This project will research a new approach to fabricate membranes with glassy
self-assembly templating (GSAT). One goal of this research is to investigate if
water in the traditional self-assembled surfactant templates can be replaced
with glassy sugar surfactants leading to higher viscosity microemulsions. The
polymerization of these template emulsions can potentially lead to
nanostructured materials with finely tunable, uniform nanometer-size pores.
After polymerization, the sugars and surfactants can be readily rinsed off with
water and recycled. The synthesis method is potentially applicable to a wide
range of polymer monomers giving an independent means to impact membrane surface
chemistry towards foulants and pore size distribution. The transformative nature
of the research lies in its novel method of synthesizing ultrafiltration
membranes that have a narrow pore size distribution and tunable surface
chemistry to tolerate foulants. The project will offer interdisciplinary
training for all the participants.