* 1604576
* Collaborative Research: Mechanisms for Cell Membrane Damage during Production of Biorenewable Fuels
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Jeffery Klauda, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2019
* USD 200,000.00

The conversion of plant biomass to biofuels by fermentation of biomass-derived
sugars to alcohols is a sustainable route for renewable fuels production.
However, during the fermentation process, the biofuel molecules produced are
often toxic to the fermenting organism at high concentrations, which lowers the
overall biofuel production capacity. One way to address this problem is redesign
the membrane surrounding the fermenting cell, so that the organism can be more
tolerant to high concentrations of biofuel dissolved in the liquid water
surrounding it. This collaborative project will develop a fundamental
understanding of how biofuel molecules such as ethanol interact with the cell
membrane of yeast, a fermenting microorganism. The key innovation is use of
sophisticated molecular dynamic simulation tools to model these interactions on
computer. These studies will suggest strategies to target genetic engineering of
the yeast cell to express cell membranes that improve the overall tolerance of
the cell to high concentrations of biofuel, so that biofuel production is
improved. The educational activities associated with this project include a
middle- and high school outreach program designed to highlight how experiments
and theory work together to solve important scientific problems, coordinated
through programs at Iowa State University and the University of
Maryland.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this collaborative research
is to gain a fundamental understanding of the cellular and biomolecular
interactions of the microbial membranes with model biofuel molecules known to
influence membrane disruption. The research will suggest how cell membranes can
be engineered so that the cell is more tolerant to these biofuel molecules. The
research plan will focus on how Saccharomyces cerevisiae membranes interact with
model biofuel molecules or intermediates, including ethanol, octanoic acid, and
n-butanol. These efforts will inform genetic engineering approaches to design
cell membranes that improve the tolerance of the yeast cell to these biofuel
molecules. Key membrane metrics include porosity, fluidity, hydrophobicity and
rigidity. The research plan has three objectives. The first objective is to
establish theoretical and experimental model membrane systems, using ethanol as
a well-characterized model inhibitor. The theoretical approach will use
molecular dynamics simulations to reveal how the molecular character and lipid
composition of the membrane influence ethanol-mediated membrane disruption. The
second objective is to probe the interaction of octanoic acid and n-butanol with
model membrane systems developed under the first objective. More complex
membrane systems will be considered to determine the effect of ergosterol, chain
unsaturation, and lipid head groups on membrane disrupter toxicity. Membrane
vesicles assembled in vitro will be compared vesicles made from whole cells as
well as intact whole cells to establish model membrane of lipid mixtures to
living systems. The third objective is to use molecular dynamics simulations to
predict the improved tolerance of membranes with altered lipid head group
concentrations, chain saturation, chain branching, and ergosterol concentration.
Membranes with improved tolerance will be tested in vitro and then expressed and
tested in engineered S. cerevisiae cells.