* 1604612
* Understanding Rotational Dynamics of Cargo in Intracellular Transport with Plasmonic Nanoparticle Probes
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Ning Fang, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 07/31/2020
* USD 300,000.00

Fang&lt;br/&gt;1004612&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A cell can be conceived as a factory
containing a network of nanomachines. Many of these nanomachines transduce
chemical energy into mechanical work in a cyclic manner. The malfunction of any
of these nanomachines can lead to severe disease. There is an urgent need from
the health and medicine sector for new innovative techniques to investigate the
composition, dynamics, and working mechanism of the nanomachines in live cells.
Translational motion can be readily revealed by a variety of conventional single
particle tracking (SPT) methods. However, rotational motion in live cells is
much more difficult to resolve and largely unknown due to challenging technical
limitations. The outcomes of the proposed research will lay the groundwork for
development of treatments for conditions caused by the malfunction of the
cellular nanomachinery, ranging from certain kinds of blindness and kidney
disease to neurodegenerative disorders and parasitic diseases. The research will
be integrated into the curriculum and will include undergraduate optical imaging
laboratory experiments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI proposes to develop a new
imaging system based on single particle orientation and rotational tracking
(SPORT), a technology invented by the PI. This system will provide 5 dimensional
information on particles (xyz location plus two angular orientation) to better
understand intracellular cargo transport. The PI will develop optical microscopy
methods to track the rotation of single gold nanorods attached to intracellular
cargo, such as vesicles and motor proteins, which when combined with x,y, and z
translations will offer more complete insight into their dynamics in live cells.