* 1604526
* Collaborative Research: Engineering of Recoverable Cellulosomes for Bioconversion
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2016,12/31/2020
* Sergiy Minko, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Catherine Walker
* 12/31/2020
* USD 245,905.00

The sustainable, industrial-scale production of transportation biofuels from
plant biomass rely on enzymes called cellulases that break down the cellulosic
fraction of biomass into sugars that can be fermented into bioethanol. The major
cost of this process is the cellulase, which in the current generation of
cellulosic biofuel facilities, is discarded after use because it must be
dissolved in water to break down cellulose to sugars, and cannot be easily
recovered. Recycling the cellulase enzyme would reduce the cost of cellulosic
biofuels production. The goal of this project is to develop a new way of
encapsulating the cellulase enzyme in recoverable solid form so that it can be
collected reused multiple times before disposal. The key innovation is to bind
the cellulase enzyme to nanometer-sized capsule called a cellulosome, which
preserves the activity of the enzyme for cellulose conversion, and has a
magnetic core which facilitates its recovery from dilute water processing
streams. The educational activities associated with this project include
mentoring of undergraduate student projects coordinated through the Nurturing
American Tribal Undergraduate Research and Education (NATURE) program at North
Dakota State University.

Microorganisms that naturally produce cellulase enzymes bind them into special
structures on the cell surface called cellulosomes. Due to the close proximity
of these enzymes within the cellulosomes, the bioconversion of cellulosic and
hemicellulosic materials proceeds with a high velocity and efficiency. However,
in the industrial production of celluloytic enzymes, the cellulosome is not
present. This research will engineer recoverable cellulosomes through a
biomimetic approach where celluloytic enzymes are encapsulated within a
nanstructured capsule containing a magnetic core. This biomimetic cellulosome
will contain a number of complimentary celluloytic enzymes confined within a
polymeric environment, and will be engineered to mimic several key properties of
natural cellulosomes, including diversity of hydrolytic activity, close
proximity of complementary enzymes, and strong and selective binding of the
biomimetic cellulosome to cellulosic substrates. The magnetic core of the
biomimetic cellulosome will facilitate its recovery from liquid suspension using
magnetic separation techniques. To explore the potential of the biomimetic
cellulosome for biomass conversion processes, the research has four objectives.
The first objective is to make a series of new biomimetic cellulosomes to
enhance synergism of hydrolytic enzymes for bioconversion of cellulosic
materials to sugars. The second objective is to quantify the effects of the
biomimetic cellulosome structure and immobilized enzyme diversity on cellulose
hydrolysis to gain a fundamental understanding of cellulase synergism in natural
cellulosomes. The third objective is to gain a fundamental understanding of
cellulosome interaction with cellulosic substrates and lignin, and the fourth
objective is to augment the functionality of the biomimetic cellulosome for
broader applications. The anticipated outcomes from these studies include a
fundamental understanding of the synergism of enzymes in engineered
cellulosomes, their efficacy for different forms of substrates, and their
potential for recovery and reuse.