* 1604524
* Exploiting multiple exciton effects in organic solar cells
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Barry Rand, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 06/30/2019
* USD 329,609.00

The sun represents the most abundant potential source of sustainable energy on
earth. Solar cells that use organic conducting polymers to convert light to
electricity ? organic photovoltaic (OPV) devices - offer a potentially low-cost
route for renewable electricity production. However, in order to achieve parity
with other solar photovoltaic technologies, organic solar cells must increase
their power conversion efficiency. This project will incorporate light-active
materials into the organic polymer solar cell device to promote a quantum
mechanical process called triplet fusion. It is believed that triplet fusion can
increase the voltage of the power output, leading to higher solar energy
conversion efficiency. This concept is innovative from a scientific point of
view because it will focus on increasing the voltage potential, not the
photocurrent, leading to a pathway to increase solar cell efficiency through an
increase in thermodynamic efficiency. The educational activities associated with
this project include participation in the Princeton University Materials Academy
that teaches hands-on materials science to under-represented high school
students from the Trenton, New Jersey, and multi-generational outreach through
the Nano Materials Science Day at a local library that encourages students,
teachers, and parents to meet with solar scientists and participate in hands-on
demos to make and test simple solar cell devices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overall goal of the research is to develop a new, organic polymer-based
excitonic solar photovoltaic device architecture that has the potential exceed
classical thermodynamic power conversion efficiency limits through the process
of triplet fusion. In triplet fusion, two excitons formed from two low-energy
sub band gap photons are required to produce one higher-energy photon. The
integration of sensitized phosphorescent materials into the organic photovoltaic
(OPV) device architecture offers the means to achieve triplet fusion. In a
phosphor-sensitized OPV device, absorption and singlet formation occurs
primarily on a fluorescent host donor. This initial absorption event is followed
by energy transfer to a phosphorescent guest present in the donor layer at low
concentration. Excitons on the phosphorescent guest then transfer to the triplet
level of the host, permitting the population of the long-lived triplet state in
the fluorescent material. This process of triplet fusion will be used to create
free charge carriers with higher energy than the exciton from which the carriers
originated. In essence, this device configuration represents the molecular
analogue to an intermediate band solar cell, but possesses similar limiting
efficiencies as singlet fission-based solar cells. The main distinction between
the triplet fusion device and a conventional intermediate band solar cell is
that, in the triplet fusion device, the intermediate band is satisfied via the
fusion of two low energy triplet excitons into a higher energy singlet exciton.
Furthermore, whereas the singlet fission device looks to increase photocurrent,
the one based upon triplet fusion looks to increase the photovoltage, leading to
fundamental enhancement of the thermodynamic efficiency. To explore this new
phenomenon, the research has two major objectives. The first objective is to
demonstrate the functionality of the phosphor-sensitized OPV device for
achieving triplet fusion, and the second objective is to understand efficiency-
limiting mechanisms involved with multiple exciton devices through comprehensive
electrical and optical characterization. Ultimately, the demonstration of a
triplet fusion OPV device adds another option to exceed Shockley-Queisser limits
and inspire work toward high efficiency organic solar cells.