* 1604483
* Collaborative Research: High-performance nanowire cathodes with stabilized microporous tunnels for Na-ion batteries
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Ekaterina Pomerantseva, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 06/30/2020
* USD 224,772.00

Rechargeable batteries help to enable a sustainable energy future through the
storage and demand-matched delivery of electricity generated from fluctuating
renewable sources such as wind or sun. Currently, lithium-ion batteries offer
the best performance in terms of capacity, power delivery, and longevity.
However, lithium is a limited resource with respect to both its total supply in
the Earth's crust and its geographic availability. Rechargeable batteries which
use sodium ions instead of lithium ions for storing charge address the
possibility of lithium scarcity in the future, because sodium is a very abundant
element. However, sodium ions are much larger ion than lithium ions, and this
large size creates a variety of operational problems within a rechargeable
battery, particularly swelling of the battery electrode during charging and
discharging. Through nanotechnology-based approach, this project will develop
new cathodes for sodium-ion batteries using hollow nanowires which confine the
sodium ions within a tunnel structure. The nanowires will be made of magnesium
oxide with tunnel diameters of about 2 nanometers. The key innovation is that by
confining the sodium ions, within the tunnel, the swelling can be controlled and
storage capacity can be increased simultaneously. The scientific outcomes of
this project can be used to help research with other future metal ion battery
systems based on magnesium, aluminum and potassium, where similar issues might
occur. The educational activities associated with this project include outreach
to school-age children from under-represented groups in engineering through the
Richmond Area Program for Minorities in Engineering, the Philadelphia Science
Festival, and the Annual Young Women's conference.

The goal of this research is to improve the mechanical stability and
electrochemical energy storage capacity of sodium-ion batteries by tuning of the
pore geometry and ionic content of microporous, sodium-ion intercalation
electrodes. The key hypothesis is that both swelling and storage capacity can be
controlled by carrying out the sodium-ion intercalation process within tunnel-
structured, sodium-stabilized manganese oxide nanowires. These nanowires contain
one-dimensional microporous tunnels forming defined diffusion paths that
facilitate reversible sodium ion intercalation. The research plan has three
objectives. The first objective is to synthesize magnesium oxide nanowire
cathodes that contain one-dimensional, microporous tunnels with defined sodium
ion diffusion channel dimensions, and then evaluate their electrochemical
performance and mechanical strength. These measurements will be realized through
bulk-scale electrochemical characterization and single nanowire-based
nanoelectrochemical probing and mechanical degradation testing. The second
objective is to improve the specific capacity within the nanowire channels by
increasing the sodium content within the microporous tunnels through chemical
routes. Through the first and second objectives, the top performing materials
will be identified that maximize capacity, mechanical stability, and life cycle.
The third objective is to improve electrochemical storage capacity and
mechanical stability during repeated charge/discharge cycles through dopant-
induced crystal stabilization of the nanowire electrode materials.