* 1604279
* EEG-Based Control of Working Memory Maintenance Using Closed Loop Binaural Stimulation
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2016,12/31/2021
* Alexander Leonessa, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Carol Lucas
* 12/31/2021
* USD 356,884.00

1604279-Abaid&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The frequency of brainwaves is known to
impact a wide range of cognitive abilities, such as concentration, mood,
attention, and memory, but understanding how to noninvasively control these
frequencies is currently not well understood. Rather than using invasive control
methods such as electrical stimulation, this project aims to drive oscillations
in the brain using existing sensory pathways in the auditory system. The
technique used here, known as binaural beats, relies on listening to different
tones in each ear and is a safe method of brain stimulation. This type of
stimulation, in a feedback loop, will be explored in terms of its impact on
working memory in people with and without mild cognitive impairment (MCI), a
common precursor to Alzheimer's disease. The results of this project are
expected to improve the quality of life for people with MCI by offering
noninvasive diagnostic and therapeutic interventions based on binaural beats in
future incarnations. This work will be shared with people who have MCI and their
caregivers through a series of information sessions in multiple locations in
southwest Virginia, thus educating the community such illnesses
impact.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Working memory is the system in control of
temporary retention and online organization of thoughts for successful goal-
directed behavior. Remarkably, individuals exhibit a maximum load on the number
of items that can be simultaneously retained. Since working memory relies upon
neural communication, it is benefitted by increased phase synchronization within
the cortex. People with MCI have decreased overall phase synchronization which
can be correlated with a loss in working memory capacity. Therefore, a non-
invasive stimulation technique to induce synchronization, called binaural beats,
may constitute a diagnostic and therapeutic technology for MCI. Binaural beats
utilize a phenomenon that occurs within the cortex when two di&amp;#64256;erent
tones are presented separately to each ear. A third phantom binaural beat, whose
frequency is equal to the di&amp;#64256;erence of the two presented tones, is
produced within the auditory pathway and projected to the auditory cortex. The
project seeks to answer the question of whether binaural beats can be used to
identify and control working memory. These interactions will be explored using
computational models and experimental tests. Hardware will be developed for
implementing real-time control of brain signals using binaural beats. The brain
signals will be recorded using electroencephalography (EEG), which noninvasively
measures the voltage across the scalp using a series of electrodes. The goal of
this work is to identify EEG outputs which can reliably predict a subject?s
ability to perform working memory tasks and to control the subject?s performance
using closed loop control of the binaural beat stimulus, both in people who are
neurologically healthy or who have MCI.