* 1604014
* PFI:AIR - TT:  Integrated Microfluidic System for Cell Separation and Enrichment
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2016,05/31/2018
* Abraham Lee, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 05/31/2018
* USD 200,000.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating an
integrated microfluidic device capable of processing milliliters of whole blood
by rapidly isolating and enriching rare cells (such as circulating tumor cells,
CTCs), resulting in faster sample preparation for high fidelity diagnostic and
prognostic measurements that are critically needed in many therapeutic
applications. This integrated microfluidic platform is important due to the
direct impact on cancer patients and supporting infrastructure resulting from
bringing this game-changing microfluidic device to market. Patient diagnosis and
monitoring would become simpler, cheaper, faster, and more convenient. Moreover,
the usage of this microfluidic platform is not limited to cancer diagnosis, but
extends to any disease or condition measured via changes in cellular physical
properties in a sample of biological fluid. The project will result in an
optimized, integrated cell separator and enrichment prototype microfluidic
device. The team will demonstrate its utility with clinically relevant levels of
CTCs in whole blood to determine its feasibility for improved cancer diagnosis
and monitoring. This integrated microfluidic device has the following unique
features: (a) label-free cell separation, enrichment, and release, (b) clinical
scale sample volumes and single pass through device to achieve complete cell
isolation and enrichment (100% target capture) in approximately 20 minutes, and
(c) device is amenable to mass production. When compared to the leading
competing methods for CTC isolation and purification from whole blood in this
market space, these features provide the following advantages: (a) simpler
operation, (b) quicker, more reliable test results, and (c) lower cost per test
and small form factor towards a potentially portable system for use in various
point-of-care applications or resource limited settings.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main technology gaps to be addressed during the
project are associated with optimizing the microfluidic device to achieve the
rigorous performance levels required for CTC analysis (isolate and enrich 5
CTCs/7.5mL whole blood for downstream detection). These gaps will be bridged by
having multiple integrated microfluidic devices working simultaneously in
parallel and improving the sensitivity of the device to sufficiently separate
and capture cells of similar size. In addition, personnel involved in this
project, especially undergraduate students, graduate students, and post-docs,
will gain innovation and technology translation experiences. They will become
well versed in microfluidic cell sorting, enrichment, chip design,
manufacturing, and the needs of primary end-users in multiple business spaces
around the world. They will also gain firsthand experience in working in a
multidisciplinary academic-industrial environment.