* 1604677
* Biomimetic Materials to Elucidate the Role of Microenvironment in Glioblastoma Stem Cell Maintenance In Vitro
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2016,12/31/2020
* Yonghyun Kim, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 12/31/2020
* USD 478,057.00

#1604677-Kim&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on developing and
characterizing hyaluronic acid-based hydrogel 3D matrices as an in vitro test
bed for studying glioblastoma stem cells (GSCs or brain tumor initiating cells),
which play an important role in tumor formation and tumor recurrence in
glioblastoma multiforme (GBM), one of the deadliest forms of human cancer. The
matrices will be used to investigate the role of microenvironmental influences,
particularly the role of mechanical and chemical signals on GSC phenotype and
examine its utility in measuring therapy response. The system has the potential
to provide a controllable and tunable environment closely mimicking the in vivo
brain. The proposed system could lead to improved therapeutic options for
patients (over 22,000/year) suffering from GBM. The system developed could be
broadly utilized in understanding the role of microenvironmental signals in
multiple types of cancer, particularly those that metastasize to the brain as
well as in fundamental studies of neural development. Educational impact is
achieved through development of an "Engineering Day" for high school students,
providing research opportunities for under-represented female and African-
American Students, integration of research related principles into existing
courses and providing summer bioengineering workshops for high school students
and teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will combine biomaterials
engineering strategies with current understanding of glioblastoma stem cell
(GSC; also known as brain tumor initiating cell) biology to design a novel 3D
culture system mimicking the native GSC microenvironment that would improve in
vitro prediction of therapeutic response by allowing investigation of GSC-matrix
interactions. GSCs cell models are superior to established glioblastoma
multiforme (GBM) cell lines that are routinely employed in the drug development
pipeline. GSCs freshly-derived from GBM patients are known to better
recapitulate GBM biology. Though it is well-known that cell behavior is
drastically altered when exposed to 3D microenvironments, GSCs are currently
mainly cultured in artificial, 2D, and matrix-free environments (i.e., stiff
tissue culture polystyrene) that do not appropriately capture the brain
microenvironment. Furthermore, softer tissue-like biomaterials afford the
ability to present the optimal combination of cues to provide more
physiologically relevant environments, which can induce cellular phenotypes
typically observed in vivo. For an improved fundamental understanding of
microenvironmental influences on GSC phenotype, biomaterials mimicking the in
vivo mechanical and chemical cues found in the brain microenvironment must be
employed. In the planned studies, the investigators will use biomimetic
hyaluronic acid (HA) hydrogels to establish the role of mechanical and chemical
signals in maintenance of the GSC phenotype. Furthermore, they will utilize
their culture system to quantify therapy response in vitro. Thus the main goal
of the project is to create a novel enabling technology that will advance
studies of GSC biology and aid future GBM drug development pipelines. GBM is
among the deadliest forms of human cancer with an average survival of
approximately one year. The proposed work is poised to provide a novel
therapeutic evaluation system that can better predict clinical outcomes, thus
could lead to improved therapeutic options affecting the lives of over 22,000
individuals per year. The system developed could be broadly utilized in
understanding the role of microenvironmental signals in multiple types of
cancer, particularly those that metastasize to the brain as well as in
fundamental studies of neural development. Outreach activities include: 1)
developing "Engineering Day" in high schools of rural Alabama's
socioeconomically disadvantaged locality where the students are predominantly
African-Americans, 2) providing engineering research opportunities to
traditionally under-represented female and African-American students, 3)
integrating various biology, materials science, and engineering principles into
new and existing undergraduate and graduate level chemical engineering courses,
and 4) providing annual summer bioengineering workshops for high school students
and teachers.