* 1604392
* Engineering Nanocarbon Air Cathodes for High-Temperature Solid-State Li-O2 Batteries
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2016,02/28/2021
* Edward Furlani, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 02/28/2021
* USD 299,999.00

1604392 PI: Wu, Gang&lt;br/&gt;Title: Engineering Nanocarbon Air Cathodes for
High-Temperature Solid-State Li-O2 Batteries&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Li-air
(O2) battery is a promising next-generation energy storage device with high
energy density that is superior to any conventional electrochemical power
source. Practical applications of such batteries are hindered by several
challenges, e.g., low efficiency of catalysts, safety issues related to
flammability of organic fluid electrolytes, and durability. Replacing the
flammable organic fluid electrolytes currently used in the batteries with highly
Li+ conductive, fire-resistant, and robust inorganic solid-state electrolytes is
a critical milestone to address these issues. The successful incorporation of
solid-state electrolytes into battery technologies requires an understanding of
the associated Li+-O2 electrochemical reactions, i.e., the oxygen reduction
reaction (ORR) and evolution reaction (OER) in solid-state air cathodes. The
proposed plan will develop a novel nano-structured, carbon-metal nanoparticle
composite for a lithium-oxygen battery with a solid state electrolyte that will
improve the performance and safety of Li-air batteries, as well as contribute to
the understanding of other related battery systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will focus on studying solid-state O2 electrocatalysis in a porous air
cathode consisting of a new Li3OCl electrolyte and a nitrogen-doped nanocarbon
ORR/OER bifunctional catalyst. The following tasks will be performed: (1)
engineering of porous structures with well-defined three-phase interfaces
(electrolyte, catalyst, and O2) in air cathodes, (2) elucidation of temperature-
dependent O2 diffusion and Li+ transport mechanisms along with electrochemical
reaction kinetics in solid-state cathodes via synergistic modeling and
experimental characterization efforts, and (3) design of 3D nanoporous air
cathode architectures that provide efficient mass and charge transports along
with sufficient activity and stability for high-temperature Li-O2
electrochemical reactions. In addition to training graduate students, the PIs
also plan to engage undergraduates and high-school students in research.