* 1604375
* Identifying and Utilizing Upper Bounds for Diffusion-based Separations using Metal Organic Frameworks
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2016,10/31/2019
* David Sholl, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 10/31/2019
* USD 306,042.00

Proposal Number: 1604375, PI: Sholl, David Title: Identifying and Utilizing
Upper Bounds for Diffusion-based Separations using Metal Organic Frameworks

Bulk chemical separations are vital to the world-wide chemicals and fuels
industries. Because these separations are largely performed with thermally-
driven methods (e.g. distillation), they consume vast amounts of energy.
Membrane-based separations offer a powerful alternative to conventional
separations for a range of large-volume chemical separations. Commercial gas
separations applications of membranes are dominated by polymeric membranes, but
these membranes are limited by a fundamental trade-off between selectivity and
throughput. Considerable progress has been made in recent years in making
membranes from porous materials including metal-organic frameworks (MOFs). The
crystalline nature of MOFs means that the fundamental tradeoff that exists for
polymeric membranes can in principle be overcome. It seems likely, however, that
other physical phenomena will place bounds on the ultimate performance that is
possible with MOF membranes. This project will use a combination of atomically-
detailed modeling and experiments to establish upper bounds on the performance
of MOFs as membranes for gas separations. This work will be critical in guiding
the development of these membranes for key industrial applications.

The project will focus on small pore MOFs such as zeolitic imidazolate
frameworks (ZIFs) and hybrid ZIFs in which separations can be achieved by both
adsorption and diffusion selectivity. The work will build upon recent work by
the PIs that demonstrates the ability to predict molecular diffusivities in
materials of this kind using molecular simulations. These calculations rely on
free energy sampling techniques, since the diffusion of species that is of
practical interest occurs far too slowly for direct molecular dynamics
simulations to be used. It is also vital that the models accounting for all
degrees of freedom in the adsorbent framework be used to accurately describe
slowly diffusing species. Detailed molecular simulations will be performed for a
series of small pore MOFs that have been selected to explore hypotheses about
the existence of upper bound relationships for molecular diffusion in MOFs.
Simulations will be tested and validated using direct experimental measurements
of diffusion in selected materials.