* 1604909
* Triboelectric charging of granular materials
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2016,02/28/2022
* Mohan Sankaran, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 02/28/2022
* USD 322,107.00

CBET - 1604909&lt;br/&gt;PI: Sankaran, R. Mohan
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Triboelectric charging is the process by which
electrostatic charge develops after two surfaces come into contact. Examples of
electrostatic charging are seen routinely in everyday life. For example, walking
across a carpet and touching metal surface produces a small electrostatic
discharge. Granular materials, which are collections of small particles, are
especially susceptible to electrostatic charging. The particles are usually
small, which means they have a high surface area to volume ratio, allowing large
charge to accumulate in small volumes. Industrial processes often involve
flowing granular materials, which promotes collisions among the particles
leading to accumulation of charge. The accumulation of charge can disrupt the
granular flow, can lead to deposition of material on container walls, and can
create an important safety hazard. Despite the importance of charging in many
systems, the mechanism of charging is still not well understood. Simple
questions, such as whether charging reflects the transfer of ions or electrons,
are still not resolved. This project will use a combination of theory and
experiment to help uncover fundamentals of triboelectric charging. The project
will involve students in the research, especially students from underrepresented
groups. The research team will use project results in its course "Engineering
Design Seminar" for local high-school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
the project is to address the most important questions underlying triboelectric
charging that remain unanswered - what are the species being transferred on
contact (electrons, ions, material), what is the role of the nature of contact
(e.g., rubbing or geometry of contact), and how can the direction of
triboelectric charging be related to the material properties. The project
comprises three major activities: measurements of particle charging in an
integrated particle charging and characterization system, experiments on
triboelectric charging between specific crystallographic faces of single
crystals of quartz and sapphire, and experiments on the effects of materials
strain on triboelectric charging. Measurements will be used to test predictions
of a theory based on non-equilibrium dynamics of a charged species during many
collisions, especially predictions of the theory for effects of particle size
and environmental humidity on particle charging.