* 1604457
* SusChEM: Nanostructural Stability of Alkali-Activated (N,K)-ASH Geopolymer Cements for Sustainable and Resilient Civil Infrastructure
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Wil Srubar III, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 06/30/2019
* USD 315,838.00

This research aims to enhance infrastructure sustainability by advancing the
materials science of alternative cementitious materials that reduce ecological
impacts associated with Portland cement manufacture. The results from this work,
which concerns the long-term durability of novel geopolymer cements, should aid
in ensuring the resiliency and service-life performance of next-generation civil
infrastructure construction materials. Furthermore, this research aims to lay
the technical foundation for the science and engineering of novel waste- and
stormwater infrastructure construction materials that leverage the pollutant
removal potentials of secondary (zeolitic) structures that may form in alkali-
activated materials. Manufacture of portland cement is responsible for
approximately 8 percent of global carbon dioxide emissions. While preliminary
research by the PI (and others) has shown that fly ash- and metakaolin-based
alkali-activated geopolymer cements can provide a durable, low-carbon
alternative to Portland cement (especially for water infrastructure
applications), the actual physical and chemical degradation mechanisms of
(N,K)-ASH gels in geopolymer cements are poorly understood. Understanding and
controlling these mechanisms is a vital next step to ensure both the
sustainability and long-term durability of geopolymer-based cementitious
materials prior to their widespread use in civil infrastructure applications.

The specific objective of this research is to investigate the time-dependent
stability of (N,K)-ASH geopolymer gel nanostructures in the presence of both
physical and chemical environmental stressors. Fundamental knowledge on the
nanostructural stability of (N,K)-ASH gels is necessary to produce sustainable,
durable geopolymer-based alternatives to conventional portland cement. The
research program is organized into three experimental phases. In Phase I, the
structure and properties of synthetic (N,K)-ASH geopolymer gels will be
characterized at the nano-, micro-, and mesoscale. In Phase II, atomic-scale
degradation of (N,K)-ASH gels in the presence of (1) deionized water, (2) carbon
dioxide, and (3) acidic media will be investigated using a combination of magic
angle spinning nuclear magnetic resonance, Fourier-transform infrared
spectroscopy, and quantitative x-ray diffraction. In Phase III, the physical and
chemical degradation of metakaolin-based (N,K)-ASH gels will be investigated and
compared to the atomic-scale changes observed in pure (N,K)-ASH geopolymer gels.