* 1605266
* GOALI: Methods for designing antibodies specific for intrinsically disordered proteins
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2016,04/30/2018
* Peter Tessier, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 04/30/2018
* USD 350,000.00

1605266 &lt;br/&gt;Tessier, Peter M. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A grand, unmet
challenge in the field of biotechnology is to be able to reliably design
antibodies that recognize pre-selected epitopes within diverse biomolecules.
This project has broad implications for understanding fundamental principles for
designing binding proteins that can be used for a wide range of applications.
This GOALI project will also expose graduate students to the biotech industry
through research experiences at Pfizer, short courses taught by Pfizer
scientists, and regular interactions with Pfizer scientists. Another key focus
of this proposal is to develop science outreach programs to underrepresented
minorities and other disadvantaged students in New York's Capital
Region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative GOALI project between academia
(Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute) and industry (Pfizer) is aimed at overcoming
the limitations of using immunization to generate antibodies specific for
intrinsically disordered proteins. The proposed method for designing antibodies
is inspired by the natural hydrogen bonding interactions between beta-strands
within folded proteins. This approach is based on mining the Protein Data Bank
for small peptides (3-6mers) within beta-strands that are naturally paired to
segments of the target epitope in neighboring beta-strands. By identifying
multiple small peptides that are complementary to the target epitope and which
overlap with each other, larger complementary peptides will be generated. These
peptides will be evaluated for their ability to mediate antibody binding to the
target epitope when grafted into the complementarity determining regions (CDRs)
of antibody fragments. Moreover, molecular modeling and directed evolution
methods will be used to identify mutations in the grafted complementary peptides
and neighboring CDRs that further increase binding affinity. Finally,
solubilizing mutations in and near the CDRs will be introduced to overcome the
hydrophobic nature of the grafted peptides.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award by
the Biotechnology and Biochemical Engineering Program of the CBET Division is
co-funded by the GOALI Program of the Division of Industrial Innovation and
Partnerships and by the Biomaterials Program of the Division of Materials
Research.