* 1605338
* Controlling Thermal Transport in Hybrid, 2D, Thermoelectric Devices from the Bottom-Up
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2020
* Joshua Hihath, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Ying Sun
* 06/30/2020
* USD 299,958.00

Controlling Thermal Transport in Hybrid, 2-Dimensional Materials from the
Bottom-Up&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of highly-efficient
thermoelectric materials, which can directly convert wasted heat into electrical
power, has emerged as one of the ultimate goals of nanoscale science and
technology. Utilizing the unique properties of nanostructured materials has
resulted in incredible progress in the advancement of thermoelectric materials.
However, despite these advances, it is still difficult to accurately predict how
the properties of these complex systems will evolve as the size scales, or how
modifying the component materials will affect the final system properties. One
of the primary reasons for this difficulty is that improving the thermoelectric
properties of a system requires simultaneous control of three properties: the
electrical conductivity, the thermopower (Seebeck coefficient), and the thermal
conductivity. This project will use hybrid, 2-dimensional (2D), molecule-
nanoparticle materials as a model system for exploring the thermal transport
properties of nanostructured thermoelectric materials. This is a unique
materials system where the properties of individual components can be measured,
controlled, and characterized, and then embedded into the hybrid material so
that the complex interplay between the components can be determined as the
system scales-up or as the components are modified. By examining the thermal and
mechanical properties of the molecular components, and the effects of these
properties on thermal transport of the hybrid materials, this project aims to
develop a set of design rules for controlling the thermal transport properties
of hybrid molecule-nanoparticle thermoelectric devices. This knowledge can then
be leveraged into a more general understanding of the properties that govern
heat transport in nanostructured materials, so that control of the thermal
transport properties of these systems can be designed in from the atomic-level
up. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will focus on understanding and
controlling the thermal transport properties of the hybrid materials by: i)
examining the role of the vibrational density of states of the molecular
substituents on the thermal transport properties; ii) studying how molecular
rigidity and nanoparticle mass and composition influence heat transport; iii)
investigating the evolution of the thermal transport properties of the arrays as
the system size scales; and iv) examining the interplay between these properties
to enable the design of nanostructured systems with desired properties. This
investigation will provide unprecedented information about the interplay between
the atomic-scale thermal properties of component materials and the properties of
integrated, hybrid materials across a range of size-scales. Using a combination
of single-molecule spectroscopic techniques (Inelastic Electron Tunneling
Spectroscopy, and electromechanical ?alpha? spectroscopy), modification of
nanoparticle size and composition, and lithographic control of feature sizes
will reveal how both the molecular and nanoparticle properties dictate the
thermal transport properties of 2D, hybrid, molecule-nanoparticle arrays. These
studies will provide crucial information about which of these properties
dominate heat transport in nanostructured materials, the relationships between
them, and how this interplay evolves as the device size scales. This systematic
series of experiments will allow for a new understanding of the principles that
dictate thermal transport in nanostructured materials, and will enable the
passive control of thermal transport to be designed into thermoelectric
materials by controlling not just their composition, but the relationships
between the component materials.