* 1605848
* Catalyst design for (n,m)-targeted carbon nanotube syntheses
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2022
* Evgeni Penev, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 07/31/2022
* USD 366,433.00

Carbon nanotubes (CNTs) have failed to fulfill long-held expectations of high-
surface-area coupled with outstanding electronic properties. This owes primarily
to an inability to catalytically synthesize the nanotubes as single-walled
entities in a patterned "chiral" (n,m)-structure; and is despite theoretical
arguments by the principal investigator that such structures should be possible
if the proper combination of catalyst, support and chemical vapor deposition
conditions can be achieved. Recently, experimental success in producing such
chiral CNTs has been demonstrated. The project will draw upon the experimental
achievement to develop refined and expanded theoretical predictions that should
guide further developments of catalytic chemical vapor deposition (CCVD) toward
optimal catalytic materials and processing conditions. The ability to produce
single-wall carbon nanotubes of high purity at industrial scale could have
profound effects on commercial applications of CNT technology, ideally with U.S.
researchers leading the way.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will evolve a
critical recent breakthrough in the PI's group revealing that the origin of CNT
chirality can be described by a set of guidelines that will aid design of
catalysts for (n,m)-targeted CNT synthesis. The researchers now clearly
recognize that this complex phenomenon lies at the intersection of two large and
mature fields: heterogeneous catalysis and crystal growth. Bringing together
these paradigms from chemistry and materials science is expected to result in a
transformative theoretical framework that should enable finding ways to engineer
chiral selective CNT production, thus advancing a variety of long-awaited
applications, all pending availability of single (n,m) type material. This will
be achieved by a comprehensive atomistic investigation of structure and
energetics of various metal-nanoparticle catalysts combined with state-of-the-
art quantitative analysis of the thermodynamics and kinetics of ruling processes
at the catalyst-CNT interface. To enable a higher probability of significantly
new understanding, hypotheses based on such microscopic results will be
validated through a continuing comparison with experimental data in the
literature and through contacts with several experimental labs. The cross-
disciplinary nature of the project will provide educational opportunities to
both graduate and undergraduate students in computational chemistry, molecular
dynamics, and statistical physics. Research results will be organized in a
curated public materials property database. The project will also involve
outreach to Houston high school students through Rice University and close ties
to the Houston Museum of Natural Sciences.