* 1605365
* Can Coral Reefs in the Central Pacific Survive Ocean Warming? A 2015 El Nino Test
* GEO,OCE
* 12/01/2015,11/30/2016
* Anne Cohen, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 11/30/2016
* USD 135,496.00

This project supports a 7 day expedition to the heart of the central tropical
Pacific during a particularly strong El Niño event, arguably one of the
strongest on record. The target is Jarvis Island, located in the path of the
cool, nutrient-rich Equatorial Under-Current (EUC). As a consequence of its
location, Jarvis, a pristine, uninhabited coral reef ecosystem, is characterized
by enhanced productivity, high densities of large predatory fish, turtles,
corals and other sea life. However, sea surface temperatures on Jarvis are
currently 3.9 degrees Celsius higher than normal for this time of year, due to
El Niño. This provides investigators with a unique opportunity to examine how a
highly productive reef ecosystem responds to ocean warming, and the mechanisms
and timescales for recovery. Information will be collected by deploying state-
of-the-art instrumentation on the reef, and sampling seawater, particulates,
plankton and corals from surface to 150 meters depth. This will be the first
expedition to Jarvis Island during a bleaching event. The US Pacific Remote
Island Marine National Monument (PRIMNM) was recently expanded as part of a
multi-national commitment to protect and preserve vast areas of our ocean and
ocean resources for future generations. However, these protections do not shield
ocean ecosystems from the impacts of 21st century climate change. The project
investigates the potential for simultaneous changes in equatorial ocean
circulation to lessen the impacts of the global warming for equatorial reefs. It
tests hypotheses that improve understanding of fundamental mechanisms of coral
reef resilience to climate change, and the ability to identify such reef systems
for inclusion in Protected Area Networks. The cruise supports the training of
four PhD students, three of whom are National Science Foundation / National
Defense Science and Engineering graduate research fellows, and provide material
in support of six PhD theses. Results will be shared at international meetings
and workshops, and published in peer-reviewed journals. All data collected and
generated from the cruise will be made publicly available via the Biological and
Chemical Oceanography Data Management Office.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Global
climate models project enhanced warming of the central tropical Pacific over
this century. By implication, waters bathing five out of the seven coral reef
ecosystems protected within the recently expanded PRIMNM, will warm by more than
3 degrees Celsius. This rate of warming far exceeds the known thermal tolerances
of reef-building corals, fueling concerns that these reefs may not survive 21st
century climate change. However the same models project a concurrent
strengthening of the EUC, a projection supported by observations. The EUC
carries cool, nutrient-rich waters that upwell on the west sides of the
equatorial islands, cooling the reefs and enhancing productivity locally. If the
GCM projections are realized, a strengthening EUC could modulate the impact of
ocean warming for these reefs by reducing the rate of warming and supporting
energetically replete coral communities that survive bleaching. This proposal
exploits the current El Niño state of the tropical Pacific to test the following
hypotheses: (1) Coral communities bathed in the nutrient-rich, productive waters
of the central equatorial Pacific bleach during every El Niño, but mortality is
low and as a result, percent live cover remains high. (2) Localized EUC-enhanced
productivity supports nutritionally replete coral communities, which metabolize
existing lipid reserves to support energetic requirements during bleaching. (3)
In addition, equatorial corals adopt a flexible feeding strategy, switching from
direct nitrate uptake during nitrogen-rich (greater than 5 micromolar nitrate)
La Niña conditions to heterotrophic feeding during nitrogen-"poor" (less than 3
micromolar nitrate) El Niño conditions. We propose that, fueled by exogenous
sources, equatorial Pacific coral communities survive bleaching with limited
mortality, coral cover remains high and coral growth rates quickly recover. If
data generated under this project support our hypotheses, then the combination
of oceanographic and political protections could maximize the potential for
coral reef survival through the 21st century.