* 1605228
* A Shared Autonomy Approach to Robotic Arm Assistance with Daily Activities
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Maysam Ghovanloo, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Grace Hwang
* 08/31/2021
* USD 298,503.00

Persons with high-level paralysis rely on the care of others and the
modification of their environment for accomplishing the activities of daily
living (ADL). Due to the degree of support required, paralysis is costly to
provide care for. Recovering the ability to manipulate through technological
means would lead to significant improvements to the quality of life for the
user, and would reduce the long-term economic impact of paralysis and contribute
to society by freeing up caregiver time and labor (usually a family-member or
friend). To that end, the project proposes to design and validate a wheelchair-
mounted robotic-arm with an augmented reality interface for enabling non-tactile
human-robot interaction. Importantly, the design will involve a multi-modal
interface approach, which includes a recently developed tongue drive interface,
a head orientation sensor, and a speech recognition system. User-centric and
participatory design methods will ensure that the engineered system will be seen
favorably by persons with tetraplegia. The award also supports fundamental
research into the design of collaborative human-robot assistive devices,
including the interface design and the underlying robot vision and planning
algorithms. The research contribution includes improved understanding on how to
effectively coordinate the higher level reasoning and thought processes of
humans with the autonomous operation capabilities and limitations of current
robotic arms. The social significance of the robotics application will be
capitalized to create engaging educational and outreach activities in promotion
of engineering mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-term goal is to
transform the lives of wheelchair bound persons with limited to no manipulation
abilities by enabling them to independently perform the activities of daily
living (ADL) irrespective of their environment. Technology meeting the varied
needs of the ADL tends to have high control complexity, which impedes adoption.
It is essential for these technologies to request high-level (guiding) commands
rather than low-level control signals, and to request feedback in a manner
compatible with the user's conception of the world. The research goal is to
engineer and validate a wheelchair-fitted robotic-arm with an augmented reality
interface and a multi-modal user interface for coupling the human command and
intent control loop with the robotic-arm decision and control loop. The novelty
of the proposed system is that it is a shared control and a shared sensing
assistive technology. The coupled system requires human input to overcome the
perceptual limitations of robot vision, and employs robotic planning and
manipulation to overcome the physical limitations of the user. By involving the
human for scene interpretation and by providing ego-centric information to the
robot arm, the coupled system minimizes and simplifies user input during complex
manipulation tasks. The associated research objectives are to (I) engineer a
human-robot augmented reality interface system with coupled feedback to the two
systems (human and robot) for communicating intent and requesting high-level
user feedback for complex manipulation tasks, (II) identify the manipulation
assistance needs and user interface design through a participatory design
process, (III) evaluate the user interface with respect to the desired command
and control objectives, and (IV) assess the impact of the operational system
with respect to task performance and cognitive burden. Engineering the unique
shared control and shared sensing system and achieving the proposed research
objectives would transform the way that assistive robotic technologies couple
the user to technology. Incorporating the research into existing education and
outreach activities would promote engineering and robotics to students and
prepare them for participation in an increasingly automated world.