* 1605088
* Collaborative Research: Coupled effects of particle shape/flexibility and pore morphology on membrane rejection: theory and experiment
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2022
* Shankar Chellam, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 07/31/2022
* USD 172,155.00

Proposal Numbers: 1604715 (Lead)/1605088 PIs: Baltus, R.E./Chellam,
S.&lt;br/&gt;Collaborative Research: Coupled effects of particle
shape/flexibility and pore morphology on membrane rejection: theory and
experiment&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The motivation for this research lies in the
fact that by the year 2025, nearly 2 billion people are projected to live in
areas of water scarcity. These drivers point to the need for advanced water and
wastewater treatment technologies to alleviate ever-increasing water demand.
Low-pressure liquid-solid membrane separation technologies such as
microfiltration and ultrafiltration directly remove difficult-to disinfect
parasites such as Giardia and Cryptosporidium, along with most bacteria,
turbidity, and other colloidal materials. However, micro- and ultrafilters are
not effective in removing viruses and some bacteria. The overall goal of this
research is to examine the impact of non-ideal pore geometry and particle shape
and flexibility on microbial rejection by porous membranes. This collaborative
research project will perform both mathematical modeling and experimental work
to quantitatively examine complex systems that more closely represent real-world
separations. Results generated from this project will be important for the
optimal design of micro- and ultrafiltration systems and for practical
applications related to water and wastewater treatment and food,
biotechnological, and pharmaceutical operations. Educational broader impacts
include the development of science outreach activities geared towards
elementary, middle, and high schools in neighboring communities in College
Station, TX and Potsdam, NY to attract underrepresented minorities into STEM
fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Currently available membrane system design
strategies are based on simple pore geometries and microbial shapes.
Consequently, they cannot fully explain incomplete microbial removal observed in
practice. This collaborative project will generate fundamental knowledge to
characterize the hindered convection of tailed viruses, filamentous viruses,
deformable bacteria, and rigid synthetic nanorods across porous membranes with
tortuous interconnected pore networks. The project tightly integrates the
experimental and theoretical efforts. The project will focus on separations of
tailed and flexible viral and bacterial particles using low-pressure membranes
with capillary pores as well as membrane systems with complex pore morphology.
One example of the technological impact of this research is that it is
addressing the difficulty in removing tailed viruses that are among the most
abundant organisms in the environment and have been shown to penetrate so-called
sterile filters. The research will examine whether flexible particles will be
able to navigate around pore bends and whether bacteria that lack rigid cell
walls can squeeze through pores. To theoretically examine particle shape and
flexibility, detailed models of particle transport in a single cylindrical pore
will be developed. Specifically, the physics of the non-spherical shape and
flexibility of the viruses and bacteria will be incorporated. Experiments to
validate these model predictions will be performed using track-etched membranes.
To examine effects of membrane morphology including pore interconnectivity, 2D
permeation measurements will be performed and interpreted using models developed
to describe these systems. This project will generate a quantitative
understanding of the role of complex pore geometries and microbial
characteristics that govern rejection of microorganism from porous membranes.
Incorporating such considerations will improve existing filtration models to
more accurately describe rejection in real-world membrane separations.