* 1605275
* Development of spirally coiling, force-sensing soft-robot for safe and accurate cochlear electrode implantation
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* In Ho Cho, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Grace Hwang
* 08/31/2020
* USD 300,317.00

Cochlear implant (CI) is fast becoming the main rehabilitation aid for those who
suffer from hair cell-related hearing impairments. The nation's current
demography suggests that the CI adoption will increase at an accelerated pace
for the foreseeable future, calling for more innovations in the CI technology.
Of particular urgency is the need for safe and accurate schemes for CI electrode
array insertion which is very challenging due to its stringent requirements on
insertion depth, electrode-to-wall proximity, and tissue safety. The
3D-spiraling human cochlear anatomy further complicates the task. Many shape-
controllable electrodes have been devised to meet the requirements but they
still suffer from issues related to limited shape control, slow operation, and
potential hazards of electrical actuation. This project focuses on achieving
safe and accurate CI electrode insertion through joint utilization of pneumatic
soft-robotic micro-tentacles and optical force sensors monolithically integrated
with them. Both of them are made of soft elastomers, which greatly facilitates
non-intrusive, safe insertion of the CI electrode. The high-level
maneuverability of the bio-inspired micro-tentacle will also widen the scope of
achievable motion and improve accuracy of the insertion process. Above all, the
fusion of agile shape control and integrated sensing will eventually lead to
"adaptive insertion" which has been incessantly pursued in CI. All of these will
be achieved via the collaboration of two researchers with very different
specialty areas, electrical engineering and structural engineering, which will
contribute to the convergence in science and technology. This project also aims
to strengthen cross-disciplinary training in academia through co-advising of
graduate and undergraduate students in seemingly unrelated, yet highly
synergistic topics such as optics, MEMS, structural engineering, and
computational mechanics. It includes outreach plans to the underrepresented in
based on K12 science and technology demonstrations and extra-curricular
activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project's ultimate goal of safe and
accurate insertion of CI electrode arrays through soft-robotic, sensor-
integrated micro-tentacle. Accordingly, the following objectives have been lined
up: (1) Development of soft-robotic tentacle capable of performing
3-dimensionally spiraling motion. This task will be carried out as a parallel
effort encompassing the microfabrication and testing work by the PI and the
computational design, optimization, and analysis by the co-PI. (2) Development
of elastomer-based optical force sensors. The key issues of the task include the
accomplishment of totally non-intrusive sensing for tissue safety and
monolithic, clinically safe integration with the soft-robotic main body. (3)
Development of the schemes to fix the shape of the soft-robot upon completion of
the insertion process. The key issue is again achieving the goal in a clinically
safe fashion. The impact of this unique collaboration will go beyond CI
eventually. The importance of micro-robots and soft-robots in rehabilitation and
assistive technologies has been in continuous increase in recent years. This
project will expedite their fusion and add momentum to the fledgling field of
"microscale soft-robotics." The plan to monolithically integrate the shape-
control and force-sensing function blocks with the soft-actuator will also
contribute to the field of human-friendly robotics which is attracting intense
research interests from the robotics community. The resulting additive
fabrication and shape-control techniques will enrich the arsenal of additive
manufacturing and microscale medical robotics, respectively.