* 1605574
* Impedance Cytometry for Rapid Biosensing of Lipid Content in Algal Cultures
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2020
* Brian Kirby, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 05/31/2020
* USD 296,694.00

PI Name: Brian Kirby Proposal Number: 1605574

Microscopic algae are a promising future platform for the sustainable production
of biofuels. These organisms use sunlight, atmospheric carbon dioxide, and
nutrients such as nitrogen and phosphorous dissolved in liquid medium to make
lipids which can be processed into liquid transportation fuel. The growth of
algae in outdoor open ponds, and the accumulation of lipids by the algae, can
vary considerably during the day or week. This requires frequent monitoring of
algal productivity for production planning. However, measurement of algal
productivity is presently time consuming and costly, requiring manual sampling
and sophisticated analytical instruments. The goal of this project is to develop
a simple, real-time sensor for monitoring algal lipids in a cultivation
environment that is constantly changing. The proposed work will develop a sensor
platform that measures the electrical properties of single algal cells as they
flow through a microscope capillary tube. The change in electrical properties is
correlated to the amounts and types of lipid stored within the algal cell. The
educational activities associated with the project feature a student-run
technical conference designed to diversify and provide mentorship for students
in the Mechanical Engineering graduate program at Cornell University.

In outdoor pond cultivation systems used for algal biofuel production, the
growth and lipid accumulation in algal cells are sensitive to constantly
changing liquid nutrient medium composition, temperature, and sunlight
intensity. Co-cultures containing two or more species of algae that have
disparate metabolisms and chromophores may add stability to the overall
cultivation platform under these changing conditions. However, lipid production
in algal cells is often triggered by nutrient starvation, which adds to the
temporal complexity of the system. There is a need to monitor and summarize all
of this biological complexity with simple measurements that describe the overall
lipid productivity of the co-culture as well as lipid productivity of individual
sub populations. The proposed research will develop a microfluidic dielectric
impedance monitor for rapid lipid detection in single algal cells and
characterize lipid storage in algal co-cultures to elucidate mixed-strain
culture effects. The project has three objectives. The first objective is to
characterize starvation-induced, dielectric-property shifts in Chlorella
vulgaris, Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, and Neochloris oleoabundans and relate
these shifts to biomass density and sequestration of lipids and starches. The
second objective is to validate the flow-impedance cytometry measurements of
lipid and starch accumulation by nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) and high-
performance liquid chromatography. The third objective is to characterize the
role of algal diversity with single-cell and bulk characterization of lipids in
mixed-species culture.