* 1605225
* Development of A Novel Class of Protein Conformation Selective Molecular Sensors
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2019
* David Whitten, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 06/30/2019
* USD 326,847.00

PI: Chi, Eva Proposal No: 1605225

This project will develop a novel class of sensors for the early detection and
tracking of neurodegenerative disorders such as Alzheimer's and Parkinson's
diseases. In particular, the sensors will detect the protein aggregates that
form in the brain as early as two decades before the onset of symptoms. The
ability to detect and track these protein aggregates will not only help in
understanding the diseases better, but will also lead to early diagnosis and
contribute towards the development of therapies to prevent and treat these
devastating diseases. Misfolding and aggregation of proteins is a central
pathogenic event in neurodegenerative disorders such as Alzheimer's and
Parkinson's diseases, particularly the pre-fibrillar aggregate conformations
that are the most neurotoxic, which is potentially due to a lack of molecular
probes that could selectively and differentially target different protein
aggregate conformations. To meet this critical need, development of a novel
oligo(p-phenylene ethynylene) electrolytes (OPEs) for the direct sensing of the
wide set of amyloid aggregates based on multiple "fluorescence turn-on"
mechanisms is proposed. Compared to existing probes that are of limited clinical
use, e.g., Thioflavin-T based probes, OPEs offer many distinct advantages,
including versatile and highly tailorable structural and chemical properties,
and most notably the multiple modes by which OPEs respond to interactions with
ligands. Specifically, the researchers will synthesize and test OPEs for the in
vitro detection of protein aggregates prepared from Alzheimer's and Parkinson's
associated proteins (Objective 1). Experimental findings will also be
synergistically combined with closely related computational modeling to gain a
fundamental understanding of OPE-protein aggregate interactions as well as OPE's
sensing mechanism. Such insights will be used to guide the rational design and
synthesis of OPEs Ex vivo detection of amyloid aggregates in brain tissue
sections (Objective 2) and in vivo detection in live Alzheimer's animal model
brains (Objective 3). Molecular sensors developed in this project will give
researchers the tool to simultaneously and dynamically track the protein
misfolding and aggregation process for both in vitro and in vivo systems,
facilitating research into the cause, diagnosis, and treatment of major
neurodegenerative disorders. Additionally, the proposed multidisciplinary
research will obligate the PIs to train graduate and undergraduates students in
modern methodologies required to address important problems at the interface
between chemistry, biology, engineering, and medicine. The acquired
interdisciplinary skills will prepare students for careers in academe, national
laboratories, and industry. The PIs also propose an ambitious plan to design and
integrate "Biosensor Design Challenge Modules" into the core chemical
engineering undergraduate curriculum at the University of New Mexico at all
levels. The goal of this educational effort is two fold: 1. Improving student
retention, particularly underrepresented minorities, and 2. Enhancing student
success by providing opportunities for solving open-ended design problems
throughout undergraduate education.