* 1605816
* Collaborative Research: SuSChEM: Root-Targeted Delivery of Encapsulated Agrochemicals using Natural Microbial Carriers
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2019
* Robert Prud'homme, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 05/31/2019
* USD 111,056.00

CBET - 1605624; 1605816&lt;br/&gt;PI: Shor, Leslie; Prud'homme,
Robert&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this collaborative project is to develop
a method to deliver chemical compounds such as herbicides, fungicides, and
nematicides directly to the root tips of plants where they can be most benefit
to the growth and preservation of the plant. To accomplish targeted delivery,
the compounds of interest will be encapsulated in nanoparticles. Protists, which
are single-cell microbes that are abundant in soil, can spontaneously engulf
nanoparticles and carry them through soil. Protists are chemically attracted
toward the root tips of growing plants, which means that the encapsulated
compounds can be preferentially delivered to the root tips rather than being
dispersed throughout all of the soil. The project will develop nanoencapsulation
technology that is compatible with protist uptake and transport. The benefits of
the research will be increased efficiency, reduced costs and reduced impact of
chemical use in agriculture, all of which can increase crop production and
promote sustainability of the farming enterprise. Students at various academic
levels will participate in the project, and the project will be used as a
platform for outreach activities for Connecticut high school teachers
participating in the Early College Experience
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Flash nanoprecipitation and inverse flash
nanoprecipitation will be used for efficient, economic and scalable production
of biocompatible particles. Fluorescent agrochemical analogs will be developed
to assess encapsulation, uptake, and transport. Analogs will be developed across
a wide range of hydrophobicity, which will help identify rules for feasibility
and commercialization potential. Cyst-forming, non-pathogenic soil protists will
be collected from agricultural soils and screened for efficient uptake of
nanoencapsulated agrochemicals and transport through soil-like media. A
microfluidic transport assay will be developed that emulates the physical
microstructure of soil and the chemical gradients found in the immediate
environment of plant roots. The microfluidic assay will enable rapid screening
and collection of fundamental uptake and transport parameters needed for
predictive modelling. Finally, an agent-based pore-scale transport model will be
developed to characterize potential benefits of implementing this technology at
the field scale.