* 1605635
* Soft-Robotic Glove for Cerebral Palsy Hand Rehabilitation (REHAB Glove)
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2016,12/31/2019
* Rita Patterson, University of North Texas Health Science Center at Fort Worth
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 12/31/2019
* USD 322,415.00

Cerebral Palsy (CP) is a birth related brain injury affecting functional
activities of persons throughout the life span. Many children with CP have some
form of upper extremity limitations. Reduced function of the hands hinder
dressing, personal hygiene, and use of assistive devices, resulting in greater
dependency, restricted social participation, and a decreased quality of life.
Recent investigations have indicated that the brain is capable of reorganizing
itself through targeted use. Functional recovery requires repeated practice,
however traditional therapy sessions are inadequate in duration and intensity.
Soft robotic devices show promise as a therapy extender needed for motor
learning. No device has shown comprehensive capabilities to address this need in
children, particularly a device that can provide continuous measurements and
data monitoring, characterize the spastic resistance, and accommodate growth as
needed. The soft-­&amp;#8208;robotic glove, REHAB Glove, developed in this
project will fill an important gap to improve independence and to reduce burden
of care. The capabilities of this glove will not only address the therapy need
of CP children but will also act as an important tool for data gathering for the
development of dosage based therapy regimes for better outcomes. The proposed
research will also serve as a training ground for medical and engineering
students to become competent researchers as they will have the opportunity to
join the project team for internships, mentorships, job shadowing, enrichment
programs or summer academy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current hand rehabilitation
devices, based on end-­&amp;#8208;effector and hard exoskeleton structures, are
complex, have limited degrees of freedom, and are mostly applicable to only four
fingers of the hand. All of these factors limit their capacity to support
complex hand rehabilitation. Furthermore, the widespread usage of these systems
in home environments is hindered by their mechanical complexity, cost, and
potential safety concerns. Recent advances in soft robotics using flexible
structures and actuators are being explored to reduce the complexity of these
devices and improve human-­&amp;#8208;robotic interaction. In this work, a
sensorized soft robotic glove will be developed using novel
soft-­&amp;#8208;and-­&amp;#8208;rigid hybrid actuators alongside an advanced
control unit with closed-­&amp;#8208;loop control. The PIs postulate that using
a sensorized therapeutic glove capable of monitoring and assisting patient hand
motion will enable children with CP to complete repetitive motions, and that
children and parents can accept the robotic glove as a tool to optimize their
rehabilitation. This device will help reduce the complexity, size, and cost
associated with current state-­of-­the-­art care as well as enable the
development of dosage based therapy studies. The soft robotic glove is made of
compliant elastomeric material, which provides a safe user-­device interaction
and allows customized fitting onto hands with different conditions and sizes.
Sensor integration will provide the capability to monitor and record hand motion
and thus evaluate the rehabilitation progress and facilitate clinical research
of the hand. With an associated control unit, the device can be portable and
used at home or in the hospital. This project leverages a unique collaboration
that brings cutting-­edge engineering, therapy, and clinical knowledge to the
development of an efficacious assistive technology that can be used to
facilitate recovery of hand function. The goals of this project will be
accomplished by executing the following aims: 1) Develop a soft robotic glove
for children with integrated sensors that measure finger trajectory and force;
2) Develop a control algorithm to assist hand motion in different operation
modes; 3) Test and validate the system's ability to measure finger motion
parameters; 4) Obtain feedback from children, parents, rehabilitation physicians
and therapists regarding the ease of use of the REHAB Glove, and their desire to
use the tool in their daily rehab practice and exercise.