* 1605465
* SusChEM: Development of a Protecting Group Toolkit for Metabolic Engineering
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2019
* John Dueber, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 06/30/2019
* USD 350,020.00

1605465 &lt;br/&gt;Dueber, John E. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Engineering living
cells to perform as chemical factories offers a route for sustainable production
of a variety of chemicals. Microbial cells can rapidly self-replicate on
inexpensive substrates and make enzymes capable of catalyzing difficult chemical
reactions cheaply, quickly, and cleanly. However, the cell presents a complex
environment for conducting these multi-step syntheses and, accordingly,
undesired reactivity often occurs to produce undesired chemical products or,
even worse, result in toxicity to the microbial production host. Multi-step
organic chemical syntheses conducted in test tubes often employ chemical
protecting groups to gain control over when and where sites of a chemical
substrate will be reactive. This general approach will be mimicked in the cell
by employing natural chemical groups that can be reversibly added to achieve
similar control over reactivity of a chemical in the cell. Microbial strains
capable of catalyzing efficient protection and stability of the resulting
tailored products will be of broad interest to metabolic engineers and will be
made available to the scientific and engineering communities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Engineering metabolic pathways to sustainably produce
molecules of interest requires designed control at multiple levels. Numerous
problems can limit productivity, including metabolite toxicity, off-pathway
catalysis, and failure to secrete the final product. Various synthetic biology
approaches have been developed for introducing control at the DNA, RNA, and
protein levels to address many of these challenges. In this proposal, control at
the metabolite level is targeted for an additional strategy in this toolkit. The
protecting group strategy used in synthetic organic chemistry to gain control
over functional group reactivity will be mimicked to gain similar control over
when and where a molecule is active. Three biomolecular tailoring groups
(glucosyl, acetyl, and sulfonyl) are proposed to provide reversible protection
in addition to the ability to tailor for altered properties such as solubility
and membrane permeability as well as the recognition by other enzymes that could
lower toxicity. Thus, reactive molecules can be made chemically inert while
protected and then reactivity be reinstated when desired via enzymatic
deprotection. Enabling the use of the appropriate protecting group for the
desired application demands the construction of a toolkit of strains wherein
each of these protected products will be stable. For many of these protecting
groups, several enzymes will need to be knocked out of the production strain to
ensure small molecule product stability in the cellular environment. A high-
throughput colorimetric plate assay will be employed to screen large matrices of
gene target knockouts. Furthermore, it is critical that these protecting groups
do not limit product titers or production rates. Accordingly, rational
engineering and adaptations for increased flux for each protection reaction will
be performed. Although acetylation and glucosylation are expected to already
have fairly high capacity, sulfonation capacity is extremely low. The resultant
strains should prove broadly useful for a variety of metabolic engineering
applications and will accordingly be shared with the community.&lt;br/&gt;This
award by the Biotechnology and Biochemical Engineering Program of the CBET
Division is co-funded by the Systems and Synthetic Biology Program of the
Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences.