* 1605472
* Collaborative Research: Environmental Sustainability of Additive Manufacturing Processes: Bridging Geometry and Life Cycle Inventory
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Fu Zhao, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 06/30/2020
* USD 160,200.00

1605472 / 1604825 Zhao, Fu /

The past decade has seen a rapid proliferation of academic achievements and
industrial applications of additive manufacturing (AM) processes. Today the
interest in AM continues to grow. Although reducing environmental impact is
considered among the main advantages, very limited efforts have been made to
rigorously evaluate the environmental performance of AM processes using the
well-accepted life cycle assessment (LCA) methodology; also, even less studies
are oriented toward process improvement. The overarching goal of this research
is to advance understanding on how product design affects energy/material
consumption and air emissions of representative AM processes. If successful,
this research will bridge geometry and life cycle inventory (LCI), which
provides much needed data foundation for LCA of AM processes and furthermore,
enables the exploration of opportunities to re-design AM process and equipment
for smaller environmental impacts. The research will be undertaken by a team
consisting of experts in life cycle assessment, additive manufacturing,
manufacturing process modeling, and pollution prevention at the Purdue
University and the University of Illinois at Chicago (UIC).

Four research tasks will be jointly pursued: (1) Material flow modeling and
feedstock chemical composition analysis, (2) Energy consumption modeling, (3)
Air emission characterization and quantification, and (4) AM process and
equipment redesign for improved environmental performance. The research findings
will be verified in both laboratory and industrial settings. The research is an
effort to systematically evaluate the environmental impacts of the emerging AM
processes using LCA methodology, with particular focus on unit process level
LCI. The project will advance understanding of the material/energy flow and air
emissions associated with four representative AM processes. The proposed LCI
model is capable of predicting inventory flows of environmental significance
while requiring only minimal experimental efforts. The research is an effort to
bridge geometry and LCI of AM processes, which can guide the design and
development of AM equipment and processes for enhanced environmental
sustainability. Deeper understanding on energy consumption, feedstock material
composition, and occupation hazard risk due to particulate matters and volatile
organic compounds can provide guidelines for designers, manufacturers, and
government agencies to safeguard workforce and reduce environmental footprints
of AM processes. This will in turn accelerate the larger scale technology
adoption of AM, and offer a competitive edge regarding sustainability to the
U.S. manufacturing sector in the global market. Research results will be broadly
disseminated through journal papers, conference presentations, online
demonstrations, and industrial collaboration. The educational activities will
strengthen the awareness of advanced life cycle analysis on additive
manufacturing in engineering and environmental fields. Research results will be
incorporated into both graduate and undergraduate courses at the University of
Illinois at Chicago and Purdue University to positively impact engineering
education.