* 1605119
* Understanding how interaction of single-walled carbon nanotubes with biological interfaces in the gastrointestinal system may alter chemical bioavailability
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2016,03/31/2021
* Joseph Bisesi, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 03/31/2021
* USD 299,999.00

Bisesi, Joseph H.&lt;br/&gt;# 1605119&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Single-walled carbon
nanotubes are small man-made materials that are currently being used in a number
of consumer industries. With this increased use, there is increased likelihood
that these materials will make their way into aquatic environments. The
materials have properties which make them highly likely to be consumed by
aquatic organisms such as fish where they may interact with the fish intestinal
system. The overall objective of this project is to understand how single-walled
carbon nanotubes influence the intestinal environment by making fish more
susceptible to chemicals (i.e. pollutants) that are already present in our
environment and are associated with health concerns. To achieve this objective
the PI will examine how single-walled carbon nanotubes may change the normal
structure and function of the intestines of exposed fish and determine whether
these changes contribute to increasing their susceptibility to other chemicals
that are already present in our aquatic environments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Single-walled nanotubes are lipophilic in nature and are
likely to sorb other aquatic contaminants already present in our environment as
well as alter the intestinal tract of fish through dietary exposure routes. The
objective of this research is to better understand the specific interactions of
single-walled carbon nanotubes with fish intestines by probing their interaction
with lipids in the gastrointestinal system which may result in structural and
functional changes in the intestinal lipidome. The PI will also examine whether
such changes in gastrointestinal lipid profiles result in release of chemicals
that may be adsorbed to single-walled carbon nanotubes, increasing
bioaccumulation of these contaminants. The PI will accomplish these objectives
by examining gastrointestinal lipid profiles during single-walled carbon
nanotube dietary exposure, determining the effects of lipids on sorption of
chemicals to these materials, and examining the effects of nano-lipid
interactions on chemical bioaccumulation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Activities
performed in this project are expected to have far reaching impacts on an
international, national, and regional scale. Results from the nano-bio
interaction studies will contribute to the design of next generation
nanomaterials that take advantage of, or avoid, identified downstream behavior.
In this way the PI can continue to utilize the amazing properties of
nanomaterials without detrimental consequences. On a local level, the research
team plans to include students from underrepresented groups in this project as
well as increasing public knowledge on the benefits of nanomaterials through the
use of videos. The scientific community will be involved in this project on a
national scale through teaching of short courses at regional meetings as well as
leading sessions at national meetings. Finally, the research team will expand
education by integrating information about nanomaterial uses for combating
health issues in resource poor countries through existing teaching programs in
international communities.