* 1605031
* Microbial Conversion of Greenhouse Gases into Fermentation-Ready Sugars
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Forest Rohwer, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 08/31/2020
* USD 409,720.00

1605031&lt;br/&gt;Kalyuzhnaya, Marina &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Human-related
activities, such as fossil fuel production, agriculture, landfill use, and
municipal wastewater are major contributors to global methane emission.
Widespread and steady growth of these man-made emissions make methane not only a
major contributor to climate change but also the primary target for near-term
climate regulation. In this project a new dry fermentation process for
biological methane utilization will be developed. This process is based on the
unique ability of salt-loving, methane-consuming bacteria to not only stay
active in an immobilized state without water supplementation but also to
accumulate sugar in response to low water availability. Dry fermentation merges
the full potential of biological systems with technology development to address
affordable methane mitigation.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Proposed is the development
of an array of micro-fibers with active methane-consuming cells engineered to
convert methane into extractable sucrose. The specific aims of the proposal
include (i) the rational modification of microbial catalysts to enhance sucrose
production capabilities by reducing ectoine, glycogen and (exo)polysaccharides
synthesis; (ii) the rational modification of the microbial catalyst to reduce
oxygen consumption, including overexpression of bacteriohemerythrin to improve
oxygen consumption, and development of strain-specific vectors for rapid
integration of large DNA fragments; (iii) the lab-scale design and validation of
the developed Dry Fermentation Module by investigating water-stress impacts on
methane consumption and sucrose accumulation rates in methanotrophic 'living'
micro-fibers. The proposed modules could represent a transformative solution for
methane conversion into useful products. The module could be developed further
into air-purifying cartridges that could be implemented at any hot-spot of
methane emission, as a sustainable alternative to gas flare. The metagenomic
libraries constructed in this project represent a novel approach for natural
products discovery with a non-traditional host. The project will actively
involve graduate, undergraduate, and high school students and encourage cross-
disciplinary collaboration and establish partnerships with
industry.&lt;br/&gt;This award by the Biotechnology and Biochemical Engineering
Program of the CBET Division is co-funded by the Systems and Synthetic Biology
Program of the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences.