* 1605882
* Evaluation of the Chemical Drivers behind Membrane Integrity Loss in Halide-Impaired Waters during Chemical Disinfection to Advance Optimal Membrane Structural Design
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2019
* Amisha Shah, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 06/30/2019
* USD 261,964.00

160588 Shah

In recent years, the role of membrane filtration to treat salt-impaired waters
has become more commonplace as freshwater shortages have increased the demand
for seawater desalination and water reuse. The process of disinfection and
desalination of impaired waters is challenged by the extreme variation in water
composition. This project presents a fundamental research framework which will
enable future informed design of water treatment strategies under such impaired
water conditions, specifically with respect to prolonging membrane lifetime. The
central aim of this research project is to integrate governing chemical
principles of polymers and aqueous phase chemistry to advance the scientific
foundation in membrane engineering applications. The project has the following
planned outcomes: (1) prediction of membrane degradation following disinfectant
exposure in halide-impaired waters, and, (2) informed design of novel membrane
surfaces that are resistant to these effects.

To achieve these outcomes, solid membrane materials and model compounds that
serve as their chemical analogs will be used to assess chemical kinetics, by-
product formation, and morphological and chemical alterations of the membrane
surface. Model feedstock waters will contain various mixtures of halide salts
(e.g. chloride, bromide, and iodide ions) as well as chemical disinfectants
(e.g. free chlorine and chloramines) in order to measure combined chemical
effects. The experimental program will identify the effects of water quality
(i.e. salinity, temperature) and operational conditions (oxidant dose). This is
especially important given that concentration polarization effects observed
during membrane filtration can potentially magnify the impact of such
parameters. Finally, this project will inform the design of novel membrane
surfaces that minimize membrane failure through chemical and structural
modifications. The development of such membrane materials would represent a
clear technological advancement which could result in significant energy and
economic savings to facilities treating impaired waters. Overall, this project
will provide desalination industries and water reclamation utilities valuable
insight on how impaired waters with high salt (halide) content will effect
membrane performance when various disinfection strategies are applied prior to
nanofiltration and reverse osmosis treatment.