* 1605290
* SusChEM: Increasing Access to Sustainable Freshwater Resources with Membrane Capacitive Deionization
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2019
* Jeremy Guest, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 07/31/2019
* USD 329,591.00

1605290&lt;br/&gt;Cusick&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Waters that are salty, not to the
extent that sea water is, present a new source of water for beneficial use in
many areas and cost efficient methods for treating them are a high priority. The
proposed research and educational activities will advance the sustainability of
brackish (salty) groundwater and reclaimed wastewater desalination by
establishing an integrated multi-scale modeling and experimental framework for
capacitive desalination technologies. Research will pursue financially viable
desalination strategies with renewable carbon resources and will focus on
overcoming knowledge gaps that limit our ability to design energy efficient and
cost effective membrane capacitive deionization systems. This framework will be
leveraged to teach undergraduates and high school students about water scarcity,
sustainable water management and freshwater production through desalination.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Reducing the energy intensity of freshwater production,
while increasing water recovery, from reclaimed and saline sources will be
critical to minimizing economic costs and environmental impacts. The overall
goal of this work is to increase access to renewable freshwater resources in
water stressed regions by addressing existing economic and energetic barriers to
brackish and reclaimed water desalination. By coupling freshwater and brine
production to capacitor electrode charging and discharging respectively,
membrane capacitive deionization systems have the potential to remove ions from
water near the thermodynamic limit of desalination, requiring far less energy
than reverse osmosis. Producing potable water from low salinity sources (i.e.,
brackish water and reclaimed wastewater) is currently economically infeasible in
most areas due to energy, maintenance and brine disposal costs of reverse
osmosis. This research seeks to address critical barriers currently limiting
membrane capacitive deionization, a potentially low cost and sustainable
alternative to reverse osmosis, by developing novel electrode geometries and
operating schemes within an integrated modeling and quantitative sustainable
design framework that links microstructure composition, reactor design and
operation decisions to predictions of treatment efficacy, freshwater production
costs and environmental sustainability. The hypothesis is that capacitor-based
deionization may enable energy efficient and cost effective production of
freshwater from brackish and reclaimed water. The objectives of this proposed
work are: i) to uncover mechanisms of electrochemical energy loss in membrane
capacitive deionization systems through integrated modeling and experimentation;
ii) to develop novel high performance electrode morphologies that address major
energy loss mechanisms; iii) to develop a membrane capacitive deionization
process model calibrated to the limits of technology for energy and water
recovery; and, iv) to establish a path forward for membrane capacitive
deionization development by integrating the process model into a quantitative
sustainable design framework that integrates environmental, economic, and
performance metrics under uncertainty.