* 1605692
* SusChem: Development and fundamental investigation of a novel low cost recycling technology for spent Li-ion batteries
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Yuanzhi Tang, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 08/31/2019
* USD 330,080.00

1605692 &lt;br/&gt;Chen, Hailong&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Owing to high energy
density and long cycling life, Li-ion batteries (LIB) are becoming one of the
most popular rechargeable batteries used as power sources in a variety of
devices and tools, such as in sensors, smart phones, electric and hybrid
electric vehicles. However, many of the electrode materials of LIBs are toxic
and potentially environmentally hazardous. Additionally, LIB electrode
constituents Co, Ni, and Li are also relatively precious metals relying on
geologically limited sources from outside of the U.S. Therefore, from the
viewpoint of environmental, sustainability, as well as national security
considerations, it is critically important to have good strategies to recycle
spent LIBs. However, it is scientifically and practically challenging to develop
a highly efficient and economically justifiable recycling method, owing to the
complex chemistries in LIB systems. The LIB recycling industry is only at the
starting stage compared to the mature and fast growing LIB manufacturing
industry. Current LIB recycling technologies are either energy costly or
environmentally unfriendly. In this project, a novel low cost method to recycle
Co, Ni, and Li metals from spent LIBs will be
explored.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Systematic investigation will be applied on each
and every step of the recycling process to achieve a fundamental understanding
on (1) how to best handle spent LIBs, (2) how to effectively and efficiently
extract and separate the valuable elements from the electrode materials, and (3)
how to make the method robust for a wide variety of LIB chemistries. Advanced in
situ characterization methods, such as synchrotron based in situ X-ray
diffraction, will be used to study the reaction mechanisms of the electrode
materials in the recycling reactions. Findings from this project may greatly
advance knowledge on the chemical reactions of metal oxides and the nucleation
and crystal growth of nanoclusters in solution. The development and optimization
of this novel recycling method may significantly reduce the potential
environmental hazards from spent LIBs, lower the cost of LIB production, and
increase the sustainability of LIB industry by turning it from a current open-
loop model to a close-loop model. A new course on Energy Technology and
Environmental Challenges will be organized at Georgia Tech focusing on the
interdisciplinary research opportunities that are highlighted in the research.
If this technology is proved to be effective and scalable for commercialization,
it can be a game changing factor to current Li-ion battery industry and can
bring revolutionary changes to the transportation industry as it would
significantly change the cost-production relationship and sustainability aspects
of these industries.