* 1605191
* Homogeneous Plasmonic Assays for Instantaneous Microbial Detection
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2019
* Abdennour Abbas, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 05/31/2019
* USD 301,147.00

PI: Abbas, Abdennour &lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1605191&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
new approach for a rapid identification and quantification of microbial content
and type in food and environmental samples will be investigated. If successful,
the results could address current need in food safety and food spoilage
detection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A new approach for rapid identification and
quantification of the microbial content and type in food and environmental
samples, will be investigated. Rapid screening (less than 2 hours) for the
presence or absence of yeasts, molds, gram-negative bacteria, gram-positive
bacteria and other phylogenetic microbial classes regardless of the strain or
species will be developed. Current rapid methods rely on incubation followed by
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for identification. The proposed homogeneous
phylogenetic-plasmonic assays are based on the combination of plasmonic and
colorimetry mechanisms (generation of color by the aggregation of metal
nanoparticles), and the identification and targeting of specific phylogenetic
entities on the microbial surface, which are specific to a certain class of
microorganisms, and can be activated to interact with plasmonic nanoparticles.
Such an interaction results in a rapid formation of a nanoparticle monolayer
surrounding the microorganism, leading to rapid color change of the sample from
red to dark-blue, visible to the naked eye. As a result, the proposed assay
technology is expected to reduce cost and time needed for analysis and decision
making would become feasible in less than two hours. Beyond the applied aspects
of the project, the proposed research will explore microbial surface entities,
particularly disulfide bridge-containing proteins, and shed light on their
importance, distribution and role in molecular recognition reactions and
stability of microbial cells. The main direct impact of this research is to
enhance the capabilities of food and environmental diagnostic laboratories by
enabling rapid microbial screening in food plants and environmental sites,
allowing timely implementation of a preventive or curative response. The project
proposes to build collaboration with industrial partners, which will help fill
the gap between academic research and the development of commercial products
that benefit society. The proposed research program will introduce graduate,
undergraduate students, and post-docs to transdisciplinary research and educate
them on how to solve problems by applying different fields of science and
engineering, such as nanotechnology, chemistry, biotechnology and food
engineering. The results of this research will be broadly disseminated through
conferences, peer-reviewed publications, potential patents and news articles to
inform the general public.