* 1605202
* UNS: U.S.-China: Integrated Systems Modeling of Food-Energy-Water (FEW) Nexus for Urban Sustainability
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2016,11/30/2021
* Nancy Love, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 11/30/2021
* USD 552,686.00

1605202 (Xu)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will advance the science and
engineering of Food-Energy-Water (FEW) nexus modeling by developing and applying
an integrated systems modeling framework. The modeling framework will enable
quantitative characterization of urban FEW nexus, identify areas for efficiency
improvement, and evaluate the consequences of policy and technology scenarios.
Results from the case studies in Detroit and Beijing will guide policy and
technology development for better managing FEW resources for these two testbeds
as well as other similar cities in the U.S., in China, and around the world. The
collaboration between the U.S. and China on this project provides opportunities
for a group of researchers with diverse background to share data, expertise, and
experience on modeling urban FEW nexus. The project will also engage
stakeholders for seeking inputs to improve the modeling framework and scenarios.
Research results will also be provided to stakeholders to support their decision
making relevant to FEW nexus. Through the U.S.-China collaboration, unique
opportunities will be created for a diverse group of graduate and undergraduate
STEM students to conduct cutting-edge research in an international,
interdisciplinary environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research employs the
latest knowledge from multiple disciplines for developing an integrated systems
modeling framework to understand urban FEW nexus. Dynamic material flow analysis
will characterize urban FEW resource stocks and flows. The structure and
importance of network components will be examined using network-based metrics
and methods from different but related fields (ecological network analysis and
complex network analysis). Policy and technology scenarios will be evaluated
using these network-based metrics and methods to identify co-benefits and avoid
unintended consequences. The resulting urban FEW nexus modeling framework will
address multiple dimensions and scales: systems (integrated FEW systems),
spatial (key system processes that are both within and outside the city
boundary), and temporal (short-term flows and long-term stocks). The modeling
framework will also be applied to two distinct testbeds (Detroit and Beijing)
for demonstration. While the case study results are specific for the testbeds,
the integrated systems modeling framework will be generally applicable for
understand the FEW nexus for other urban areas.