* 1605646
* Probing Neural Connectivity at Multiple Temporal Scales
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* David Margolis, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 08/31/2022
* USD 485,954.00

1605646 - Najafizadeh&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The brain is a highly complex dynamic
system in which neural functional connections are continuously changing at
multiple time scales. These changes can occur at very short scales, for example
due to learning a simple task, or at relatively longer scales, due to wide range
of reasons, such as learning complex concepts, brain-related diseases (e.g.
Alzheimer's and depression), and going through rehabilitation. Currently, our
understanding of how the neural functional interactions form and change with
time has been very limited because of lack of 1) quantitative measures that can
reliably characterize these changes at different time scales, and 2) the ability
to continuously monitor and record brain activities at different time scales,
from millisecond to days and weeks. This project aims to address these
limitations by taking a combined theoretical-experimental approach to establish
a data-driven computational framework with new quantitative measures that can
characterize the temporal evolution of dynamics of brain functional networks,
across short-and long time scales. To further broaden the capabilities of the
framework, this project will take a step further to consider scenarios where the
brain network structure has been manipulated, and will computationally and
experimentally investigate how brain networks reorganize and change with time in
response to transient, localized manipulations of the network structure. The
outcome of this project will have a transformative impact in the field of
neuroscience by introducing a powerful computational framework for quantifying
the dynamics of brain networks that have been evaluated experimentally under
various conditions. The project will also provide a unique opportunity for the
graduate and undergraduate students to obtain multidisciplinary expertise at the
intersection of signal processing, statistics, neurobiology and imaging, thus
providing an ideal platform for the training of the next generation engineers
and neuroscientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the fundamental
problems in the field of neuroscience and brain mapping is the lack of a
generalized computational framework with reliable quantitative measures for
characterizing the changes that occur in the functional interactions among brain
networks at multiple temporal scales. The focus of this three-year project is to
establish a comprehensive data-driven quantitative framework, which will enable
studying and quantitatively characterizing the dynamic properties of brain
functional networks at multiple temporal scales. With a focus on somatosensory
learning, this research will use the proposed framework along with chronic
imaging in GCaMP6f reporter mice, to quantitatively examine 1) how the
interactions among functional brain networks are modified by task performance
(short term changes), 2) how such interactions differ over days when mice
finally becomes expert in performing the task (long term changes), and 3) how
manipulating different nodes in the network, will change dynamics of brain
functional interactions. This project, via combined theoretical-experimental
studies, will introduce innovative approaches at three frontends. First, a
systematic data-driven approach for quantitatively analyzing the temporal
evolution of dynamics of brain functional networks at different temporal scales
will be established. The aim is to represent the functionality of the brain
networks with a multi-layer network, in which layers are labeled by time.
Second, using state-of-the-art chronic imaging in GCaMP6f reporter mice, the
project will monitor network activities at several temporal scales, from fast
millisecond to those that occur on a slower time scale of days to weeks. The
joining of quantitative analysis with in vivo imaging brings a powerful approach
to the understanding of behavior-related dynamic changes in the cortical
network. Third, to strengthen the capabilities of the framework, quantitatively
and experimentally (using simulations as well as inactivation methods during
imaging), the project investigates how the functional network is altered by
transient, localized manipulations of network structure. The outcomes will be
particularly important for advancing understanding of the dynamics of functional
reorganization of the brain networks after stroke or injuries. The success of
this project, by including the temporal dimension into the analysis, will have a
transformative impact in the field of neuroscience. The new comprehensive
framework will enable quantitative assessment of studying short-term and long-
term network changes to advance our understanding of the dynamics of functional
reorganization of the brain. The unique rich data set that will be generated
through the state-of-art imaging system in this project along with the framework
will provide important information on how cortical network activity changes
across fast and slow time scales as related to learning. The outcomes of this
research will have a significant impact in the clinical domain, helping the
development of the next generation of personalized rehabilitation technology. In
addition, the proposed research work is multidisciplinary as it covers topics
from signal processing, statistics and engineering to neurobiology, imaging and
neuroscience, thus providing a unique opportunity for the graduate and
undergraduate students involved in the project to gain new learning experiences.