* 1605136
* Coupled Mixing and Auto-Ignition Dynamics of Turbulent Fuel Jets Issuing into Hot and Vitiated Oxidizing Environments
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2016,09/30/2019
* Jeffrey Sutton, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 09/30/2019
* USD 300,000.00

1605136 - Sutton&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A broad range of engineering systems such
as transportation and power-generation platforms rely on the injection of a
turbulent fuel stream into a high-temperature, oxidizing environment. Under
certain mixture and temperature conditions, auto-ignition will occur. Systems
such as diesel engines and high-speed scramjets/ramjets rely on auto-ignition
for achieving ignition and flame stabilization. Other systems, including gas-
turbine and spark-ignition engines are designed to prevent auto-ignition to
avoid significant and/or catastrophic damage. For either of these scenarios it
is highly desired to understand the physics governing the transient auto-
ignition process. Turbulent flows are very complex and when coupled to the
chemical reactions governing auto-ignition, a highly dynamic system is formed
where turbulent mixing has a direct effect on the reaction chemistry. In this
project, time-resolved measurements of fuel/oxidizer mixing, temperature, and
species will be made using advanced laser diagnostics, characterizing the flow
and chemical conditions necessary for achieving auto-ignition kernel formation
under turbulent fuel injection. The impact of the research will be far-reaching,
ranging from a new physical understanding of auto-ignition dynamics to assessing
numerical simulations and models. This project also will aid in the training of
a graduate student and mentoring of a post-doctoral researcher. In addition, a
unique aspect of this project is the implementation of a formal direct graduate-
to-undergraduate mentoring program, where a graduate student is partnered with
and mentors an undergraduate honors student. The PI also will partner with a
local elementary school for K-12 outreach, equipping young students with
information, inspiration, and initiative in STEM-related topics. The overarching
topics, such as combustion, engines, and lasers, provide exciting themes for
younger children and can help build the foundation for a life-long interest in
science and technology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will be
transformative in the fact that the dynamic coupling between turbulent mixing,
low-temperature chemistry and ?hot? ignition kernel formation will be examined
in detail for the first time. High-speed (10 to 100 kHz acquisition rate) laser
diagnostics will be used to measure the mixture fraction, temperature, and
CH2O/OH concentrations following turbulent fuel injection through auto-ignition.
Specific research contributions include quantification of key time-dependent
processes which lead to the observed auto-ignition topology including the
mechanisms in with turbulent mixing modifies auto-ignition topology and the role
of low-temperature chemistry (e.g., CH2O) on ignition kernel formation. Due to
the transient and spatially-intermittent nature of the auto-ignition process,
multi-dimensional, temporal records are necessary to characterize the flow field
scalars at the ignition kernel sites. These measurements will be used to
determine space-time correlations between mixture fraction, CH2O (low-
temperature chemistry) and OH (hot ignition kernel) as well develop new
statistics of the mixture fraction, temperature, and scalar dissipation
conditioned on the ignition kernel location for parameterization of the most
probable conditions leading to auto-ignition. The proposed measurements will be
carried out across a broad range of test conditions, examining the effects of
varying Reynolds (Damk√∂hler) number, fuel type, and oxidizer composition and
temperature.