* 1605604
* Effects of three-dimensional macroporosity and matrix elasticity on the outcomes of stem cells based cartilage tissue regeneration
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2020
* Lin Han, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 05/31/2020
* USD 337,047.00

PI: Han, Li-Hsin &lt;br/&gt;Proposal #: 1605604&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cartilage
regeneration by stem cells provides a tremendous hope for the millions of people
who suffer from cartilage injuries, e.g., osteoarthritis. The overall objective
of this project is to understand how pore size and matrix elasticity in a 3D
environment regulate stem cell-based cartilage regeneration. The building blocks
for the novel 3D scaffold are ribbon-like and microsized hydrogels that can be
cross linked to encapsulate human mesenchymal stem cells and provide an
environment with independently tunable pore size, matrix elasticity and chemical
properties. The proposed studies will provide valuable information about the
environment needed to achieve complete stem cell based cartilage repair.
Educational and outreach impact will be achieved through enhanced research
experiences for involved students, new graduate level courses, and activities
involving high school teachers and underrepresented K-12 students. This award is
co-funded by the Biomaterials program in the Division of Materials Research
through the BioMaPs program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Articular cartilage injuries
as a result of trauma and degenerative diseases present a serious health
problem. Osteoarthritis alone affects more than 27 million people in the U.S.
and is predicted to affect 1 in 2 people in their lifetime. Chondrocytes in the
cartilage have a poor regenerative capacity, and most articular injuries cannot
heal without open surgery or other invasive intervention. Autologous cartilage
implantation, or ACI, and the microfracture technology are the established
treatments for cartilage repair, but these methods are often limited by
insufficient cartilage supply, continual cartilage degeneration, and the
formation of fibrosis cartilages that do not provide sufficient mechanical
strength to sustain body loads. Stem cell-based cartilage regeneration provides
tremendous hopes for people suffering from cartilage injuries. The success of
stem cell chondrogenesis relies on an ideal cell niche that provide properly
orchestrated niche properties, forming the key elements that are crucial for
chondrogenesis, including biochemical and biophysical cues, to promote the
desired stem cell bioactivities. Macropores, the pore space no smaller than the
typical cells, is a highly potential mechanosensing regulator to control the
stem cell chondrogenic differentiation. However, the mechanisms by which niche
properties in three-dimensions regulate stem cells chondrogenesis remain largely
unclear. A platform to support the fundamental study on the complex interaction
between niche properties and stem cell bioactivities is currently lacking. Given
the complex nature of how stem cells respond to niche properties in our body, a
three-dimensional niche model that can easily control macroporosity, matrix
elasticity and cell morphology will facilitate a mechanistic study on the niche
effect on chondrogenesis, and may one day lead to an ideal cell niche to realize
the ultimate goal of complete cartilage repair. This project will conduct the
first step to attempt such goal by using the crosslinkable microribbons, which
are ribbon-like and micron-sized hydrogels that emerged in the past couple
years, as the building blocks to construct the model cell niches to provide a
vast variation of pore size, cell shape, and elasticity. The microribbons
provide the following functions to facilitate a comprehensive study on how niche
compositions impact stem cells chondrogenesis: 1) direct cell encapsulation in
three dimensions, 2) control of cell shape by tunable macropore size, 3)
independently tunable biochemical and mechanical cues, and 4) interconnected
macroporosity to retain the ECM components produced by cells. Using
macroribbons, the investigators address 3 aims: 1) To develop a 3D model that
exposes human mesenchymal stems cells (MSC) to various macropore sizes and
matrix elasticity, and to evaluate the cellular properties of MSC with regard to
cell shape, focal adhesion, cytoskeleton organization, and transcription factor
activity; 2) To determine how macropore size, matrix elasticity and the
associated cellular properties influence the chondrogenic differentiation of
human MSC; and 3): To understand how macroporosity and matrix elasticity
influence the production of cartilage matrix and the stability of chondrocyte
phenotypes. If successful, numerous patients suffering from cartilage injuries
can benefit from the 3D macroporous cell niche developed. The proposed project
spans multiple disciplines including engineering, biology and medicine. Students
carrying out proposed research will benefit greatly by being exposed to a
variety of experiments including organic synthesis, nanoindentation, stem cell
cultivation and cellular assays. New graduate-level courses incorporating the
elements from the proposed research will be developed to translate the research
outcomes from lab benches to the classroom. Technology used for the proposed
project, such as wet-spinning and scaffold fabrication, will be contributed to
the outreaching programs hosted by the PI and the college of engineering,
providing short lectures, summer camps, and hands-on lab experience to high
school teachers and underrepresented K-12 students. The PI and co-PI will
actively recruit female and minority students to conduct the proposed research.