* 1605789
* Electric field-based enhancement and control of film and nucleate boiling heat transfer
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2022
* Vaibhav Bahadur, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 07/31/2022
* USD 321,000.00

Electric field-based enhancement and control of film and nucleate boiling heat
transfer&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Boiling heat transfer influences the performance
of many industrial processes like steam generation, desalination and quenching.
Enhanced heat transfer improves the energy efficiency of thermal processes and
reduces the operating temperatures. At high temperatures, boiling heat transfer
is drastically reduced due to the formation of an insulating vapor layer between
the surface and the liquid. This well-known Leidenfrost effect (film boiling) is
responsible for adversely affecting the performance of industrial equipment
which involves boiling. An electrical voltage applied across this vapor layer
can promote liquid-surface wetting, thereby eliminating dryout and enhancing
heat transfer. Similarly, an electric field can control bubbles, which also
influences boiling heat transfer. The proposed research is a fundamental study
on the influence of electric fields in multiple regimes of boiling heat
transfer. Electrical suppression of the Leidenfrost state will be analyzed and
the resulting heat transfer enhancement will be quantified. Electric-field-based
control of physical phenomena associated with bubbles will be analyzed to
quantify electric field-enhanced heat transfer in the nucleate boiling regime
(which involves bubbles). The proposed research includes experimentation,
analytical modeling and numerical simulations. Overall, the proposed research
will develop a new area of study in the field of boiling heat transfer. This
will also set the stage for the development of novel heat transfer technologies
which impact the energy and materials processing sectors. The impact of this
work is particularly evident in the area of quenching (ultrafast cooling), where
electrically tunable cooling offers a new tool to control the microstructure and
mechanical properties of metals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research
studies the influence of interfacial electric fields on film and nucleate
boiling heat transfer, for liquids with very low (but finite) electrical
conductivity (like organic solvents and deionized water). In such liquids, the
applied voltage is expressed across the electrically insulating vapor gap or
bubble. This localized interfacial electric field can influence boiling-related
phenomena more strongly than the volumetric electric field in electrically
insulating liquids. The proposed research will directly measure the heat
transfer coefficients and analyze the fundamental mechanisms underlying heat
transfer enhancement. This work involves the development of a high heat flux,
high temperature pool boiling test facility to measure the critical heat flux
(CHF), which is the maximum heat flux that avoids dryout. The physics underlying
Leidenfrost state suppression will be captured by single droplet experiments and
analysis. The influence of electric fields on microfluidic phenomena like bubble
growth, oscillations, and detachment will be studied by single bubble high speed
visualizations and analytical modeling. Experiments will be conducted with
deionized water and isopropanol/methanol as working fluids. Specific outcomes of
this work include measurements of electrically enhanced heat transfer
coefficients and CHF?s, and an in depth understanding of the micro/mesoscale
thermal-fluid-electrical phenomena influencing boiling heat transfer. Overall,
the proposed research will lead to seminal contributions in the field of boiling
heat transfer. This research can potentially reshape the boiling curve by making
the CHF limit irrelevant and increasing heat transfer coefficients. This work
also lays the foundations for electrically tunable boiling heat transfer.