* 1605524
* SusChEM: Novel Electrochemical CO2 Conversion Systems with CO2-Expanded Liquids
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* James Blakemore, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 07/31/2020
* USD 450,000.00

The project will convert the greenhouse gas carbon dioxide (CO2) to chemical and
fuel products utilizing electrocatalysis in combination with liquid-phase CO2
media known as Carbon dioxide eXpanded Liquids (CXLs). Capture and valorization
of CO2 produced by combustion processes is one of the greatest technological
challenges faced by society. The project represents a new approach that
concentrates CO2 via CXLs, thereby improving the selectivity and faradaic
efficiency of the electocatalytic process leading to product generation. This
innovation overcomes the key challenge of processing dilute gaseous CO2, and
enables development of a practical process for converting CO2 to value-added
products. The project will broadly train graduate and undergraduate students in
electrochemistry, materials science, and reaction engineering, and will share
the importance of managing emissions of greenhouse gases with elementary school
children through summer science camp experiences.

The study will develop the first proof-of-concept demonstration of
electrochemical cells that interface the traditional three-electrode
configuration of physical electrochemistry with reactors designed to allow
generation of CXLs from solvents pressurized with CO2. Fundamental research on
these new conditions will reveal how CXLs influence the rates and selectivities
of CO2 reduction, important considerations because CO2 serves as both the
reactant and a co-solvent. This approach is expected to overcome the major
challenges that hinder electrochemical CO2 conversion: CO2 starvation and
parasitic proton reduction (i.e., generation of hydrogen gas). More broadly, the
research has potential to transform the field by expanding the range of
catalytic materials and electrolytes that can be deployed in CXL media. By
paving the way for effective CO2 utilization both as co-solvent and reactant,
the CXL-based technology will contribute to the reduction of global warming and
the adverse effects of climate change, while easing industrial dependence on
fossil fuels. Educational aspects will include the recruitment of
underrepresented groups through existing and new partnerships with Historically
Black Colleges & Universities (HBCU). Results from this research will be used to
develop case studies for current graduate and undergraduate courses.