* 1605904
* Coupling liquid crystal phase transitions with aptamer selectivity for biomolecular sensing
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2021
* Raymond Tu, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 05/31/2021
* USD 296,898.00

PI: Tu, Raymond &lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1605904&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal is to create an inexpensive and flexible biosensor using biological
materials of special properties for the rapid recognition of harmful toxins and
cancer biomarkers. Liquid crystals, the same structures that are in TVs and
watches, can be used as an ultra-sensitive switch for visualizing the sensing
phenomena. Taken together, a new device is expected to be created for the rapid
detection of numerous disease biomarkers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will
investigate a low-cost label-free sensing technology that focuses on analytes
that can quickly diagnose illnesses and toxins prevalent in impoverished
populations. The researchers aim to accomplish this by combining the cooperative
phase transitions of liquid crystals with the flexibility of aptamer-based
analyte binding. Liquid crystal based biosensors are inexpensive and sensitive,
but the label-free application of the homeotropic to planar phase change
requires a change in the interfacial packing of the nematic mesogen, restricting
applications to a narrow range of targets. In contrast, aptamers possess the
ability to selectively bind to a wide range of analytes, and the ability to
quickly evolve new targets using Systematic Evolution of Ligands by EXponential
(SELEX) enrichment has made the nucleic acid recognition elements a popular
topic in the sensing community. Still, the challenge remains to translate this
easily evolvable selectivity into an inexpensive label-free "aptasensor." The
goal of this work is to examine the fundamental interfacial science and aptamer
sequence space needed to robustly couple the nematic liquid crystal-aqueous
interface with aptamer selectivity and sensitivity. Our approach for creating a
"generalizable" aptamer-liquid crystal system investigates in the proposed work,
four fundamental aspects of the sensing system. (1) Develop a quantitative
methodology for the evaluation of competitive adsorption to the nematic liquid
crystal-aqueous interface. (2) Measure and model the change in surface energy as
the liquid responds to surfactants, unbound aptamers and bound aptamers. (3)
Determine the rate limiting steps for realistic sensor design, where the
kinetics of the phase transition should not require protracted diffusive or
adsorption times. (4) Develop tools for the evolution of both the aptamer
selectivity as well as the aptamer interaction with the liquid crystal and
surfactants.