* 1605935
* Genetic control of bone structure
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2021
* Marjolein van der Meulen, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 06/30/2021
* USD 300,000.00

PI: van der Meulen, Marjolein C.&lt;br/&gt;Proposal #:
1605935&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The bones of the skeleton consist of two tissue
structures: cortical bone, a high volume fraction material forming the outer
shell and central shafts of long bones; and, cancellous bone, an open lattice
with high porosity located in the interior and bone ends. To date bone tissue
engineering has not considered the distinct genetic regulation of these two
structures. The goal of this work is to examine age-related genetic and
molecular mechanisms in the context of regulation of cancellous and cortical
bone separately. Information obtained is critical to understanding and
replicating bone tissue formation, maintenance and degeneration. The novel data
will be used to identify genetic targets and pathways to inhibit or stimulate
gene expression and/or envelope-specific signaling mechanisms to stimulate and
enhance bone formation in vivo. The major broader impact objectives are focused
on using this research and the PI's administrative role to enhance the
participation of women in STEM education and academic careers. This award is co-
funded by the Biomaterials program in the Division of Materials Research through
the BioMaPs program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The bones of the skeleton consist of
two tissue structures: cortical bone, a high volume fraction material forming
the outer shell and central shafts of long bones; and, cancellous bone, an open
lattice with high porosity located in the interior and bone ends. Thus their
distinct genetic control is critical if one seeks to replicate these two
structures. Cancellous and cortical bone have different developmental pathways
and adapt differently to biophysical stimuli. For example, mechanical loading is
an anabolic biophysical srtimulus that increases bone mass and can reverse bone
loss in the adult. Mechanobiologic adaptation differs and is specific to
cancellous or cortical bone. The two structures are differentially affected by
disease, often with greater cancellous effect than cortical. The differing
responses likely reflect different developmental and mechanosensory gene
regulation between the two tissues. However, gene expression in the individual
tissue structures has not been examined during growth or with adaptation to
loading. The pathways underlying skeletal gene expression have been studied
using knockout mice or with gene analyses of whole bones that do not
differentiate between the two tissue types. The overall hypothesis of the
proposed work is that gene expression differs in cortical and cancellous bone in
vivo, leading to differential gene expression between the two tissues during
growth and with perturbations such as mechanical loading. The research team has
demonstrated: cancellous and cortical bone can be isolated individually from the
tibial metaphysis of growing mice; sufficient mRNA is available and suitable for
transciptomics; and, cancellous and cortical bone express different genes in
growing mice. Using RNA-sequencing and pathway analysis, this project will 1)
quantitate age-related gene expression in cancellous and cortical bone
separately in the tibiae of growing and adult female mice; and, 2) identify
potential new targets to stimulate anabolic bone formation using differential
gene expression in the tibia of growing and adult female mice after in vivo
loading, a mechanotransduction model developed by the PI's laboratory that
differentially affects cancellous and cortical bone tissue. Information obtained
is critical to understanding and replicating bone tissue formation, maintenance
and degeneration. The novel data will be used to identify genetic targets and
pathways to inhibit or stimulate gene expression and/or envelope-specific
signaling mechanisms to stimulate and enhance bone formation in vivo. The major
broader impact objectives are focused on using this research and the PI's
administrative role to enhance the participation of women in STEM education and
academic careers. Specifically the PI will: 1) engage middle school girls in
STEM learning via workshops based on the proposed research; 2) involve female
students in her research laboratory; and, 3) increase women faculty in STEM
departments in academia.