* 1605075
* New Approaches for the Design of Particulate Media
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2019
* Heinrich Jaeger, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 08/31/2019
* USD 347,071.00

CBET - 1605075&lt;br/&gt;PI: Jaeger, Heinrich&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Particulate
media, or granular materials, are random aggregates of a large number of solid
particles. They come in all sizes and encompass a broad range of naturally
occurring materials, such as gravel, sand, and soil, and a broad range of
industrial and agricultural products, such as grains, fertilizers and powders,
and pigments. These materials pose special challenges to handle on a large scale
because they can exhibit an array of solid-like and fluid-like behaviors. A key
question in designing such materials is how to pick the constituent particles to
achieve desired material properties of the aggregate. This project will develop
a new approach that will allow practitioners to engineer particle types that
will yield predetermined, target outcomes for the behavior of the aggregate. The
project will involve a combination of computations and experiments to solve the
problem of particle design and to develop a set of general design rules. The
project will provide opportunities for students at all academic levels to
participate in research. The researchers will participate in a Bridge Program
that encourages undergraduates, especially those from underrepresented groups,
to continue to graduate work. In addition, the team will participate in several
outreach activities to increase the public's appreciation of science and
engineering, including the Physics with a Bang! event, which demonstrates
science principles to broad audiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To tackle the
inverse problem of identifying appropriate particle shapes for given performance
targets, the project implements a computer-aided design and optimization method
that makes use of ideas from evolutionary computation. Going beyond devising
specific solutions to specific design targets, the project introduces new
capabilities by developing general design rules. Such rules apply across a whole
range of related targets and, once established, enable rational design by
providing a mapping from overall behavior of the particulate medium to particle-
level attributes, such as shape. For the design of random composite or
particulate systems with complex particle shapes this is a new approach with
transformative potential. In this project,arbitrary convex and non-convex shapes
will be represented by sets of bonded spheres of varying radius and overlap,
whose configuration can be mutated and evolved to optimize performance.
Directions to be investigated include distributions of particle sizes and
shapes, particle breakage, particles combining hard and soft materials,
designing the stress response in the nonlinear regime of incipient failure, and
optimizing not only the particles but also the processing pathway. In a second
stage of the project this methodology is extended to designing flow behavior,
focusing on concentrated particle suspensions. For calibration and validation
the computational effort is closely coupled to systematic experiments that use
high-resolution 3d-printing to fabricate particles and use x-rays and ultrasound
for non-invasive imaging.