* 1605843
* Evaluating the Influence of Ecoroof Surfaces on Indoor Air Quality
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2021
* Todd Rosenstiel, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 06/30/2021
* USD 374,400.00

1605843 &lt;br/&gt;Starry, Olyssa&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Americans spend 90% of
their time in buildings, resulting in exposures to air pollution being largely
dictated by indoor air quality. One key determinant of indoor air quality is
ventilation of indoor spaces with outside air. Increased rates of building
ventilation have been correlated with improved occupant health, satisfaction,
and productivity. However, improved indoor air quality, from increased
ventilation, is ultimately contingent on the quality of outdoor air. Ecoroofs
are an increasingly popular strategy for improving building sustainability that
result in vegetated building surfaces that may be in close proximity to a
building?s outdoor air supply (often rooftop). While air quality models indicate
that ecoroofs may remove substantial quantities of air pollutants from urban
atmospheres, no empirical studies are known that investigate how an ecoroof may
affect the indoor air quality of the same building. Urban air quality studies of
ecoroofs typically consider only deposition of air pollutants, however, there is
precedence for vegetation to emit volatile compounds that may degrade indoor air
quality or participate in secondary chemistries which results in the formation
of irritating or harmful air pollutants. Therefore, there is a need to
critically and holistically evaluate source, sink, and transformations of air
pollutants at vegetated ecoroof surfaces. Examining how ecoroofs may impact
indoor air quality is critical for developing more sustainable building designs
and for identifying synergistic opportunities to enhance the sustainability of
the urban environment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will investigate the
effects of ecoroofs on indoor air quality with a holistic approach that
addresses two fundamental, yet interrelated research questions: 1) How does the
design of a building rooftop affect deposition, processing, and emissions of air
pollutants? and 2) How might ecoroofs affect indoor air quality? This project
will address these questions with a combination of extensive and innovative data
collection that integrates ecology, biology, and building science approaches.
Specific investigations will include a broad field survey of 48 roof surfaces in
Portland, OR, an intensive air quality monitoring study at a commercial facility
with a dual ecoroof/white membrane roof, and bench-scale laboratory
investigations. Field measurements and laboratory parameterizations will be used
in statistical models and material balances to explain relationships between the
urban environment, ecoroofs, and indoor air quality. This project will provide
data that leads to an improved understanding of ecoroof-indoor air quality
interactions. The data, parameterizations, and models from this project will
inform building sustainability practices by enabling indoor air quality impacts
to be integrated into ecoroof and urban green-surface design. Study outcomes
will help identify opportunities to improve indoor air quality and reduce human
exposure to air pollutants. The project will work closely with the City of
Portland and the local Greenroof Information Thinktank (GRIT) to engage the
community in this work and disseminate results to the public as well as
industry.