* 1605223
* Harnessing the Power of Apoptosis to Create Regenerative Acellular Biologic Scaffolds
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2019
* Christine Schmidt, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 07/31/2019
* USD 307,998.00

1605223 - Schmidt Many successes in regenerative medicine have been achieved
through the use of naturally derived materials and particularly decellularized
matrices, e.g., decellurized human dermis and decellurized human nerve graft.
One key limitation to further advancement of these decellularized matrices is a
loss of matrix microarchitecture and bioactivity during standard
decellularization processing, which often starts with a process to induce cell
necrosis (death through damage), releasing intracellular components throughout
the matrix, followed by washes using harsh chemicals to remove cell remnants,
which also results in undesired matrix destruction and removal of favorable
bioactive factors. This project seeks to shift the paradigm in decellularization
techniques by inducing apoptosis (programmed cell death) rather than necrosis.
During apoptosis cells detach from the matrix and form small apoptotic bodies
containing cellular components that can be readily removed. Furthermore, during
apoptosis cells secrete cytokines that are known to aid in tissue regeneration
in the remaining extracellular matrix. The apoptosis technique will be used to
develop nerve and lung tissue specific matrices with preserved microarchitecture
and bioactive factors that can be compared to commercially available products.
The nerve tissue matrix will be tested in a rat sciatic nerve defect model, also
in comparison with commercially available products. Results obtained are
expected to contribute to the medical research community by creating a new
platform for generation of acellular tissue specific matrices with enhanced
regenerative potential, which could dramatically shift the future of
regenerative medicine. Educational and outreach impact will be achieved through
training of a graduate student and several undergraduate students and developing
fun interactive lessons and labs to teach middle school students about
biomaterials and biomedical engineering and to increase young women's interest
in STEM.

The goal of this project is to harness the power of apoptosis induced cell death
to create tissue specific matrices with preserved microarchitecture and
bioactive factors capable of enhancing regeneration in tissues and organs.
Naturally derived materials and particularly decellularized matrices have been
essential to success in regenerative medicine. One key limitation to further
advancement of these decellularized matrices is a loss of fine matrix structure
and bioactivity during standard decellularization processing. The hypothesis of
this work is that induction of cell death by apoptosis will enable easier and
gentler cell and antigen removal, thus better preserving matrix
microarchitecture and bioactive factors. Furthermore, apoptotic cells secrete
factors to enhance regeneration after implantation. Biological scaffolds derived
from tissue specific extracellular matrix are highly desirable for tissue
engineering and regenerative medicine because they are composed of proteins
native to the implant site and provide a scaffold for regeneration. However, it
is important to remove all cellular components prior to implantation to prevent
immunogenicity. Most commonly used commercial decellularization start with a
process to induce cell necrosis, releasing intracellular components throughout
the matrix, followed by washes using harsh chemicals to remove cell remnants,
which also results in undesired matrix destruction and removal of favorable
bioactive factors. This project seeks to shift the paradigm in decellularization
techniques by inducing apoptosis rather than necrosis. During apoptosis cells
detach from the matrix and form small apoptotic bodies containing cellular
components, which can be readily removed. In addition, during apoptosis cells
secrete cytokines that can be sequestered in the ECM, and are known to induce
proliferation, stem cell recruitment, and immunomodulation, thereby aiding in
tissue regeneration. In Specific Aim 1 exploits cell apoptosis in representative
tissues and organs (nerve and lung) to create novel tissue specific matrices
with preserved microarchitecture and bioactive factors. Bioactivity and
regenerative potential of apoptosis-optimized acellular grafts will be compared
to grafts from a commercially used decellularization technique. Specific Aim 2
uses in vivo models to analyze immune response and regenerative potential of
apoptosis-optimized acellular grafts versus grafts created from a commercially
used decellularization technique. Results obtained are expected to contribute to
the medical research community by creating a new platform for generation of
acellular tissue specific matrices with enhanced regenerative potential, which
could dramatically shift the future of regenerative medicine. Educational and
outreach impact will be achieved through training of a graduate student and
several undergraduate students, developing fun interactive lessons and labs to
teach middle school students about biomaterials and biomedical engineering,
developing lessons for 6th-8th grade girls at Girl?s Place, Inc. to increase
young women?s interest in STEM and forging a new collaboration with the Cade
Museum of Gainesville to expand lessons into full scale labs that will be run
regularly to encourage creativity and invention in children.