* 1605116
* Early Non-Invasive Diagnosis of Liver Disease with Optical Spectroscopy
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2021
* Lev Perelman, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center
* Standard Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 06/30/2021
* USD 660,000.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;Perelman, Lev; 1605116&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The clinical
management of patients with liver disease is a major challenge due to the
absence of accurate non-invasive clinical tests. Some medications have shown
promise for reversing liver fibrosis and cirrhosis, however there is a large
barrier in testing these medications in people because treatment evaluation
requires either invasive liver biopsy or post-mortem evaluation. This project
will develop an optical spectroscopic system for non-invasive liver monitoring
and will have a broad impact in hepatology. The project will provide Ph.D.
thesis projects for Biological and Biomedical Sciences (BBS) Program students at
Harvard Medical School and also the Harvard-MIT Division of Health Sciences and
Technology (HST) students. The PI will augment courses at Harvard to introduce
the principles of diffuse optical spectroscopy. Portions of instrument
development and design will be made available by the PI for student projects
within the biomedical engineering senior design course instructed at BU.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI has shown that optical spectroscopy can obtain
liver diagnostic information in mice by quantifying scattering and absorption
properties due to hemoglobin, cytochromes, fat, and collagen. In order to
proceed to human use the project will develop non-invasive optical spectroscopic
methods for correlating alterations in these properties with liver disease, with
the goal of providing an accurate diagnostic method appropriate for humans.
First techniques for animal use will allow studying diagnostic parameters in all
the applicable models of liver disease. Then they will develop a non-invasive
clinical optical spectroscopy system and will test it in vivo in human subjects.
This involves development of a non-invasive fiber based probe for liver disease
by measuring spectroscopic parameters related to portal hypertension. Numerical
modeling will use Monte Carlo techniques to model light propagation through
media layers. Experimental measurements on multilayered phantoms will be used to
validate the models. Specific tasks include: (1) Instrumentation Development and
Testing in Tissue Phantoms; (2) Physical Model and Algorithm for Non-Invasive in
Vivo Measurements; and (3) Animal and Human Experiments.