* 1605805
* Conversion of Bioethanol to Butadiene for Manufacture of Green Tires
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2016,12/31/2019
* Israel Wachs, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 12/31/2019
* USD 299,996.00

PI Name: Israel E. Wachs Proposal Number: 1605805

Many important chemicals in use today are derived from non-renewable petroleum
resources. An important example is butadiene, which is converted to synthetic
rubber used in manufacture of tires. One approach to make tire manufacture more
sustainable is to find a non-petroleum substitute for butadiene. Ethanol
produced from renewable cellulosic biofuel and bio-refinery operations is
potentially an alternative feedstock for synthetic rubber production, if a
suitable catalyst to drive the conversion of ethanol to butadiene can be found.
This project will seek fundamental understanding of the interaction of ethanol
with metal oxide catalyst surfaces at the molecular level to discover the best
type of catalyst and the optimal conditions needed to convert ethanol to
butadiene. The proposed research has the potential to lead to a viable pathway
to produce synthetic rubber from sustainable feedstocks with a lower carbon
footprint. The educational activities associated with the project include
international opportunities for student research at a renowned catalyst research
institute in Germany, as well as the development of modules for outreach on
sustainable chemicals and fuels.

The overall goal of the research is to elucidate the molecular level structure-
reactivity/selectivity relationships for the catalytic conversion of bioethanol
to butadiene. This goal will be accomplished through an integrated study of
catalyst synthesis, spectroscopic analysis of surface chemistry, molecular
calculations, and transient reaction kinetics analysis. A well-defined series of
catalysts will be synthesized to explore the effects of the silica-supported
active metal oxide phase domain size, local structure, oxidation state, acid-
base-redox characteristics and interactions between the active metal oxides. The
catalysts will be characterized at the molecular level with in situ and operando
spectroscopy under reaction conditions. The ethanol surface chemistry will be
probed with Temperature Programmed Surface Reaction (TPSR) spectroscopy, and
isotopic labeling will assist in revealing the reaction pathways of specific
molecular functionalities involving in the coupling reaction to yield butadiene.
Steady State Isotopic Transient Kinetic Analysis (SSITKA) reaction studies will
provide additional kinetic details about the reaction network and rate-
determining-steps. The experimental findings will be complemented with
theoretical calculations to get a deeper, molecular- level understanding of the
active sites required for each catalytic step. All of this information will be
combined to establish structure-activity/selectivity relationships to guide the
molecular design of improved catalysts for the conversion of bioethanol to
butadiene.