* 1605101
* SusChEM: Dispersed Metal Oxides for the Sustainable Production of Propylene
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Ive Hermans, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 08/31/2019
* USD 408,878.00

1605101 Hermans, Ive

The study aims to develop an efficient catalyst for the Oxidative De-
Hydrogenation of Propane (ODHP) to propylene as an alternative to conventional
processes for supplying the huge industrial demand for propylene as a chemical
intermediate in the production of a wide range of value-added products. The work
is motivated by substantial opportunities for energy savings combined with
effective utilization of shale gas resources to maintain competitiveness of the
U.S. Chemical Industry.

ODHP offers a thermodynamically favored route to the production of propylene
versus current technologies assuming reaction selectivity can be controlled to
avoid wasteful over-combustion. Catalysts based on supported vanadium oxide
materials have been widely investigated, and it is known that both the
dispersion of the vanadium oxide and the choice of support material play
important roles in controlling the activity and selectivity. Selectivity for
propylene production is favored by two-dimensional (2D) vanadia species, and the
investigator's group has recently obtained loadings of such species on silica
far above levels previously believed to represent a maximum dispersion limit.
The high dispersion was found to be associated with a sodium promoter in the
silica, leading to a working hypothesis that sodium catalyzes the formation of
the dispersed 2D vanadia, relative to the nucleation rate of less active and
selective 3D particles. The investigator has also found further enhancements in
ODHP rates and propylene selectivity by co-immobilizing tantalum oxide and
vanadium oxide on silica as catalyzed by sodium. The study will seek further
enhancements in ODHP catalyst activity and selectivity via two thrusts. The
first utilizes CVD techniques and additional investigation of the mechanism by
which sodium promotes vanadia dispersion (including an investigation of post-
synthesis removal of sodium to increase activity). The second thrust will extend
the co-immobilization studies to a family of ternary oxides (V-M/SiO2) where M
will consist of tantalum, zirconium, and aluminum, amongst others. The
investigator has a broad range of characterization tools at his disposal to
achieve detailed insight into the chemistry and structure of these materials via
collaboration with ETH Zurich and Argonne National Laboratory. The study will
broadly promote education and outreach related to STEM areas while laying
fundamental groundwork for new catalysts and catalytic processes responsive to
the changing landscape of the chemical and petroleum industries.