* 1605392
* SusChEM: Sustainable material use in laser deposition: integrating experimental design, environmental impact assessment and economic evaluation
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Julie Schoenung, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 06/30/2020
* USD 426,312.00

1605392 &lt;br/&gt;Schoebubg, Julie M.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Conventional methods
used to fabricate metallic components generally require casting or wrought
fabrication processes such as extrusion or forging. Secondary machining steps
are generally necessary in order to achieve specified surface finish,
dimensional accuracy and geometrical complexity. But machining wastes both
material, i.e., the scrap material removed from the bulk part (machining chips),
and energy, rendering conventional methods highly inefficient from a
sustainability perspective. As an alternative, direct metal deposition
techniques are being explored, which create solid metal parts by melting metal
powder and depositing material only where it is wanted, thus fabricating the
component by adding, rather than subtracting material. This change in
fabrication strategy is intended to inherently reduce both energy requirements
and material waste by avoiding (or reducing) the extent of secondary machining
required. However, the actual deposition efficiency, i.e., fraction of feedstock
material that actually becomes part of the consolidated component, has been
demonstrated to be as low as ~5%. In practice, the remainder of the powder is
generally not reused, and becomes waste (waste powder), just like the machining
chips. Consequently, these direct metal deposition processes also present
critical issues in terms of sustainability. This research program has three
primary research objectives: to formulate a quantitative assessment framework
for environmental impact assessment and economic evaluation of direct metal
deposition technologies, to utilize this framework to guide the experimental
design space for utilizing waste powder and machining chips as alternative
feedstock materials in direct metal deposition, and to implement the
experimental design, including carefully controlled component fabrication,
coupled with in-depth characterization and testing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research incorporates various assessment and evaluation tools into a
quantitative assessment framework that captures the experimental variables
associated with direct metal deposition, especially when utilizing alternative
feedstock materials. This framework will be formulated so that it is integrated
with and therefore guides the experimental design space, rather than being
carried out after all the experimental parameters have been rigidly defined, as
is the current norm for assessment studies. Overall, the research will advance
the understanding of the performance-sustainability-economics trade-off space
for direct metal deposition. Direct metal deposition is a relatively new
technology that is promoted to be cost effective and sustainable, due to its
ability to create parts through addition, rather than subtraction, of material.
Yet the process currently has limitations in materials utilization, but moreover
appears to be sufficiently robust to potentially overcome these limitations
through the utilization of alternative feedstock materials. From a broad
perspective, these topics present a foundational opportunity to highlight trade-
offs between performance, sustainability and economics, and furthermore to
promote the incorporation of sustainability and economic assessment early in the
design process.