* 1605351
* Rapid, Free-Solution Electrophoretic Separations of Kilobase DNA by Transiently Attached Wormlike Micelles
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2019
* James Schneider, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 07/31/2019
* USD 295,389.00

Proposal Number: 1605351, Scheider&lt;br/&gt;Rapid, Free-Solution
Electrophoretic Separations of Kilobase DNA by Transiently Attached
Micelles&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop an ultrafast method to
analyze long-strand DNA without the use of gels but with shorter analysis times.
Many important DNA sequencing methods require a length-based sorting of DNA
longer than 1000-10,000 bases. The most common method to accomplish this is
pulsed-field gel electrophoresis, which requires 12-36 hours to complete and
presents a significant bottleneck. The proposed method instead uses low
viscosity, water-based solutions of surfactants instead of gels, and is expected
to perform the same function as mentioned in gel electrophoresis but with
runtimes of less than five minutes. Additionally, the low-viscosity solutions
used are easy to inject into capillaries and microchips and do not suffer from
clogging and degradation with repeated use. Incorporation of this rapid, gel-
free method into critical DNA sequencing procedures could greatly decrease the
cost of sequencing methods used in forensic identification and biology research
such as genome mapping and pathogen identification. One Ph.D student, three M.S.
students, and five undergraduates will be trained in colloid and interface
science, organic chemistry, and bioseparations as they contribute to the
project. Single-molecule DNA visualization studies will be built into
demonstrations for K-12 student outreach, and lab modules for undergraduate
courses will be developed based on microchip
electrophoresis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will research a rapid, non-
gel means to separate double strand DNA greater than 10-100 kilobases (kB) in
length as required for genome mapping and other applications using inexpensive,
widely available capillary electrophoresis equipment. The method uses
transiently attached wormlike micelles as drag-tags, which, when attached to DNA
by a terminal n-alkane group, provide a length-dependent electrophoretic
mobility without the use of a sieving matrix. Specific objectives of the project
aims are: (1) to design and implement substituted peptide nucleic acid staples
to attach alkyl groups to the ends of 48.5 kB lambda-DNA and its digests; (2) to
screen a series of nonionic micelle buffers to obtain the largest drag-tag size
possible; (3) to develop a theory predicting the mobility of the DNA by
consideration of DNA-drag-tag segregation effects in networks of varying pore
size and micelle lifetimes; and (4) to perform single-molecule imaging of DNA to
assess the extent of DNA-drag-tag segregation. The proposed work will identify
optimal buffers and run conditions for a given set of DNA lengths to be
separated and identify limits of DNA length and runtime that can be achieved.
Insights into the perturbation of wormlike micelle entanglements by vicinal
hydrophobes may also help better understand the rheological behavior of these
solutions in the presence of contaminants.