* 1605242
* A scalable pipeline for generating synthetic antibodies against designer glycotopes
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Matthew DeLisa, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 07/31/2020
* USD 359,518.00

1605242 &lt;br/&gt;DeLisa, Matthew P.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Carbohydrate chains,
known as glycans, are involved in many functions of a cell since they determine
the properties of macromolecules such as proteins. Unfortunately it is difficult
to determine the type and structure of glycans. However, antibodies that
recognize and bind to specific glycans could offer a powerful tool for the
analysis of these carbohydrates. The objective of this proposal is to create a
robust method to generate glycan recognizing antibodies that will bind to
specific chains and that can be used to analyze these structures. A better
understanding of the role that glycans play will contribute to the fundamental
knowledge of the behavior of cells which is critical for finding cures for
diseases and for engineering efficient cells in
biomanufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this proposal is to
create a robust, integrated pipeline for the rapid discovery and
characterization of selective, high-affinity Abs against defined glycan
structures or glycan-polypeptide determinants of biomedical importance. The
underlying hypothesis is that glycoengineered Escherichia coli can be leveraged
for facile production of large quantities of relatively pure glycotopes, which
can be efficiently immobilized to solid supports and used for parallel selection
of glycobodies from phage-displayed synthetic Ab libraries. To test this
hypothesis, an array of ~100 structurally uniform glycotopes will be synthesized
using engineered bacteria carrying synthetic pathways of glycosyltransferases.
Then, using a quasi-manual protocol, synthetic glycobodies against these
glycotopes will be selected from large combinatorial libraries by iterative
rounds of Fab-phage display. Finally, isolated glycobodies will be characterized
for glycotope affinity and specificity using ELISA, surface plasmon resonance
(SPR), and glycan microarrays. To establish biological relevance, glycobodies
will be used to probe the expression of authentic glycan signatures on primary
cell lines, viruses, or pathogenic bacteria. By coupling glyco-antigen
expression (Aim 1) to antibody selection (Aim 2) within the same laboratory,
this project is anticipated to yield an integrated pipeline for routine
generation of orthogonal glycobody-glycotope pairs in a matter of
weeks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award by the Biotechnology and Biochemical
Engineering Program of the CBET Division is cosponsored by the Biomaterials
Program of the Division of Materials Research.