* 1605114
* Collaborative Research: SusChEM: Phase-specific catalysis combined with reactive distillation for the selective production of butadiene from y-valerolactone
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Jesse Bond, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 08/31/2020
* USD 181,000.00

1605114 / 1605071 &lt;br/&gt;PIs: Bond, Jesse Q. / Crossley, Steven P.
&lt;br/&gt;Title: Collaborative Research: SusChEM: Phase-specific catalysis
combined with reactive distillation for the selective production of butadiene
from y-valerolactone&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Economically feasible conversion of
biomass to chemicals is of critical importance for sustainability. Inherent
inefficiencies in alkane activation and production gaps caused by the recent
shale gas boom have created niches within the petrochemical industry that might
realistically be filled by biomass. The goal of this collaborative project is to
develop a new technology for selective production of a relatively high-value
petrochemical, butadiene, from aqueous solutions of gamma-valerolactone, a
biomass derived chemical. The butadiene markets have become increasingly
volatile after the recent paradigm shift in refinery operation. The researchers
will develop a multiphase reactor to achieve selective butadiene production from
aqueous solutions of gamma-valerolactone.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The envisioned
chemical transformation occurs through sequential ring opening of valerolactone
to form pentenoic acid isomers, which subsequently undergo decarbonylation to
form butadiene. A multiphase reactor will be employed to achieve ring opening of
valerolactone to form pentenoic acids in an aqueous phase, extraction of these
pentenoic acids into an organic phase, decarbonylation of pentenoic acids in the
organic phase to form butadiene, and reactive distillation of butadiene from the
organic phase to a sweep gas. Fundamental studies of the governing phenomena
will be undertaken in order to develop strategies for maximizing butadiene
selectivity. The aim will be to integrate non-ideal solution thermodynamics,
phase and chemical equilibria, reaction kinetics, and transport phenomena into
an overall process model and functional reactor design. This approach will also
lead to a better fundamental understanding of condensed phase catalysis and
multiphase reactors. In addition to training graduate students, the PIs plan to
engage high school and undergraduate students in their research and develop an
educational module on biomass refining.