* 1605126
* Battery Cathodes with Optimized Interfacial Stability Through the Tailored Design of Core-Shell Architectures
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Jordi Cabana, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2022
* USD 371,399.00

Rechargeable lithium ion batteries help to enable sustainable energy systems by
storing electricity generated by intermittent renewable resources such as wind
and solar energy, or by powering zero-emission electric vehicles charged by
electricity from renewable resources. However, the performance of lithium ion
batteries degrades over repeated recharging cycles because of unwanted reactions
that occur at the boundary between the battery electrode and the electrolyte.
This project will develop new electrode materials for preventing these unwanted
reactions. The key innovation is to coat nanoscale crystals of the lithium-based
energy storage material with a very thin layer of other materials that are
tailored to block these undesired reactions but maintain performance. The
coating is uniformly applied to all the nanocrystals, and so that when the
crystals are formed into an electrode, there are no gaps in the coating. The
educational activities associated with this project involve mentoring of
undergraduate students for summer research, and outreach to high school students
in the Chicago area. The goals of the outreach activities are to communicate the
value of energy storage technology in modern society to diverse groups of high
school students in the Chicago area, and to encourage these students to pursue
education and careers in STEM fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This overall goal of
this research is to improve the ability of lithium ion battery cathodes to
withstand extreme cycling environments by maximizing interfacial stability
without sacrificing energy storage capacity, power delivery, and recharging
time. Cathode-electrolyte instabilities have been linked to the presence of
electroactive transition metals at the surface of the electrode. These
instabilities result in irreversible transformations at these interfaces, with
formation of insulating layers that impede transport as well as material loss
due to corrosion. Core-shell architectures can address interfacial instability.
The shell will be rich in inactive aluminum ions that minimize irreversible
transformations at the interface, and the core will be composed of active
transition metal oxides (Mn, Ni, Co) with high charge storage capacity.
Furthermore, the shell will be thin to reduce storage capacity loss, and
conformal to passivate all interfaces. To gain a fundamental understanding of
the ability these core-shell cathode materials to maintain electrode stability,
the research plan has three objectives. The first objective is to fabricate
core-epitaxial shell nanocrystals for high voltage, high energy battery
cathodes. The second objective is to design and evaluate core-shell
architectures at the secondary particle level, and the third objective is to
construct of full lithium ion cells and characterize of their interfacial
mechanisms of operation. As part of this research, synthesis and fabrication
tools will be developed to effectively coat all interfaces with tailored
materials and create integrated cathode architectures where appropriate levels
of electron and ion transport are imparted.