* 1605161
* GOALI/Collaborative: Engineering Biofilm Dynamics for Cyanotoxins in Biological Water Treatment
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Xiaozhen Mou, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 08/31/2020
* USD 104,751.00

1605185/1605161 Seo / Mou

Threats to drinking water supplies as a result of increased frequency and
duration of harmful algal blooms has been on the rise nationally and globally,
for example the Lake Erie cyanobacteria bloom. To protect the public from
emerging contaminants like cyanotoxins in drinking water sources, various
advanced water treatment processes are considered and adopted by water
utilities. This project is exploring a sustainable treatment approach using
bacterially active filters to remove harmful algal bloom toxins and other
chemicals of emerging concern as the first step in drinking water treatment.
However, biological filtration systems for emerging contaminants are not well
adopted as they commonly show either low or unmaintained biofilm activities for
target pollutants. To enhance the performance of biological filtration systems,
bioaugmentation and bio-stimulation were considered, but still regarded as
uncontrollable as engineering approaches for consistent results. Accordingly,
systematic studies are greatly needed to understand and control biofilm dynamics
in biological filtration systems for emerging contaminants.

The principal research objectives of this study are: 1) to understand the
composition, activity and dynamics of biofilm community and their impact on the
effectiveness of biological filtration systems in cyanotoxin removal, and, 2) to
provide optimum operational parameters and monitoring tools for effective
biological filtration systems operations under the pressure of source water
contaminated with harmful algal bloom organisms. Research emphasis will be
placed on understanding how the bacterial biofilm formation and activity, can be
enhanced and maintained by engineered approaches such as bioaugmentation and
bio-stimulation in order to improve performances of biological filtration
systems for cyanotoxin removal. Specific objectives and hypotheses proposed are:
1) To understand the degradation dynamics (adaptation and evolution) of
cyanobacteria toxin degrading bacteria for bioaugmentation or bio-stimulation
applications. Hypothesis: The concentration variation of cyanotoxins and the
presence of other natural organic matter and nutrients in water will affect the
community and function of cyanotoxin degrading bacteria. 2) To investigate
surface interactions between bioaugmented bacteria and indigenous biofilm formed
on filter media (physical, chemical, and biologically mediated interactions by
microbial biofilms). Hypothesis: The formation of biofilm(s) may affect not only
hydrodynamics and physical properties (e.g. effective size of media) of
biological filtration systems, but also the adhesion and growth of bioaugmented
bacteria in biological filtration systems. 3) To determine the impact of filter
operational parameters on biofilm formation, growth, and subsequent degradation
of cyanotoxins in biological filtration systems. Hypothesis: Optimized
operational parameters of biological filtration systems (backwashing frequency
and intensity, filtration rate, and bio-stimulation) can be obtained to address
various environmental factors. In addition, the proposed project will provide
training and education for three graduate students as well as summer research
opportunities for undergraduate and high school students. Furthermore, research
findings will be introduced in PIs' outreach and service activities, for
example, educational programs for under-represented K-12 students and public
outreach via Lake Erie Center.