* 1605347
* Development of a continuous genome shuffling approach to expedite adaptive laboratory evolution
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Arul Jayaraman, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 06/30/2020
* USD 350,000.00

1605347&lt;br/&gt;Kao, Katy C.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop a
novel methodology to study how microbes evolve. All biological systems have the
capacity to adapt and to evolve. Adaptive evolution can be used as a tool for
the development of effective strains for the conversion of renewable feedstock
to fuels and chemicals for a more sustainable route of production. Due to the
complexity of biological systems, the process of how microbes adapt and evolve
is not fully understood. The researchers will address this challenge by
developing a strain of Escherichia coli that can be used to expedite the process
of adaptive evolution via the continuous recombination of beneficial mutations
while removing neutral or deleterious mutations from the population. The tools
to be developed in the proposed work can also be applied to gain fundamental
understandings of the emergence and development of antibiotic drug resistance.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ability of biological systems to adapt and evolve is
both an advantage and disadvantage in the field of biotechnology. This
evolutionary potential of microbial systems presents opportunities for
developing strains with desired traits. On the other hand, undesired adaptation
can cause strain instability and loss of performance. The goal of this project
is to address this limitation by developing an enabling methodology towards the
fundamental study of evolutionary processes in microbial systems. Adaptive
laboratory evolution (ALE) is a powerful inverse engineering tool that can be
used to generate microbes with desired traits and to uncover the underlying
mechanisms of how microbes evolve and adapt. Specifically, this project aims to
develop a continuous in situ genome shuffling system that expedites ALE
experiments in Escherichia coli, which will allow beneficial mutations from
different clones to recombine to form superior genotypes and deleterious
mutations to be removed from an otherwise superior strain. Therefore, the
overarching hypothesis of the proposed work is that inclusion of sexual
recombination will expedite the rate of adaptive evolution. This hypothesis will
be tested via three objectives: (i) characterization of the benefit of an
efficient bi-directional conjugation system in E. coli, (ii) development of a
conditional mutator version of the genderless system, and (iii) application of
the system to develop E. coli strains that exhibit multiple desired
characteristics and that elucidate the impacts of adaptive evolutionary
strategies and recombination on the rates of adaptation, evolutionary
trajectories, and mechanisms of adaptation. The work will involve team members
from engineering and plant pathology and microbiology, allowing students at all
levels to gain experience in interdisciplinary research.&lt;br/&gt;This award by
the Biotechnology and Biochemical Engineering Program of the CBET Division is
co-funded by the Genetic Mechanisms Program of the Division of Molecular and
Cellular Biosciences.