* 1605916
* GOALI: Understanding the anomolous adsorption capacity of hydrothermal char
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Michael Timko, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 08/31/2020
* USD 313,485.00

1605916&lt;br/&gt;Timko&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hydrothermal chars are inexpensive
carbon-based materials that are synthesized by heating waste feedstock in the
presence of liquid water. Hydrothermal chars have recently attracted significant
interest because they exhibit promising performance in a variety of applications
ranging from soil additives to electrocatalysis. The objective of this GOALI
project is to understand and control the unusually high adsorption capacity of
hydrothermal chars for inorganic and organic compounds. This adsorption capacity
can be exploited to sequester compounds that pose environmental risks. The
research will be performed in collaboration with Cabot Corporation, who will
provide comprehensive characterizations of complex hydrothermal char materials.
Results from the project will be incorporated into Worcester Polytechnic
Institute?s student projects curriculum. The research team will partner with the
Worcester-based non-profit group, The Toxic Soil Busters, for additional
research and mentoring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hydrothermal chars have remarkable
adsorption capacities despite their relatively low surface areas. It has been
hypothesized that surface-bound carboxylic acid groups self-associate to mediate
an ultramicropore structure that is accessible only in the presence of hydrogen
bond donating molecules. Traditional gas sorption measurements that use
molecular nitrogen do not open the carboxylic acid gated ultramicropore
structure, resulting in low apparent surface areas. However, the carboxylic
acids deprotonate in water, and the hydrothermal char structure swells,
mimicking the swelling of a hydrogel under appropriate pH conditions. Therefore,
the sorption capacity of hydrothermal char is a result of its actual surface
area being much greater than measured. To test the hypothesis, two separate ball
milling techniques will be used to independently control the surface area and
surface chemistry of the hydrothermal chars: (1) a dry-milling technique that is
useful for modifying hydrothermal char surface composition, and (2) a solvent-
assisted wet-milling technique that increases the surface area of carbonaceous
materials. Using these two related techniques, the PI will investigate
systematically the adsorption capacity of hydrothermal char to determine why
measured adsorption capacities of hydrothermal chars are comparable to those
measured for activated carbon, despite the fact that the nitrogen-measured
surface areas of hydrothermal chars are less than 1% of those measured for
activated carbon. The three aims of the project are: (1) to understand the
relationship between surface area and sorption capacity using a reactive gas
milling to modify surface composition; (2) to understand the relationship
between measured surface area and sorption capacity, using solvent-assisted
milling as a technique for increasing measured surface areas of pyrolysis
biochar; and (3) to test the carboxylic acid gating of hydrothermal char
ultramicropore area by measurement of sorption characteristics for a series of
sorbates with varying characteristics and molecular sizes. By disentangling the
competing effects of surface area and surface composition, the results will
provide a firm understanding of the remarkable sorption capacities of
hydrothermal chars.