* 1605679
* Long-term brain circuit imaging with chemical and optogenetic stimulation
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2016,12/31/2021
* Dirk Albrecht, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 12/31/2021
* USD 314,811.00

PI: Albrecht, Dirk R.&lt;br/&gt;Proposal #: 1605679&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
focus of this 3 year proposal is developing a much needed microfluidic platform
for long-term, high resolution optical imaging and recording of stimulated brain
activity in living animals. Existing optical systems are limited by 1)
requirements of relatively intense excitation light that causes photobleaching
and phototoxicity that limits the duration of the experiment and hinders
stimulating the neuronal circuit under investigation or 2) by the
incompatability of optical systems that can operate at lower intensities with
standard microfluidic stimulation methods. The central aim of this proposal is
to develop microfluidic devices using optical index-matched materials compatible
with a low intensity microscopy method, "selective plane illumination microscopy
(SPIM)." Preliminary results show feasibility of hydrogel-based systems to
record neural responses in C elegans for hours, as well as compatibility with
simultaneous optogenetic (pulsed visible light) neural activation and readout.
The proposed system will for the first time enable simultaneous chemical and
optical stimulation and perturbation of brain circuits under investigation, with
multiple neurons monitored for activity over several hours. The methods
developed will impact the broader neuroscience community, in which neural
imaging is a critical method for developmental, structural, and functional brain
studies. Materials and hardware, including microfluidic systems, will be made
accessible to the research and commercial community. Broader impact is also
achieved through a comprehensive educational plan including innovative curricula
in advanced biomedical imaging focused on neuroscience applications and outreach
activities to increase involvement of STEM-underrepresented students and local
communities, through exciting, hands-on modules for summer programs and
scientific demonstrations. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Sensation, memory, and
behaviors are encoded in dynamic electrochemical patterns within neurons of the
brain. Recent advances in fast three-3D microscopy have enabled the optical
imaging of activity in large numbers of neurons at once, in some cases nearly
the entire brain of an organism. Such systems promise to revolutionize the study
of neural circuit regulation, compared with sparse single-neuron recordings that
do not capture neural dynamics elsewhere in the circuit. However, current
confocal and structured illumination systems are limited by their requirements
of relatively intense excitation light, causing photobleaching and phototoxicity
that limits the duration of an experiment, and by difficulty in stimulating the
neuronal circuit under investigation. While light sheet or selective plane
illumination microscopy (SPIM) captures more emission light and therefore
operates at lower excitation intensity, optical requirements are incompatible
with standard microfluidic stimulation methods. Therefore, there exists an
urgent need for SPIM-compatible microfluidic stimulation methods to enable long-
term, high resolution recording of stimulated brain activity in living animals.
The central aim of this proposal is to develop microfluidic devices using
optical index-matched materials compatible with SPIM. Preliminary results show
feasibility of hydrogel-based systems to record neural responses in C elegans
for hours, as well as compatibility with simultaneous optogenetic neural
activation and readout. Specific objectives are: 1) development of diSPIM-
compatible sample immobilization and microfluidic stimulation, 2) multi-neuronal
imaging of sensory-stimulated brain circuits to observe and study sensory
feedback, and 3) multi-neuronal imaging of optogenetically-stimulated brain
circuits to observe the effect of reversible circuit perturbations on ensemble
neural activity in the same animal. Innovations of the propose include: 1)
identification of hydrogel encapsulants compatible with diSPIM that immobilize
living animals but maintain organism health and function; 2) microfluidic
designs, including hydrogel-glass or hydrogel-silicone hybrids, that deliver
precise chemical concentrations; 3) identification of sensory neurons detecting
novel chemical stimuli; 4) identification of sensory feedback and study of its
regulation via candidate genetic mutants; 5) simultaneous optogenetic and
chemical stimulation while monitoring multiple sensory and interneurons, to
observe neural responses during dynamic circuit perturbation. The end result
will be a new configuration of the dual-view inverted (diSPIM) system and
protocols suitable for the embedding of cells and small organisms to record
high-resolution, isotropic, fluorescent 3-D volumetric images for long time
periods during and after chemical and/or optogenetic stimulation. The studies
planned will improve the understanding of circuit computation in C. elegans when
stimulated with natural sensory stimuli (e.g., chemicals) and by arbitrary
optogenetic stimulation within a compact and well-defined neural circuit. The
methods developed will impact the broader neuroscience community, in which
neural imaging is a critical method for developmental, structural, and
functional brain studies. Materials and hardware, including microfluidic
systems, will be made accessible to the research and commercial community.
Integrated with the proposed research is a comprehensive educational program
toward training and educating the next generation of interdisciplinary
scientists, particularly biologist-engineers, including: 1) innovative curricula
in advanced biomedical imaging with focus on neuroscience applications, 2)
mentoring undergraduate and graduate students through research and engineering
design projects, and 3) outreach to increase involvement of STEM-
underrepresented students and local communities, through exciting, hands-on
modules for summer programs and scientific demonstrations.