* 1605547
* Collaborative Research: SusChEM: Air-stable, high-lifetime bismuth compounds as solar absorbers with perovskite-like band structures
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2016,01/31/2020
* Tonio Buonassisi, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 01/31/2020
* USD 300,000.00

The sun represents the most abundant potential source of sustainable energy on
earth. Solar cells for producing electricity require materials that absorb the
sun's energy and convert its photons to electrons, a process called
photovoltaics. Recently, materials based on inorganic-organic halide perovskite
materials have achieved promising solar energy power conversion efficiency
approaching that of silicon solar cells, and can be made from earth-abundant
elements using lower-cost, solution based fabrication methods. However, these
perovskite materials contain lead, which is toxic, and they also degrade in the
presence of moisture, which prevents their commercial use. To address these
limitations, this project will develop new solar perovskite-like solar materials
based on the element bismuth, which is both abundant and has low toxicity. This
unexplored class of materials was identified through theoretical and
computational techniques, and the research will use these theoretical insights
to make and test the performance of this potentially exciting new class of
materials for photovoltaic applications. The experimental findings, in
combination with theoretical analysis, will feed back to the materials design
criteria to help identify promising new materials for continued study. The
educational activities associated with this project include laboratory
internships offered in coordination with minority-serving organizations, hands-
on learning modules, and the continued development of a semester-long solar
photovoltaics course.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bismuth (Bi) compounds with
perovskite-like band structures, including ternary bismuth halides and bismuth
chalcohalides, are promising absorption materials for solar photovoltaic
applications that go beyond conventional perovskite materials in three ways.
First, their electronic structure and strong spin-orbit coupling can enable
tolerance to intrinsic defects in a way that is similar to methylammonium lead
iodide perovskite materials, but do not contain lead. Second, the bismuth cation
has a large Born effective charge to provide high dielectric constants and
screening of charged defects. And third, lead-free methylammonium bismuth iodide
materials can be phase stable in the presence of water vapor due to the
preferential formation of protective oxide layers. Given these potential
advantages over lead-based organic metal halide perovskite materials, the
overall goal of this research is to gain a fundamental understanding of the
photovoltaic performance of bismuth-containing compounds as perovskite-like
solar PV materials through theoretical and experimental investigation. Towards
this end, the research has three objectives. The first objective is to
investigate the importance of symmetry for favorable transport properties by
investigating the alkali metal metathiobismuthites, one of the few classes of
Bi-based materials that are not layered. The second objective is to develop
models to determine the recombination processes and recombination rate in
materials from time-resolved photoluminescence measurements. The third objective
is to develop strategies for growing the new Bi-compounds with higher purity and
correlate impurity content with minority carrier lifetime. Density functional
theory will be used to determine the electronic structure, dielectric constant,
and charge carrier effective masses. Experimental studies will establish the
materials design criteria for efficient solar absorption, focusing on
determining the role of intra-granular structural defects, molecular cations,
and crystal symmetry on transport diffusion length, optical properties, and
overall device performance. The diffusion length of the thin films will be
obtained through time-resolved photoluminescence measurements as well as single
photon and two-photon spectroscopy for depth-resolved lifetime measurements that
decouple the effects of surface recombination.