* 1605719
* Laminar to Turbulent Transition in Pipe Flow:  Effect of Dispersed Phase
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2021
* Ellen Longmire, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 06/30/2021
* USD 319,000.00

PI: Longmire, Ellen&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1605719&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of the proposed research is to experimentally and theoretically explore the
transition from laminar to turbulent flow in the case of two phase flow in a
pipe. While a lot of prior work has been done on transition for single phase
fluids, the theme of this proposal is largely unexplored. The proposed work will
have an impact on understanding the fundamental notions in transition to
turbulence when one of the two phases is dispersed in the other. The
technological applications of this work are important, most notably in the
process of 3D printing and in additive
manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent experiments on pipe flows suggest
that the critical Reynolds number for transition can either be shifted to
significantly lower values or delayed to much higher values when a liquid flow
includes a second phase of immiscible liquid drops or rigid particles. The
direction of the shift depends on the volume fraction of the discrete phase as
well as the ratio of pipe-to-particle diameter. The physical mechanisms behind
these transition changes are unknown. The objective of the proposed research is
to uncover and characterize these mechanisms through experimentation and
analysis. It is hypothesized that at least two mechanisms are present: larger
drops or particles can promote instabilities caused by local differences between
the particle and surrounding fluid velocity, and smaller drops or particles can
suppress growth of or otherwise disrupt larger scale instabilities and coherent
structures. Experiments are planned in a transparent pipe facility where
critical Reynolds number will be determined for liquid/liquid and liquid/solid
dispersions. Results will be analyzed to determine time evolving flow features,
ensemble averaged statistics, and dynamically significant modes associated with
transitional flow structures, and ultimately the specific mechanisms affecting
transition. The educational activities proposed include undergraduate and
graduate student involvement in research, engagement with elementary school
teachers to develop science curriculum, and outreach activities ranging from
actively mentoring female high school and college students to meetings of the PI
with members of Congress in order to promote science and engineering.