* 1605533
* Watery Fuel Diffusion Flames
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2016,09/30/2020
* Derek Dunn-Rankin, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* John Daily
* 09/30/2020
* USD 396,887.00

1605533 - Dunn-Rankin&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Currently, 90% of worldwide energy
utilization comes from the combustion of fossil fuels, and this use is not
expected to decline worldwide for the foreseeable future. Consequently,
improvements in combustion performance to increase fuel efficiency and reduce
the emission of harmful pollutants are important. The classical fire triangle
shows that for sustained combustion to occur, heat, fuel, and a supply of
oxidizer must be present; a reduction of any of these can make a flame burn less
robustly, which may result in a decrease in temperature, an increase in flame
fluctuations, and ultimately flame extinction. Interestingly, sometimes these
nearly extinguished flames exhibit the highest combustion performance (i.e.,
high efficiency and low emissions). Since water is commonly used to extinguish
unwanted flames, it is important to determine if just the right amount of water
can potentially produce high performance near-extinction combustion. In
addition, some next-generation fuels have very high water content that can
naturally produce this same near-extinction behavior. The proposed research
explores the role of water when it is introduced as a fuel side reactant in a
non-premixed flame. The broad scientific and technical impact of this work
includes an improved understanding of combustion chemistry of systems that
incorporate water naturally or artificially to manipulate the combustion
process. The project is of great value to undergraduates, graduates, and
international scholars interested in sustainable energy; it will incorporate
research participation for students at all levels, as well as opportunities to
extend professional collaborations. The project will also broaden the
participation of underrepresented minorities in STEM fields and as part of the
NSF-funded Louis-Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation
(LSAMP).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical focus of the work is to explore the
role of water, over a range of pressures between 1-50 atm and operating
conditions, in diffusion flames using a co-flow jet and counter-flow burner
configuration. This work will look specifically at flame extinction due to the
addition of water, which significantly reduces flame temperature and also
dilutes the fuel-air mixture. Measurements include flame temperature and
concentrations of important radical species involved in inhibiting combustion.
The methods for measuring temperature will include thermocouples, thin filament
pyrometry, and Coherent anti-Stokes Raman spectroscopy (CARS). Qualitative
measurements of OH and CO will employ planar laser induced fluorescence.
Experimental results will be compared with computational fluid dynamic
calculations and with detailed chemical kinetics calculations for both
atmospheric and high pressure conditions. The combination of experiments and
calculation will expose comprehensively the role of water in controlling
combustion.