* 1605683
* Multimodal signal amplification by collaborative plasmonic intensification and catalytic multiplication (c-PI/CM)
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2016,12/31/2019
* Wei-Chuan Shih, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 12/31/2019
* USD 157,000.00

PI: Shih, Wei-Chuan &lt;br/&gt;Proposal No: 1605683&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Very
sensitive measurement of disease-indicating molecules in body fluids is
essential for delivering quality healthcare. This project aims to develop a new
approach that is expected to be both sensitive and reliable. The new approach is
based on synergy of light-excited electron oscillation and chemical reaction
occuring simultaneously on specialized nanostructures.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In biosensing, an unmet need is ultrasensitive
detection (like polymerase chain reaction, PCR) with accurate quantitation (like
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay, ELISA). This ability is sorely needed for
protein biomarkers which cannot be PCR-amplified, or constrained by time, sample
quantity, or resources. To meet this need, a novel concept of multimodal signal
amplification by collaborative plasmonic intensification and catalytic
multiplication (c-PI/CM) is proposed. The central intellectual merit is to
exploit the collaborative synergy between PI and CM. Collaborative PI/CM is not
simply enhancing one modality by the other, but the collaboration and positive
reinforcement between the two modalities. Thus, PI/CM is fundamentally different
from, for example, plasmon-enhanced ELISA. To test this hypothesis, the PI will
design a series of experiments to elucidate the fundamental mechanisms of
c-PI/CM by investigating their interplay on standard plasmonic nanostructures
fabricated by nanolithography. A second hypothesis is to test whether c-PI/CM
would perform better on recently developed nanoporous gold (NPG) disks which
exhibits intrinsic catalytic functions, high-density, three dimensionally
distributed plasmonic field enhancement sites (also known as, hot spots), order-
of-magnitude larger surface area, and excellent structural integrity and
environmental stability, all pointing to a more plausible high-performance
c-PI/CM platform. Several in situ monitoring techniques will be used to assess
sensing performance: LSPR shift, surface-enhanced Raman scattering (SERS), and
surface-enhanced fluorescence (SEF).