* 1605355
* Assessing Inhalation Exposure to Aerosolized Contaminants from Drinking Water
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2022
* Julia Gohlke, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 06/30/2022
* USD 299,973.00

1605355&lt;br/&gt;Dietrich&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposed project fills a
critical knowledge gap concerning human exposure, at the air-water-human
interface, to contaminants from aerosols emitted by ultrasonic humidifiers.
Typically, consumers purchase ultrasonic humidifiers, fill them with drinking
water, and use them in confined spaces such as bedrooms for several hours per
day. The resulting inhalation exposure information, from ultrasonic humidifiers,
will allow scientists to reasonably assess the human health risks associated
with dissolved contaminants in drinking water and subsequently offer
recommendations for consumer use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fundamental
characterization of ultrasonic humidifier aerosol composition, fate and
transport under realistic living conditions, and propensity for infant, child,
and adult inhalation exposure and resulting inhaled dose, will be the first of
its kind for assessing this aspect of the air-water-human interface. The
description of the relationships between aerosol size - contaminant
concentration and aerosol deposition patterns on room surfaces will provide new
data and perspective for the health effects of aerosols. This project has
implications for human health because of the uncertainty surrounding inhalation
exposures from aerosolized drinking water. The experimental research has four
objectives and the reseach is guided by four hypotheses: 1) To use particle size
and cascade impactor instruments, in conjunction with inductively coupled plasma
mass spectrometry, to comprehensively characterize humidifier aerosols in size,
distribution, and inorganic chemical composition for varying water qualities
representative of realistic drinking waters. Hypothesis 1: Inorganic contaminant
concentrations are the same in all aerosol particle sizes for a given water
quality. 2) To examine aerosol deposition on surfaces is determined as a
function of distance from a humidifier which is situated in realistic indoor
living scenario. Sampling locations are both within and outside the humidifier
plume. Hypothesis 2: Inorganic contaminant concentrations will be deposited at
similar aerial concentrations in all locations of the room. 3) The experimental
data are inputs to calibrate and validate the USEPA RISK Indoor Air Quality
model for its first application to room-sized ultrasonic humidifiers. Hypothesis
3: The USEPA RISK model can be calibrated to meet ASTM air modeling guidelines
(1991) using the experimental data from this study. 4) The data obtained will
use the USEPA RISK model to assess the human inhalation exposure to aerosolized
contaminants for many realistic exposure scenarios involving infants, children,
and adults. Hypothesis 4: The indoor air model confirms that human inhalation
exposure to inorganic contaminants in ultrasonic humidifier aerosols exceed
health guidelines. The model results will be evaluated with respect to
inhalation exposure regulations, existing dose data, and geographically varying
water quality. The PI and co-PIs are committed to developing the professional,
ethical, outreach, and research preparation of students on this project. The PhD
and undergraduate students will be actively recruited from underrepresented
groups, as has been done for many years by the faculty involved in this project.
This project will recruit underrepresented students and provide them
educational, research, and professional experiences, including mentoring grade
6-12 students. The student researchers will communicate their results throughout
the globe through blogs at the Water INTERface website
(https://blogs.lt.vt.edu/water/), maintained by the Virginia Tech Graduate
School for faculty and students in water research and though publication of
scientific articles.