* 1605060
* Mechano-regulation of bone metastatic cancer: linking cell strain to cell function
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Yahya Modarres-Sadeghi, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 06/30/2020
* USD 433,500.00

PI: Lynch, Maureen. &lt;br/&gt;Proposal #: 1605060
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Metastatic cancer spread to the skeleton is common and
after the metastasis occurs, patient prognosis dramatically declines due to
severe skeletal-related complications, including bone destruction
("osteolysis"). The goal of this project is to define for the first time how the
mechanical signals arising from physical activity, which are the primary
regulator of bone cell function and remodeling, regulate the bone metastatic
cells that are exposed to the same signals. This will be accomplished by
pursuing three objectives: 1) Building a tissue-level multi-physics
computational model of mechanical loading in a 3D bone mimetic scaffold. 2)
Determining the cellular strains resulting from interactions between bone
metastatic breast cancer cells and fluid flow and 3) defining a data-driven
relationship between cellular strains and bone metastatic breast cancer cell
osteolytic phenotype. The results will transform fundamental understanding of
how tumor cells are regulated in the skeletal microenvironment with considerable
potential to improve clinical management of the disease. Educational Impact will
be achieved through increased educational opportunities in bioengineering at the
undergraduate level, engage middle and high school underrepresented populations
in bioengineering research at UMass, and active recruitment of graduate students
from underrepresented groups to broaden participation in the field of
bioengineering. This award is cofunded by the Computational Mathematics program
in the Division of Mathematical Sciences through the BioMaPs program.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to define, for the first time, a
mechano-regulatory algorithm that links metastatic cancer cell function and
cellular deformations. The skeleton is the preferred site for metastasis in many
cancers, including breast, prostate, lung, and kidney. After metastasis occurs,
patient prognosis dramatically declines due to severe skeletal-related
complications, including bone destruction (?osteolysis?). Mechanical signals
arising from physical activity are the primary regulator of bone cell function
and remodeling, and bone metastatic cells are also exposed to these signals;
however, their role in metastasis in unclear because they are often ignored in
studies of metastatic bone disease. Using breast cancer as our example case, our
preliminary data shows that compression of bone metastatic tumor cells in a 3D
bone mimetic scaffold altered their expression of genes that modify bone
remodeling, supporting our hypothesis that skeletal mechanical signals are a
fundamental regulator of tumor cell behavior. Here, we seek to systematically
define the functional relationship between mechanical signals and bone
metastatic cell function through development of an integrated in vitro 3D
experimental and multi-physics, multi-scale computational platform. This project
will benefit from collaboration between experts in engineered systems of in
vitro loading and cancer biology as well as computational fluid-structure
modeling. The Research Plan is presented as three objectives: 1) Build a tissue-
level multi-physics computational model of mechanical loading in our 3D bone
mimetic scaffold. Method: This objective will generate a "tissue-level"
computational model including Finite Element and Computational Fluid Dynamic
analysis to determine the internal stresses and strains of our bone scaffold
undergoing compression and perfusion. MicroCT images of the scaffold will be
converted to a discretized model, and estimated values of the induced flow
velocities and the extracellular matrix strain within the scaffold will be
calculated based on a one-way coupling method; 2) Determine the cellular strains
resulting from interactions between bone metastatic breast cancer cells and
fluid flow. Method: This objective will create a "cell-level" computational
model of cellular deformations. The estimated values of internal flow velocity
and tractions from Objective 1 are utilized as the boundary conditions for a
fully-coupled Fluid-Structure Interaction algorithm, which will be used to model
the interaction between the inter-scaffold fluid flow and cancer cells; 3)
Define a data-driven relationship between cellular strains and bone metastatic
breast cancer cell osteolytic phenotype. Method: This objective will result in a
data-driven mechano-regulatory algorithm for bone metastatic breast cancer
cells. First, the cellular response of tumor cells, cultured in our bone
scaffold, under a range of imposed mechanical loading environments will be
measured via expression of osteolytic genes. These results will be
mathematically correlated to the cellular deformations from Objective 2 using
multivariate statistical analysis. The results of this project will transform
our fundamental understanding of how tumor cells are regulated in the skeletal
microenvironment with considerable potential to improve clinical management of
the disease. The data collected from these studies will form the foundation for
defining the role of mechanical stimulation during bone metastasis. Educational
Impact will be achieved through increased educational opportunities in
bioengineering at the undergraduate level, engage middle and high school
underrepresented populations in bioengineering research at UMass, and active
recruitment of graduate students from underrepresented groups to broaden
participation in the field of bioengineering.