* 1605411
* Ionic Polyimides: Design, Synthesis, Characterization and Modeling of a Versatile Material Platform for Membrane Separations
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2021
* Christoffer Turner, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 07/31/2021
* USD 430,725.00

Proposal Number: 1605411, PI: Bara, J.E.&lt;br/&gt;Title: Engineering Advanced
Polymer Materials as Membranes for Energy Efficient Gas
Separations&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Gas separations such as air separation
(oxygen/nitrogen), carbon dioxide/methane in natural gas, and syngas
(hydrogen/carbon monoxide) are important components of industrial chemical
processes that produce many of the most economically important materials vital
for the Nation's economy and well being. Traditionally, these separations have
been carried out using well-established, but energy intensive operations such as
distillation or absorption and stripping processes. Use of polymer membranes
offers an alternative approach to perform these separations in an energy
efficient manner and with lower investment cost. However, gaps still exist that
block the wider use of polymer membranes technologies. This project will provide
the fundamental research that is needed to understand the role of polymer
structure and chemistry on performance attributes such as enhanced throughput,
increased product purity and long membrane lifetimes. Through the use of
synthetic chemistry, polymer engineering, and computer modeling, this project
will combine the most important structural elements from the separate classes of
polymer materials into unique and unprecedented polymer structures that possess
the desirable properties of each individual material while aiming to eliminate
or minimize the respective limitations. Investigation of the new polymers being
developed in this project will open a vast new library of materials for use in a
variety of engineering applications. Furthermore, the computer simulations being
employed will advance the ways in which researchers visualize and understand
polymeric materials at the molecular level. This project will train graduate and
undergraduate students to work in a synergistic experimental and computational
environment, an important aspect of 21st century research. This project will
also involve outreach activities centered around 3-D printing and mobile apps
for smartphones to inform a wider range of students on concepts in engineering
using tools and games that they are familiar with.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key
objectives of this research are to experimentally and computationally understand
the structure-property-performance relationships underlying ionic polyimide
polymer membranes for gas separations. This work will assess the utility of
ionic polyimides across several key gas pairs related to energy production and
greenhouse gas emissions. By combining elements of polyimides, ionic liquids,
polymers of intrinsic microporosity and ligands used in metal organic
frameworks, the ionic polyimide design strategy is completely unexplored and
provides the ability to control and improve polymer properties such as
fractional free volume (FFV) based on non-covalent supramolecular assembly
driven by coulombic attractions, which may also assist in slowing/stopping
polymer aging. The fundamental understanding of ionic polyimide performance will
be enhanced with the development of unique molecular-level simulation models.
Three different levels of model resolution will be employed (quantum mechanics,
molecular dynamics, and kinetic Monte Carlo) in order to build a comprehensive
membrane model with explicit gas/polymer/gas interfaces. This will move the
modeling field a significant step closer towards realistic representations of
the experimental systems, allowing the description of gradient-driven flow,
similar to the pressure-drop environment associated with actual industrial gas
separation processes. The success of this project will translate to major
advancements in the ability to build nanostructured polymer membranes, for lower
energy and cost separations. Furthermore, ionic polyimides are likely to be
desirable for many other applications based on the well-known broad utility of
conventional polyimides as high-performance polymers.