* 1605669
* Collaborative Research: Quantifying the Critical Importance of Insect-mediated Pollination Service for the U.S. Economy
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Christina Grozinger, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 06/30/2019
* USD 80,000.00

1603667 (Khanna) and 1605669 (Grozinger)

One of the critical ecological supporting services for the nation's economy is
pollination provided by insects (both managed and wild species). However, in
recent years, increased habitat loss, reduction in available forage sources,
climate change, monotonous diets, stressful management practices and
vulnerability to pests has placed heightened stress on pollinator species.
Understanding the economic value of pollination services attributable to managed
and wild pollinators will highlight the critical importance and dependence of
the U.S. economy on pollinators, and the key role played by pollinators in
sustaining human and industrial activity. Comprehensively assessing the economic
contribution of pollinators will help provide a basis for setting priorities for
their conservation. This project brings together highly complementary expertise
in sustainability science and engineering (PI Khanna) and pollinator biology and
health (PI Grozinger) for understanding and quantifying the direct and indirect
economic dependencies of the U.S. economy on insect-mediated pollination
services, and identifying the industry sectors and industrial communities (group
of closely linked sectors) that are most vulnerable to reductions of insect-
mediated pollination service.

In this project, a a novel framework will be developed for quantifying the
direct and indirect economic dependencies of the U.S. economy and industry
sectors on insect-mediated pollination service. The data and methods developed
will be broadly applicable for evaluating the economic importance of pollination
services to the world economy, as well as evaluating other ecosystem goods and
services. The framework will help identify industrial sectors that are at most
risks or likely to experience the most disruption arising from a reduction of
pollination services. By quantifying both the direct dependencies of the
agricultural sectors and the indirect economic dependencies of non-agricultural
of the U.S. economy on insect pollinators, a holistic understanding will be
gained of the role that pollination services play in product and industrial life
cycles. Additionally, the creation of a new environmental impact category in the
framework will facilitate easier quantification of the dependence of economic
goods and services on pollination services on a life cycle basis with a specific
focus on honey bees. The project is targeted to play a pivotal role in
understanding the critical role of insect pollination services for the U.S.
economy, in terms of agricultural output as well as cascading effects on
industrial sectors and the larger economy. The insights resulting from this work
may lead to greater appreciation of the role of ecosystem goods and services in
the life cycle of economic products and services, and is anticipated to play an
important role for educating researchers, stakeholders, policy makers,
entomologists, conservationists, industrial ecologists, and LCA practitioners on
the economic role of pollination services. Educational exhibits and modules are
designed to engage hundreds of engineering and science students, while public
outreach activities are planned for K-12 students and citizens. These studies
will educate the next generation of the science and engineering workforce on the
importance of insects and pollination, a topic of significant societal
relevance.