* 1605283
* Collaborative Research: Discontinuous Shear Thickening and Shear Jamming in Dense Suspensions: Statistical Mechanics and the Microscopic Basis for Extreme Transitions of Properties
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Jeffrey Morris, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 06/30/2019
* USD 236,758.00

CBET - 1605283/1605428&lt;br/&gt;PI: Morris, Jeffrey F./Chakraborty,
Bulbul&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project comprises computational
and theoretical studies of the flow of suspensions consisting of solid particles
in liquids. The project focuses on concentrated suspensions, where particles
occupy more than half of the mixture volume. These are often called dense
suspensions, and they are found in application as cement, concrete, and mineral
ore slurries. Dense suspensions can change properties suddenly when flow
conditions change. In some cases, as the strength of the flow, or shear rate,
increases, the mixture can suddenly exhibit an extremely large increase in flow
resistance, a phenomenon known as "discontinuous shear thickening" (DST). The
flow can even stop, which is known as "shear jamming." DST can have major
negative effects on industrial processes involving the mixtures. While DST has
been known for many years, it has not been explained. The goal of this project
is to determine why this phenomenon happens, which could provide guidance how to
design suspensions and processing operations to diminish negative effects of
DST. Results of the research will be used in modules that will enable high
school students to visualize how many-particle systems result in large-scale
behavior, such as DST in cornstarch suspensions, where small grains of starch
cause enormous changes in flow properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
explore recent observations that DST can be explained by particle contacts and
friction. The work will explore the structure of networks of forces between the
particles and how this structure changes as the flow rate is increased to a
level causing abrupt changes in properties. In particular, the team will explore
whether the flow property transition has the characteristics of a phase
transition through simulations of discrete particles in different flows and
applications of theoretical concepts from statistical physics. The role of the
liquid will be considered by comparing results with the behavior of dry granular
systems in which the force network concept and its relation to jamming have been
examined by others. This work will probe the relationship of flow-induced
property changes to thermodynamic phase transitions and will establish the
similarities and differences between different particulate flows. Because solid-
liquid mixtures are commonly used in industry and are found in geophysical
settings such as mud flows, the project will significantly expand our ability to
understand and ultimately predict the dynamics of these complicated systems in
important applications.