* 1605482
* Collaborative Research: Microbial Fuel Cell Optimization through Digital Microfluidic Electrochemistry in Single-Bacterial Drops
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2019
* Daniel Hassett, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 07/31/2019
* USD 152,000.00

Municipal wastewater treatment processes consume significant amounts of energy.
However, the organic materials fed into the waste treatment process offer the
potential for energy-positive waste water treatment if this waste organic
material can be converted into energy. Many bacteria that grow in waste water
can be harnessed to consume these organic contaminants to clean up the water and
at the same time generate electrical current from their metabolism. These
bacteria are bound within an electrode of a device called a microbial fuel cell
to harvest this current as electrical power. To achieve maximum power output
from microbial fuel cells, it must be determined how many species of bacteria,
when organized into complex colonies known as biofilms, collaborate to convert
organic matter into electricity. This project will study this collaborative
metabolism within a novel miniaturized culture system capable of high-through
analysis to accelerate the screening process. This miniature culture system will
be capable of measuring metabolism of a single bacterial species, as well as in
small mixed colonies of many bacteria, from a single drop of culture. This
information will be used to determine how the electrical current produced and
the organic matter consumed depends on bacterium type, as well as the potential
synergy between many types of bacteria. The educational activities inspired by
this project feature a hands-on teaching module for high school girls, who will
build a simple microbial fuel cell to power a light-emitted diode (LED) or a
digital watch. It is hoped this activity will illustrate to high school girls
the potential of renewable green energy and biotechnology as exciting future
career choices.

The microbial fuel cell system components, which include electrodes, membranes,
and bacteria, must be carefully engineered to achieve optimal power generation.
This project will focus on genetic optimization of the bacteria within the
electrode. This optimization is challenging given the interconnected manner in
which wastewater bacteria grow. Towards this end, the proposed research has two
primary objectives. The first objective is to develop a high-throughput digital
microfluidic (DMF) platform for studying microbial fuel cell metabolism and
electrical current evolution from single species of bacteria or small colonies
of mixed bacteria. The second goal is to optimize the bacterial communities for
high power density through high-throughput analysis of single bacterium electron
transfer limitations. The DMF chip will be fabricated with droplet actuation
electrodes, nanostructured electrochemical electrodes, and isolated on-chip
microwell cell culture chambers. The droplet actuation electrode deposits a
culture droplet into the microwell, and nanostructured electrodes within the
culture microwell will enable the detection of single bacterium output current
as well as measurement of specific cell culture contents using cyclic
voltammetry. Bacteria known to consume organic matter in waste water and convert
it into electrical current through microbioelectrochemical metabolic processes,
including P. aeruginosa, Geobacter (G. sulfurreducens) and Shewanella (S.
oneidensis) will first be studied as the model exoelectrogens in single species
culture. By selectively increasing complexity and heterogeneity in the culture
systems, beginning with isolated single species and moving to mixed bacterial
colonies, a better understanding of the synergism among bacteria can be
systematically determined. Through this study, it also is hoped that the DMF
chip will become established as a new tool for studying electron transfer
processes in bioelectrochemically-active bacteria.