* 1605744
* Collaborative research: SusChEM: Hybrid mixed-resolution solvation models for chemical processing in ionic liquids
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2016,02/29/2020
* Richard Turton, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 02/29/2020
* USD 248,448.00

1605744 / 1604369 &lt;br/&gt;PIs: Ismail, Ahmed / Bardhan, Jaydeep
&lt;br/&gt;Institution: West Virginia University Research Corporation /
Northeastern University&lt;br/&gt;Title: Collaborative Research: SusCHEM: Hybrid
mixed-resolution solvation models for chemical processing in ionic
liquids&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A major bottleneck in the quest for large-scale
replacement of petroleum feedstocks with ones derived from cellulosic biomass is
the difficulty posed by the physical, chemical, and biological pretreatments
that are necessary for converting the native biomass into industrially-useful
feedstocks. And while the mechanical and biological pretreatment routes are
largely well understood, substantial uncertainty remains in how to chemically
pretreat biomass to enable further processing. The goal of this collaborative
project is to advance multiscale models of molecular solvation to better
understand dissolution of cellulosic biomass in ionic liquids. Ionic liquids are
an important class of materials, which have a broad spectrum of applications.
The project will (i) apply multiscale solvent models to ionic liquids; (ii)
establish the use of X-ray solution scattering experiments to validate
multiscale models; (iii) apply these models to understand why small
concentrations of dissolved water limit cellulose dissolution; and (iv)
integrate research with education and outreach efforts to advance cross-
disciplinary training and broaden STEM participation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research will elucidate the fundamental relationships between ionic
liquid structure and performance, and how these relationships depend on
temperature and water content. These dependencies are key to enabling the
rational engineering of ionic liquids for robust performance during chemical
processing in ionic liquids. The computational techniques that will be developed
will link the microscopic details with macroscopic behavior using a novel
multiscale approach that drastically reduces the computational costs associated
with atomistic molecular dynamics and coarse-grained simulations. By reducing
the number of atoms present in the system, the cost of calculating electrostatic
forces, the dominant cost in molecular dynamics simulations of charged systems,
will be greatly reduced, allowing for much larger and longer simulations with
the same set of available computational resources. This approach will allow for
much more in-depth studies of the interactions between ionic liquids and
cellulose than is currently possible. The ultimate objective is the
identification of the dominant criteria for selecting ionic liquids that will
enable the design of more economical and more efficient chemical processes for
cellulose dissolution.