* 1605424
* GOALI: Advancing the Oxygenic Photogranule Process for Energy Positive Wastewater Treatment
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2019
* Chul Park, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 06/30/2019
* USD 330,000.00

1605425&lt;br/&gt;Park&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The opportunity to recover chemical
energy from wastewater, while widely recognized, is hindered by two challenges:
the lack of an effective method to harness this energy and the cost incurred, i.
e., amount of energy required, for wastewater treatment. Innovation of
wastewater treatment that is sustainable and can recover potential energy is,
thus, urgent. The primary goal of this project is to further the understanding
of an advanced newly developed system, the oxygenic photogranule-based process,
which has the potential to turn wastewater treatment plants into energy positive
water resource recovery facilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research
is based on the discovery and invention in the PIs research group that activated
sludge can naturally transform into self-aerating biogranules and be used for
flow-through systems for aeration-free wastewater treatment. Since aeration is
the highest energy demand in operating existing wastewater treatment plants,
development of this new technology can bring substantial energy savings.
Phototrophic assimilation of CO2 within oxygenic photogranules also opens
opportunities to recover wastewaters chemical energy and solar energy in the
form of high quality bio-feedstock. These features may lead to a paradigm change
in how wastewater is treated. This research will also reveal the mechanism by
which oxygenic photogranules are formed under both static and hydrodynamic
conditions, which is a unique phenomenon for this microbial granule.
Furthermore, the research will address key questions, such as system
adaptability to the deep-tank reactor operation under natural or engineered
light conditions, which must be answered to scale up the process, substantially
advancing the new technology for industrialization. This GOALI application
proposes international, multidisciplinary collaboration between academia and
industry to: 1) improve fundamental understanding of the oxygenic photogranule
granulation phenomenon, and, 2) engineer the key components of this new
technology for commercialization. To accomplish these goals, the PIs propose
three research aims: 1) to elucidate the granulation phenomenon in reactor
operation; 2) to engineer the light pattern to advance the oxygenic photogranule
process for industrial use; and, 3) to investigate the feasibility of the
oxygenic photogranule process for municipal wastewater treatment.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will involve studies of advanced microscopy,
deep-sequencing based microbial ecology, physiology of oxygenic photogranules,
and reactor hydrodynamics to understand oxygenic photogranule formation, in
reactor operation and its comparison to granulation occurring under static
cultivation conditions. This project will also conduct substantial reactor
studies to investigate the impact of light pattern on granulation and additional
N removal by the biological nutrient removal mechanism. Finally, the project
will carry out a pilot to investigate the feasibility of the oxygenic
photogranule process for municipal wastewater treatment with development of the
economic cost model for the oxygenic photogranule process; thus, the data
generated during this research will be easily transferred to industry. This
research is transformative because it will develop a new technology to change
energy consuming wastewater treatment plants into energy positive facilities.
Successful development and industrialization of the oxygenic photogranule
process will therefore bring substantial societal and environmental impact. This
project involves well-planned multidisciplinary research comprising
collaboration among U.S.-based academia and industry and a research institute in
France. Working with industry partners is essential for this project because its
ultimate goal is to implement the process in municipalities. The project will
use collaboration between the PIs at university and industry to mentor each
other, industrialize the process, and disseminate the research at both academic
and industry meetings. The project also includes international collaboration to
promote oxygenic photogranule research and reach out to broader scientists and
engineers around the world. The French researchers also submitted the proposal
to their national funding agency, which will complement the oxygenic
photogranule research to be done in the U.S. This GOALI will also enhance the
PIs collaboration with researchers and students from a womens liberal arts
college, to apply microscopy to understand the granulation phenomenon. During
this project, the PI will continue to reach out to Kenyan collaborators to work
together for sanitation in Kenya and to initiate an oxygenic photogranule pilot
in Kenya in the future. Finally, the PIs groups will have continuous outreach to
municipalities in the region, to spread awareness and incite excitement among
municipal employees to be connected to and involved with academic research.