* 1605178
* The Origin of Geometric Friction and Cohesion
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Corey OHern, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 08/31/2019
* USD 463,743.00

CBET - 1605178&lt;br/&gt;PI: Brown, Eric&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dry granular
materials are collections of small discrete particles that interact with each
other through frictional contacts. Examples of granular materials from nature
include sand, soil, and snow. Granular materials are also found in industrial
processes, especially in the pharmaceutical, energy, and agricultural
industries. These materials display complex spatial and temporal responses to
external forces because they behave as collections of discrete grains instead of
a pure fluid and because they are not in thermal equilibrium. The mechanical
strength of these materials has been studied previously, but most fundamental
research has considered spherical or nearly spherical particles. This project
focuses on understanding the mechanical properties of packings of granular
materials composed of highly nonspherical particles such as long rods, chains,
and objects that can interlock, such as staples and bent rods. We will image the
packings using x-rays to identify contacts and entanglements and connect this
information about the microstructure to the strength of the packings in response
to compression. The experimental data will be used in computer simulations to
validate a physical model of packings of highly nonspherical
grains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Uniaxial compression experiments will be performed
on packings of nonspherical particles with different particle aspect ratios
and&lt;br/&gt;topologies. The experimental results will be compared with a
theoretical model that predicts which particle shapes
exhibit&lt;br/&gt;geometric cohesion and which particle shapes produce packings
that show significant strain-hardening stress-strain response. Comparisons for
several particle shapes (e.g. rods and staples) will allow us to validate the
model so that it can be employed to predict the mechanical response of granular
packings for a wide parameter space of particles shapes. In addition, numerical
simulations combined with x-ray micro computed tomography studies will allow us
to investigate the microstructural properties of granular
packings&lt;br/&gt;(e.g. interparticle contacts and entanglements) that give
rise to geometric cohesion and strain hardening and how they are affected
by&lt;br/&gt;friction and bending stiffness.