* 1605405
* Development and study of new generation of ultrabright fluorescent FRET-based sensing nanoparticles
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* P. Jack Hoopes, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 07/31/2020
* USD 481,460.00

1605405 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fluorescence is a powerful optical tool in biology
and medicine. While the majority of fluorophores are used for imaging, some of
them can also be utilized to detect the presence of particular ions.
Fluorophores can also be functionalized to adhere to specific chemical
structures. While being highly desirable, it is extremely difficult to create
molecular fluorophores which can be functionalized and work as sensors.
Fluorescent nanoparticles (NPs) offer a unique combination by having a
fluorescent sensing core and a functionalizable surface.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI proposes to develop a new generation of bright
fluorescent silica NPs that will work as sensors and be functionalizable with a
variety of molecules. The proposed hybrid fluorescent nanoparticles (NPs) are
novel and pioneered by the PI. The significantly improved brightness of the NPs
could enable many applications that were previously impossible. The proposed
super bright hybrid NPs would become a powerful tool for many biomedical
applications that are not addressable with fluorescent dyes. The educational
impact will include the direct exposure of the research to his graduate student
and his post-doc on the grant, the PI has and will continue to involve
undergraduates in the research. He will incorporate the research findings into
existing courses he teaches and will maintain existing outreach efforts and
public presentations in high schools.