* 1605809
* Capillary Diodes with Selective Oil-Water Wetting Dynamics
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2016,12/31/2020
* David Hwang, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 12/31/2020
* USD 362,789.00

1605809&lt;br/&gt;Colosqui, Carlos&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
examine an innovative approach for separation of water and oils, generally
defined as organic compounds insoluble in water, by tuning the in wetting/de-
wetting dynamics of drainage and absorption dynamics in engineered porous media.
This project will advance the fundamental knowledge of (dynamic) wetting and
liquid adhesion on "real" surfaces having complex nano- and microscale
structure. The new knowledge will advance technologies for anti-fouling, drag
reduction, and micro/nano-fluidic handling, having large impacts on the U.S.
economy, infrastructure, and the environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent
theoretical developments by the PI indicate that the dynamics of the wetting
process, present nontrivial regimes not described by conventional continuum-
based and deterministic predictions. These theoretical predictions have been
confirmed by molecular dynamics simulations and, more recently, through
experimental work by the PI's group and other groups. Building upon these
developments this project will examine the feasibility of exploiting novel
phenomena such as the crossover from capillary-driven to thermally-activated
wetting for innovative technical applications. The accomplishment of specific
research objectives will be enabled by interdisciplinary and complementary
skills of the PI and Co-PIs. To understand this will require incorporating the
effects of thermal motion of the contact line which dominate the dynamics as
mechanical equilibrium is approached. This project aims to generate fundamental
knowledge required to understand and control the dynamics of spontaneous and
forced imbibition or drainage in nano/microstructured media such as synthetic
filters, sponges, and fabrics, or soil, sandstone, and biological membranes. The
research hypothesis this project will examine is that significant asymmetries in
wetting/de-wetting dynamics (wetting hysteresis) of different liquid pairs on
micro/nanostructured surfaces can be designed and controlled to engineered
capillary "diodes" for efficient separation of immiscible liquids. The PIs
approach to test this hypothesis is to use the surface nano/microstructure to
control dynamic hysteresis effects that will lead to fast or slow (arrested)
wetting depending on the direction of motion of the wetting line and
physicochemical properties of the liquids (e.g., viscosity, density, interfacial
tensions). The central objective of this project is to generate fundamental
knowledge required to understand and control the dynamics of spontaneous and
forced imbibition/drainage by different liquid pairs on nano/micro-structured
media such as synthetic filters, sponges, and fabrics, or soil, sandstone, and
biological membranes. Building upon theoretical developments and preliminary
experimental results the project has two specific objectives: (1) Tuning the
crossover points between fast and slow wetting regimes; (2) Controlling the
relaxation rate in the slow (kinetic) regime. Theoretical predictions will guide
the selection of experimental parameters and physical conditions to accomplish
two specific objectives: (1) Tuning the crossover point between fast and slow
wetting regimes; and, (2) Controlling the relaxation rate in the slow (kinetic)
regime. The proposed research has the potential to be highly transformative to
environmental remediation and water treatment. The engagement of students and
underrepresented minorities is extensive from graduate education to K-12.