* 1605037
* Designing Novel Types of Cooperative Effects to Influence Catalytic Performance
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2020
* Nicholas Brunelli, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 05/31/2020
* USD 340,000.00

This study seeks to design a solid-catalyst substitute for a liquid-phase
catalytic process used to convert fructose (obtained from biorenewable sources)
to 5-hydroxymethylfurfural (HMF) - a key intermediate chemical that can be
further processed to a range of fuel and chemical products. The solid-catalyst
approach has the potential to reduce the cost and complexity of biorenewables
processing, thereby making bio-fuels and bio-chemicals more competitive with
fossil-derived analogs. The study will also include an educational outreach plan
that will increase the participation of women and underrepresented minorities in
STEM fields.

Specifically, the PI seeks to co-immobilize the two elements of the conventional
liquid-phase process (sulfonic acids in a dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO) solvent) on a
solid silica support to achieve cooperative catalytic sites that dehydrate
fructose to HMF with high selectivity. The proposed work will focus on the
precise grafting of organosilane tethering agents onto the silica support to
achieve the desired cooperative effects. Optimization will be achieved by
varying several properties of the tethered groups such as length and molecular
structure. The study will also address the stability of the tethered species in
the aqueous reaction environment. The technological impact of the project can be
substantial if it can open the door to a water-based process that eliminates the
energy intensive (and expensive) distillation process currently needed to
separate the product HMF from the DMSO solvent. Overall, this would create a
more direct route from biomass to HMF - a versatile platform chemical that can
be used to create biomass-derived polymers, to synthesize fuel additives, or to
produce commodity chemicals from renewable sources. In addition to undergraduate
and graduate education opportunities, the project will interface with several
existing programs at Ohio State University to create a classroom module for
students and a project to introduce the concepts of acids and bases to
elementary school children.