* 1605130
* Collagen turnover-stimulated gene delivery to enhance tissue repair
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Kristi Kiick, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 08/31/2022
* USD 425,000.00

1605130 - Sullivan&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop new materials
that can ultimately improve the speed and efficacy of healing in chronic wounds
and other injured tissues. Many treatment approaches for difficult-to-heal
wounds involve the topical application of healing factors such as growth factor
(GF) proteins. However, GF proteins are needed at specific concentrations over a
well-defined time course, and topical delivery regimens often fail to produce
desired delivery profiles leading to incomplete repair. Accordingly, this
project will develop and evaluate a fundamentally new gene delivery approach
that will enable improved control over GF delivery. To accomplish this effect,
the project will produce biomaterials in which gene particles are integrated
into the fibers of collagen gels that are designed to degrade and release GFs at
the right time at the local tissue healing site. Completion of the project will
result in the acquisition of new scientific understanding at the interface of
tissue repair biology and biomaterials engineering by illuminating the ways in
which cellular repair mechanisms may be altered when cells encounter engineered
materials that mimic native tissues. Ultimately, these material platforms can be
applicable in multiple tissue engineering applications such as wound repair and
implant functionalization. The efforts will also have broad impacts on
bioengineering education and career development of underrepresented students,
through new research, classroom, and career development opportunities to
graduate students, undergraduates, and high school students. These activities
will be facilitated through integration and leadership from the PIs in a variety
of on-campus training and mentoring
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Aberrant extracellular
matrix (ECM) synthesis and turnover processes define the success or failure of
healing in a wide variety of regenerative medicine applications. Accordingly,
improved strategies to understand and manipulate ECM-driven cell growth and
growth factor signaling would have enormous benefits in multiple tissue repair
technologies. The investigators are developing an innovative approach to improve
control over the dynamics and location of growth factor delivery by harnessing
ECM remodeling to stimulate growth factor gene release and expression. In
particular, investigators will exploit their expertise in designing collagen-
mimetic peptide (CMP) nanostructures to engineer DNA polyplex-modified collagen
scaffolds that induce localized, high efficiency GF expression coordinated with
tissue repair kinetics. The development of CMP-linked gene delivery technologies
has transformative potential through its ability to both harness as well as
enrich and orchestrate the highly dynamic cellular repair cascades underlying
healing. Furthermore, the studies provide unique opportunities to ask
fundamental questions at the interface of regenerative biology and biomaterials
engineering: (1) Does CMP-mediated integration of gene nanostructures within
collagen scaffolds permit gene retention over time periods commensurate with the
stability vs. turnover of the scaffold? Are native endocytic collagen processing
pathways altered when nanostructures are integrated via triple-helical
interactions with CMPs? and (2) Does integration of gene nanostructures within
collagen enhance the stability of the genes in a manner akin to ECM-based
stabilization of protein factors and viruses? These questions are addressed
through two objectives aimed at (1) optimizing the localization and activity of
CMP/polyplex-linked collagens for sequestration and delivery of active gene
constructs over prolonged time periods, using both in vitro and in vivo repair
models to express model genes; and (2) elucidating key design parameters
controlling polyplex retention, CMP/polyplex/collagen processing, and improved
activity of expressed growth factors such as PDGF. These approaches will
ultimately be useful as a versatile biomaterials platform able to stimulate
improved healing in a variety of regenerative medicine applications. The project
will advance the use of collagen-mediated gene delivery in multiple tissue
engineering applications such as wound repair and implant functionalization. The
research activities will also serve as a catalyst to provide new research,
classroom, and career development opportunities to graduate students,
undergraduates, and high school students, particularly through integration and
leadership from the investigators in a variety of on-campus training and
mentoring programs.