* 1605584
* Investigation of Extreme Near-Field Thermal Radiation at Sub-10-nm Vacuum Gap Distances
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Keunhan Park, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Ying Sun
* 07/31/2020
* USD 355,997.00

CBET - 1605584&lt;br/&gt;PI: Park, Keunhan&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The rate of
radiative heat transfer can significantly exceed the expected rate when the gap
between objects is smaller than the wavelength of the thermal radiation. This
observation enables innovative technological applications such as near-field
thermophotovoltaic power generation, thermal rectification and local radiative
cooling. The objective of this project is the experimental validation of near-
field thermal radiation, which is relatively unexplored, especially for gaps
less than 10 nanometers. The outcome of this research will provide knowledge in
the spectral distribution of thermal radiative energy and its transport in the
extreme near-field regime. Results of the project will spark the development of
detection, imaging and spectroscopy of mid-infrared light at the nanoscale as
well as near-field thermophotovoltaic power generators. The project will promote
training and learning through the involvement of undergraduate and graduate
students in the proposed research activities. Additionally, K-12 outreach will
be performed via the Utah Science Olympiad, Engineering Day and Utah Nano
Days.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Experimental and theoretical investigation of extreme
near-field thermal radiation will be accomplished by: (1) measuring the extreme
near-field radiative heat transport between a heated tip and a surface in an
ultrahigh vacuum atomic force microscope (UHV-AFM); (2) measuring the near-field
thermal spectrum via tip-enhanced photocurrent generation and tip-scattered
thermal radiation; and (3) modeling tip-surface near-field thermal interactions
via numerically exact and approximate methods. Innovative features of this
project originate from using the tip-plane configuration in a customized UHV-
AFM, which is interfaced with reflective optics that allows the measurement of
tip-scattered thermal radiation in conjunction with direct tip-substrate thermal
and radiative interactions. Home-built resistive nanothermometers and a
customized photovoltaic mid-infrared detector will be implemented as a substrate
to directly measure tip-substrate near-field energy transport. The obtained
experimental data will be compared against the numerical model, called the
thermal discrete dipole approximation, to understand the underlying mechanisms
and factors affecting extreme near-field thermal radiation and radiation-to-
conduction transition. This research will provide quantitative measurements of
extreme near-field thermal radiation which will allow, in tandem with the
theoretical models, the determination of the limit of applicability of the
continuum theory based on fluctuational electrodynamics. In addition, an
extensive spectroscopic analysis of near-field thermal radiation will shed light
on understanding the near-field effects on the thermal radiation spectrum,
including the potential spectral redshift when a tip is in near-field
interactions with a substrate. The proposed theoretical work will overcome the
challenge of the current point-dipole based tip-plane near-field thermal
radiation model.