* 1605200
* Leveraging Toe Dynamics to Improve Prosthetic Feet and Amputee Mobility
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Karl Zelik, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Grace Hwang
* 08/31/2020
* USD 295,513.00

CBET - 1605200&lt;br/&gt;Zelik, Karl E.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are over 1
million Americans with lower-limb loss, and annual U.S. hospital costs
associated with amputation are in excess of $8 billion. These lower-limb
amputees struggle with mobility-related challenges that degrade their quality of
life, by making physical activity more fatiguing, health more precarious, and
independent living more difficult. Powered bionic prostheses have been developed
to help address some of these mobility and health deficits; however, these
powered feet are prohibitively expensive for many amputees. There is a pressing
need for lower-cost prosthetic innovations, which can improve amputee walking
ability and be accessible to individuals across the socioeconomic spectrum. This
research proposal seeks to investigate one potential solution, by exploring how
toe joint dynamics can be incorporated into passive prosthetic feet to enhance
mobility. Although biological toes are known to be beneficial for walking and
balance, little attention has been paid to restoring this important toe function
into prosthetic feet. The first goal of this proposal is to systematically
characterize the interplay between the ankle and toe joints, since our existing
data and understanding is limited. This new scientific knowledge of toe joint
dynamics can then be applied to develop prosthetic feet with optimized toe
properties that improve amputee walking abilities. This research will address
important knowledge gaps in our fundamental understanding of ankle-foot
function, and could lead to more affordable and effective foot prostheses that
improve quality of life for amputees across the socioeconomic spectrum.
Undergraduate and graduate students will be involved in all stages of this
research, and targeted efforts will be made to promote inclusion of gender and
racial minorities in engineering. Prosthetic science and technology will be
integrated into the university curriculum, and this research will be
disseminated broadly; for example, through lab tours for local middle and high
school students, specifically for community organizations targeting under-
represented groups in science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of this research is to investigate the dynamic interplay between the
ankle and toe joints during bipedal gait, and then assess if a low-cost
prosthetic foot with articulating toe joint can improve mobility outcomes for
lower-limb amputees. A series of systematic parameter studies is proposed to
advance our fundamental understanding of ankle-foot function, which has the
potential to spur transformative and affordable prosthetic advances. This
research focuses on level ground walking because it is a ubiquitous mode of
human locomotion, and critical for daily living. A reconfigurable foot
prosthesis will be developed, which allows ankle-foot parameters (e.g., joint
stiffness, foot and toe lengths) to be systematically and independently varied.
Aim 1 seeks to assess if inclusion of an articulating toe can increase limb
push-off capabilities during walking and improve gait economy, and to identify
optimal toe properties. Human subject parameter studies will be performed to
generate new biomechanical data (e.g., kinematics, kinetics, metabolic rate),
which characterize the dynamic interplay between the ankle and toe joints, and
the effects on whole-body gait. This will be the first controlled, systematic
study of toe parameters, within and beyond natural biological variation. This
research will fill an important knowledge gap, and provide the scientific basis
for new, low-cost innovations in prosthetic feet. Increased knowledge of ankle-
toe interplay could also impact the design of exoskeletons, orthoses and
humanoid robots. Aim 2 seeks to perform a feasibility study to test if a
prosthetic foot with an articulating toe joint can improve amputee walking
performance, by comparing transtibial amputees walking on a passive foot
prosthesis with vs. without a toe joint. Assessment will be performed in
collaboration with clinical partners, using comprehensive biomechanical analysis
and the expertise of rehabilitation physicians dedicated to the care of
amputees.