* 1605867
* Atomically dispersed amorphous catalysts: ab initio computational tools for a new frontier
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Baron Peters, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 07/31/2021
* USD 301,866.00

The project aims to develop and apply computational methods to understand the
catalytic properties of isolated metal atom sites on amorphous support
materials. The computational results will be compared to experimental data on
the Phillips Petroleum ethylene polymerization catalyst which has been a
workhorse industrial catalyst for 60 years despite longstanding questions about
the active sites and the mechanism. The results will not only provide
information specific to potential improvements in the Phillips catalyst, but
will improve theoretical tools for understanding a broad class of catalysts
where the activity is dominated by a small fraction of highly active metal sites
on the amorphous support. Related educational and outreach programs will be
offered to students at all levels, including a game to engage high school
students in scientific pursuits.

The study will develop computational techniques to identify the specific
properties that make certain catalytic sites highly active relative to others
among an ensemble of isolated metal sites on an amorphous support material. The
work specifically focuses on chromium supported on amorphous silica (the
Phillips catalyst) for which a broad body of characterization data is available.
The computational approach will combine machine learning techniques and rare
events methods for analyzing the distribution of sites to predict relationships
between structure and activity. Specifically, machine learning methods trained
by ab initio calculations will learn how activity is related to the local
structural environments of the isolated chromium species on the silica surface.
Non-Boltzmann sampling techniques will ensure that rare but important sites with
unusually high activities (low activation energies) are adequately sampled to
ensure accurate site-averaged kinetic properties. The combined approach provides
a new "importance learning" strategy that can be broadly used to build models of
active site distributions, identify critical characteristics of highly active
sites, and engineer better atomically dispersed catalysts on amorphous supports.
Broader educational and outreach contributions include the development and
public sharing of "plug-ins" that support the importance learning approach,
virtual reality visualization of the machine learning tools, and a related game
for high school students in which they will have an opportunity to compete with
the machine learning algorithm to design highly active catalytic sites.