* 1605080
* Study of The Fundamental Dynamics of Water Wave Effects on Turbulence for Environmental Applications
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2016,12/31/2021
* Lian Shen, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 12/31/2021
* USD 299,817.00

PI: Shen, Lian&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1605080&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research is focused on the study of turbulence generated close to the
flow structures known as Langmuir cells. These are pairs of large, horizontal
counter-rotating vortices that appear in the ocean and in lakes and are aligned
in the wind and wave direction. They play an important role in many
environmental problems including the transport of oil spills at sea, transfer of
greenhouse gases between the atmosphere and oceans, and the transport and mixing
processes in lakes that affect aquatic ecosystems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is
proposed to use Large Eddy Simulation (LES) models, where the numerical mesh
continuously adopts to the water surface deformation, to capture and understand
the dynamics and the process of formation of Langmuir cells. This is a step
change in modeling such flows, since current simulations and existing theories,
like the Craik-Leibovich (C-L) model, simplify the flow assuming flat
interfaces. The goal is to capture the formation and evolution of Langmuir cells
directly, without the simplifications of the (C-L) model. Detailed descriptions
of the flow field will be used to investigate the fundamental mechanisms of
turbulence fluctuations and vortex dynamics in Langmuir cells, based on which
the C-L theory will be corrected and updated. This research could impact our
understanding of transport of oil spills at sea, transfer of greenhouse gases
between the atmosphere and oceans, and the transport and mixing processes in
lakes that affect aquatic ecosystems. As part of the educational scope of the
project, Native American high school students will be introduced to
environmental fluid mechanics through their participation in summer camp
activities co-organized by the PI.