* 1605105
* SusChEM: Integrated Studies on Interactions between Lignocellulosic Fine Structure and Hydrolytic Enzymes toward Efficient Hydrolysis
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* David Shonnard, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2021
* USD 310,716.00

Lignocellulosic plant biomass such as grass straw and agricultural residues has
been recognized a low-cost, abundant, and renewable source of fermentable sugars
for production of fuel alcohol and other value-added chemicals. Current
processes deployed in cellulosic biofuel facilities use a mixture of enzymes to
convert the cellulosic fractions to fermentable sugars. However, this process is
still fairly slow and is the most expensive step in cellulosic biofuels
production, in part because lignocellulosic biomass is recalcitrant to enzymatic
attack and breakdown. This recalcitrance is due to the complexity of
lignocellulose structure at the molecular and microscopic levels. Therefore,
before enzyme treatment, the lignocellulosic biomass is pretreated, typically
with a combination of steam and chemicals, to open up the pores in the biomass
so that the enzyme can be more effective. There is a need to develop a better,
molecular level understanding of the biomass breakdown processes to identify new
strategies optimize or eliminate pretreatment and improve the rate of conversion
to realize cost reduction. The goal of this project is to develop a fundamental
understanding of how lignocellulosic biomass is broken down, or deconstructed,
during enzyme treatment so that these new cost-saving strategies can be
identified. The innovative aspect of this study is the combination of molecular
modeling and molecular chemical imaging to discover more about this complex
process. The educational activities associated with this project feature the
development of a workbook on the conversion of biomass to biofuels for use in
summer youth programs.

Lignocellulosic biomass is a three-dimensional biopolymer matrix of cellulose,
hemicellulose, and lignin ordered at multiple scales ranging from the molecular
scale to the microscale. The complexity of the lignocellulosic matrix has long
been recognized as a key limiting factor in the efficiency of its enzymatic
hydrolysis to fermentable sugars. This research will combine dynamic modeling
and molecular imaging to gain new insights into the real-time dynamics of
lignocellulosic molecular and fine structure changes during the conversion of
lignocellulosic biomass to sugars using mixtures of hydrolytic enzymes. To
accomplish this goal, the research has three objectives. The first objective is
to gain a fundamental, quantitative understanding of the molecular mechanisms
underlying the recalcitrance lignocellulosic biomass fine structure to enzymatic
attack. The second objective is to establish relationships between cell wall
component composition and molecular structural organization with hydrolysis
processing conditions and correlate these relationships to biomass
deconstruction efficiency. The third objective is to develop a mechanistic
modeling framework capable of simulating biomass deconstruction under realistic
hydrolysis conditions with comprehensive consideration of substrate morphology
and component distribution. These objectives will be enabled through single-
molecule imaging via Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM) and chemical imaging via
Stimulated Raman Scattering (SRS) of the biomass deconstruction process during
enzymatic treatment. Outcomes from the proposed research will enable the
rational design of enzyme cocktails and processing conditions to overcome the
factors that slow down the hydrolytic reactions, leading to optimal design of
the hydrolysis bioreactor systems and cost reduction of cellulosic biofuel
manufacturing systems.