* 1605715
* GOALI: Advancing Decentralized Anaerobic Membrane Bioreactor Treatment of Food Waste
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Adam Smith, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 08/31/2020
* USD 330,000.00

1605715&lt;br/&gt;Smith, Adam&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This joint proposal brings
together the University of Southern California and FEED Resource Recovery (FEED)
to collaboratively develop strategies to optimize decentralized anaerobic
membrane bioreactor treatment of food waste. With new diversion rules for food
waste in California taking effect 2020, decentralized anaerobic membrane
bioreactor systems could benefit the food processing industries and other food
waste producers to effectively manage their waste with recovery of renewable
energy. Life cost analysis and life cycle cost analysis will provide valuable
information on economic and environmental benefits, which could be helpful for
policy makers, investors and food waste producers to adopt the
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of this project is to divert food
waste from landfills to wastewater treatment plants or decentralized anaerobic
digestion facilities where it can be converted to energy. There has been
substantial research effort on anaerobic digestion of various waste streams,
including food waste. However, anaerobic membrane bioreactors are still an
emerging technology with few full-scale systems in operation worldwide. They are
particularly attractive for decentralized food waste treatment given their
smaller footprint, increased energy recovery, and higher quality effluent
relative to conventional digestion. Food waste management has unique challenges
relative to sewage sludge digestion. For example, food waste characteristics
vary seasonally (e.g. corn or pumpkin season) which can be detrimental to
process performance due to fluctuations in organic loading, toxicity, and other
concerns. Further, components of food waste such as inorganic particles can be
problematic for polymeric membrane integrity. FEED has experienced these issues
first-hand. The PIs will evaluate strategies to optimize anaerobic membrane
bioreactor treatment of food waste such as two-phase anaerobic membrane
bioreactor treatment, co-digestion with fats, oil, and grease, and ceramic flat-
sheet membranes. Pending positive results from bench-scale studies, the project
team plans to evaluate two-phase treatment at the full-scale. The use of
cutting-edge molecular microbiological tools on bench- and full-scale systems
will advance our broader understanding of anaerobic food waste treatment at a
mechanistic level. Life cycle analysis and life cycle cost analysis of anaerobic
membrane bioreactors will provide valuable information to compare the economic
and environmental merits of anaerobic membrane bioreactor in comparison to other
food waste management method. Development of sustainability assessment tools
will highlight economic and environmental opportunities for FEED and the solid
waste industry. The proposed industry-university collaboration enables
comprehensive evaluation of decentralized anaerobic food waste treatment through
bench- and full-scale studies, use of advanced molecular microbiological
analyses, and development of sustainability assessment tools. One Ph.D. student
will be funded by this project and work both at USC and FEED over the project
duration. In addition, an outreach activity (seminar and tour of FEED facility)
for Carson High School students in the Environmental Science, Engineering, and
Technology program is proposed to expose high school students to graduate
studies in engineering and career paths in industry.