* 1605407
* Towards science-driven designs of transportation green infrastructure
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2016,12/31/2020
* Ke Zhang, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 12/31/2020
* USD 337,885.00

1605407 Zhang

Near-road air pollution is a worldwide public health concern. A predictive tool
(model) will be developed to analyze various atmospheric processes and their
interactions in the roadway-vegetation environments. The overall research
objective of this proposal is to test the hypothesis that science-driven designs
of roadside green infrastructure such as vegetation barriers and vegetated noise
barriers can effectively mitigate near-road air pollution.

The predictive tool will be built on an environmental turbulent reacting flow
modeling framework, Comprehensive Turbulent Aerosol Dynamics and Gas Chemistry,
developed by PI's research group. New components will be created to represent
the turbulent mixing and atmospheric deposition processes due to roadside green
infrastructure. In addition, a full gas-phase chemical mechanism will be
incorporated to assess the role of biogenic volatile organic compound emissions
on near-road air pollution. Furthermore, a novel method to couple turbulent
mixing and multi-component aerosol dynamics will be created to enhance the
accuracy in quantifying the effects of green infrastructure on evolution of
particulate matter near roadways. Each process will be tested extensively
against both laboratory and field measurement datasets. Working with ecosystem
designers and scientists, the research team will apply the predictive tool to
investigate how the advanced scientific understanding can improve real-world
green infrastructure designs, i.e., testing the hypothesis, at two locations,
Oakland, CA and Research Triangle Park, NC. Finally, the effects of green
infrastructure will be parameterized by modifying Gaussian plume formulations
using a novel multi-regime method based on the fundamental understanding of the
flow structures before and behind roadside green infrastructure. The
parameterizations will be incorporated into a highway dispersion model, CALINE4.
Thus the modified CALINE4 becomes an assessment tool for the broad community.

The specific objectives of the proposed project are to: 1) elucidate how the
presence of green infrastructure affects the different atmospheric processes
near roadways using an integrated experimental modeling approach, 2) evaluate
how different green infrastructure designs affect their effectiveness in
reducing near-road air pollutant levels, and, 3) create an assessment tool that
allow planners and designers to evaluate different green infrastructure designs.
The research products from this project will transform the transportation
planning and community designing process. The current role of transportation
planning in improving air quality is mostly "passive," meaning that air quality
is treated as compliance. The research will encourage local communities to
identify solutions to their local near-road air pollution problems, contributing
to sustainable community development. Their modeling framework will become a
platform for fostering interdisciplinary partnerships among different fields
(e.g., air quality and transportation management, landscaping and urban
planning) in solving transportation air quality problems. The collaborations
with government agencies (i.e., EPA and Forestry Service), companies (i.e.,
Accent Environmental) and NGOs (i.e., Urban Biofilter and Breathe California of
Sacramento) on this project will mark the first step towards this
interdisciplinary partnership. Lastly, the objective of the education plan is to
bring more underrepresented minority students into the research fields, built on
PI's previous success in working with and recruiting underrepresented minority
students. Besides the interdisciplinary training of a graduate student, the PI
will partner with the Diversity Programs in Engineering at Cornell University to
recruit underrepresented minority undergraduates to work on the Research
Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) program associated with the proposed
project.