* 1605354
* Active Thermal Switching of Smart Composite Materials
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2016,12/31/2020
* Stuart Rowan, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Ying Sun
* 12/31/2020
* USD 346,370.00

Active Thermal Switching of "Smart" Composite Materials

All materials found in nature exhibit an ability to conduct heat defined by
their thermal conductivity. Polymers, for example, have a low thermal
conductivity, while metals typically possess a high thermal conductivity. This
research explores the innovative concept of thermal switching wherein a smart
material can be engineered such that its thermal conductivity can be actively
controlled. Thermal switching is of interest for use in applications where
control of thermal conductivity improves the functionality of a device or
system. For example, heating and cooling in buildings, thermal storage,
temperature adaptive textiles and thermal management of electronics or solar
cells are all applications where intelligent control of heat transfer is
required for next generation solutions. The objective of the research is to
develop an innovative smart material with a thermal conductivity that can be
switched either permanently or temporarily up to three orders of magnitude upon
encountering a thermal stimulus. In other words, the material's thermal
conductivity may be switched from behaving like a polymer to acting like a metal
on demand. The material systems being developed consist of a shape memory
polymer matrix and fiber-like fillers that have the ability to intelligently
rearrange within the polymer.

The goal of this research is to develop an innovative smart material with a
thermal conductivity that can be switched either permanently or temporarily by
up to three orders of magnitude upon encountering a thermal stimulus with or
without the presence of an additional external force. The material system
comprises a shape memory polymer as the matrix to control the orientation of
nanofiber fillers upon application of a stimulus. The following methods and
approaches are being used: 1. Preparation of cellulose nanocrystal, boron
nitride and carbon nanofibers. Fibers were chosen as the filler type because
during the shape memory polymer contraction/expansion, a high aspect ratio
filler is required in order to induce alignment. 2. Fabrication of
nanofibers/shape memory polymer composites with the ability to achieve high
thermal conductivities when fibers are "switched" into alignment and low thermal
conductivities when fiber alignment is reduced. Two key classes of materials are
being explored: semi-crystalline crosslinked polymers and cross-linked polymers
with a glass transitions temperature above room temperature. In these materials
the crystalline regions act as the thermal reversible transitions that fix the
material in its strained temporary state. Upon increasing the temperature above
the glass transition temperature, the material increases its elasticity,
allowing to composite to be stretched and inducing alignment of the fibers. 3.
Characterization of the composites to determine degree of dispersion and
alignment of fillers using x-ray diffraction techniques. 4. Thermal
characterization of the in-plane and through-thickness thermal conductivities of
the composites and the axial thermal conductivity of the individual fibers. 5.
Theoretical investigations into the thermal conductivity of the individual
fibers and composite systems. 6. "Writing" of thermal conduction paths onto
composite films and subsequent testing to demonstrate the effectiveness of the
thermal switching at the device level.