* 1605167
* Rapid screening of biomolecular conformation and binding interactions
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2020
* Victor Ugaz, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 05/31/2020
* USD 300,000.00

CBET 1605167 Ugaz, V.&lt;br/&gt;Rapid screening of biomolecular conformation and
binding interactions&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This fundamental research project will
develop a new tool for biological separations that will make it possible to
image the nanoscale conformation of biomacromolecules (e.g. DNA, RNA, proteins)
much smaller in size than can currently be probed. This platform will be robust
and amenable towards automation. This project will deliver innovative
capabilities that are needed to support high throughput screening of compounds
with advanced chemical and biochemical functions (e.g., therapeutic targets).
The project approach imposes no lower limit on the size of macromolecules that
can be interrogated and can be performed within a 10 to 20 minute experiment,
enabling orders of magnitude higher throughput than currently possible. More
broadly, the fundamental physical underpinnings that make this analysis possible
will be used in a tablet-based computer format, enabling general audiences to
access and to interact with nanoscale physics in a fun and engaging way that
mirrors familiar tablet games.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal investigator
will conduct fundamental research that is aimed at establishing an innovative
entropic force microscope capable of quantitatively mapping conformational
changes in biomacromolecules (e.g. DNA, RNA, proteins), both self-induced and
emerging from complexation with binding agents (e.g. small molecules, proteins,
adducts). A slate of small molecule and protein-based binding species will be
evaluated encompassing different binding modes to quantify their influence on
macromolecular conformation. A predictive model will also be developed to inform
the rational selection of tailored nanoporous hydrogel formulations and
polymerization conditions, enabling macromolecular conformation to be optimally
probed within a broad range of analyte size. This work will lay a foundation to
establish a new tool capable of performing rapid parallel screening of binding
interactions in a highly automated fashion not possible using existing methods.
More broadly, a conventional Brownian dynamics simulation toolbox will be
implemented into an iPad application that provides a visual representation of
polymer coil size, relaxation phenomena, Brownian motion, and transport under an
external driving force (i.e., electrophoresis). The app will harness the
embedded 2D physics engine employed by popular video games, making the
simulation toolbox accessible and engaging in a way that is challenging to
achieve by presenting the physics alone. Finally, the project will train and
mentor a Ph.D. student and undergraduate and senior high school students will be
recruited from underrepresented groups in STEM for research experiences.