* 1605129
* Silicon Metal-Insulator-Semiconductor Photovoltaics with Atomic Layer Deposited Interfacial Layers
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2021
* Nicholas Strandwitz, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 05/31/2021
* USD 355,106.00

The sun represents the most abundant potential source of sustainable energy on
earth. Solar cells for producing electricity require materials that absorb the
sun's energy and convert its photons to electrons, a process called
photovoltaics. Lowering the cost per watt for solar photovoltaic energy
conversion systems is a long-standing goal that could enable more widespread
adoption of solar energy. In particular, thin-film solar cells can be made
cheaper than crystalline silicon-based solar cells if the right combination of
material properties for high solar energy conversion efficiency can be found.
The goal of this project is to investigate new layered structures for thin-film
solar photovoltaics that potentially offer both low-cost processing and high
solar energy conversion efficiency. These new layered structures, based on a
metal-insulator-semiconductor sandwich of electronic materials, have behavior at
their respective material boundaries that may favorably change the overall
electronic structure and properties of the solar cell, resulting in improved
performance. The innovative aspect of this research is that advanced techniques
will be used to deposit these layers on top of one another with atomic level
precision so that these properties can be more carefully and insightfully
studied. The educational activities associated with this project include the
development of a community outreach program with a local science center and the
production of videos that animate the effects of physics behind the operation of
photovoltaic devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this research is
to identify the underlying mechanisms that induce barrier height modifications
and other interfacial electronic changes by insertion of dielectric tunnel
layers in the context of metal-insulator-semiconductor photovoltaics (PV).
Metal-insulator-semiconductor structures will be fabricated by film deposition
and interface modification techniques that allow for an unprecedented level of
interfacial control. This level of control will enable investigation of the
fundamental behavior of fixed charges, molecular surface functionalization,
atomic layer deposition (ALD) chemistry, hydrogen treatment, and ALD bilayers in
MIS structures. The specific influence of these phenomena on barrier heights and
interfacial electronic figures of merit relevant for improving PV devices will
be quantified. Dipoles within bilayers of dissimilar metal oxides will also be
used to control barrier heights. The impact of fixed charge on electronic
properties will be investigated by varying fixed charge density and insulator
thickness experimentally, and comparing these experimental results with
theoretical simulations. Molecular surface functionalization and hydrogen at
interfaces provide additional synthetic control, and their ability to minimize
interfacial electronic defects will be determined. By comparing electronic
measurements, low-energy ion scattering, and photoelectron spectroscopy
measurements, critical relationships between layer mixing, dipole strength, and
interface trap densities will be elucidated. Thus, the research will advance
fundamental understanding of the underlying physical mechanisms while improving
energy conversion figures of merit in a new generation of metal-insulator-
semiconductor, thin-film solar PV devices.