* 1605091
* Variability of wind effects on natural ventilation and pollutant transport in buildings
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Michael Waring, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 06/30/2020
* USD 303,870.00

1605091 Lo, Liang Chung J.

With expanding energy consciousness in the building sector, architects and
engineers have been increasingly using natural ventilation as a means to reduce
energy expenditures. While natural ventilation has been used for thousands of
years in various culture worldwide, the current modern method of designing for
natural ventilation is simplistic and assumes steady flow, thus misestimating
actual natural ventilation rates and their associated energy and indoor air
quality impacts. The key reason behind such difficulty is the inherent
unsteadiness of the wind in both its direction and magnitude. Unlike mechanical
ventilation, which is driven by fans with well-tuned control, the wind's effect
on ventilation is wholly unpredictable given the current approach. Such lack of
knowledge may result in unintended consequences in energy consumption, human
comfort, and even the overall health and wellbeing of the occupants. To better
understand the consequences on building airflow and occupants of wind
variability, this research project will analyze quantitatively, for different
building forms and locales, the impacts of wind-driven natural ventilation flow
in terms of ventilation effectiveness, energy consequences, and indoor air
quality.

These goals of the research project will be accomplished by: 1) Researching the
ideal formulation of a probabilistic transient wind effect framework that
describes wind's variable impacts on buildings, as well as researching what
minimum time scale that metric should operate on; 2) Simulating wind-building
interactions in the nine National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA)
established climate zones in the contiguous United States for a selections of
building types from Department of Energy's representative building stock in the
U.S., using both computational fluid dynamics (CFD) methods and quasi-steady
state approximations; 3) Investigating a broad spectrum of factors of the impact
of the framework, such as ventilation effectiveness, energy impacts, and indoor
air quality and occupant productivity and health. The research is anticipated to
impact the building design process by allowing engineers to properly design for
the wind harnessing potential, rather than considering natural ventilation
solutions as an afterthought as in most existing building designs. This
improvement would result in more energy efficient buildings, higher occupant
productivity, and lower absenteeism rates.