* 1605042
* Intense Laser-Atom Physics in Scaled Interactions
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2022
* Louis DiMauro, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2022
* USD 1,102,801.00

The fundamental interaction of laser light with matter provides the foundation
of modern basic and applied optical research. The impact on basic research was
exemplified by the recent detection of gravitational waves emitted by colliding
black holes, which confirmed Einstein's theory of gravity. At the heart of this
achievement is an optical interferometer detector. In general, interferometers
have exquisite sensitivity for detecting small disturbances, be they
gravitational waves propagating through space or the minute motion of an
electron in an atom as explored in this project. The interaction of light and
matter is also being exploited in applications that provide more tangible
benefits to society, such as non-invasive surgery and future sources of energy.
In these cases, the ability to direct large amounts of laser energy into matter
in a precise and controllable manner is paramount. Understanding the physics
responsible for precisely sculpting the laser-matter interaction is a major
thrust of this project. When a large amount of laser light is coupled into
matter, the energy is dissipated by fragmenting the matter, releasing secondary
particles such as electrons, ions, and photons. Analyzing the composition of the
fragmentation process and the energy flow among the constituents provides a
microscopic view of the elementary physics. In this project, sensitive detector
configurations are used to allow the measurement of the type of particles, their
energy content, and their emission direction, taking into account interference.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program implements a detailed strategy of utilizing
the scaling predicted by semi-classical and quantum models for exploring the
global physics of a single atom response to an intense electromagnetic field.
The critical scaling parameter is the color, i.e. frequency, of the laser light
and the project outlines how novel wavelength lasers can extend the breadth of
experiments into an unexplored regime and thus contribute to our overall
understanding of nature. More specifically, atoms and molecules are exposed to
intense (atomic unit of field), femtosecond light pulses whose wavelength can be
varied from 0.4-4 &amp;#956;m. At these low frequencies, the electronic
response, e.g. ionization, is highly nonlinear and the field energy that quivers
the electron can exceed the binding energy of the valence electron. In the
experiment, the ionized electrons are resolved in angle and energy, and studied
as a function of laser intensity, polarization and frequency. The main
objectives are to map the global behavior of strong-field ionization, observe
how it evolves with scaled field parameters, provide stringent tests of theory
and identify the invariant behavior in the physics. In addition, the laser
sources developed by this program have broad applications in science and
technology. The interdisciplinary nature of this research coupled with state-of-
the-art optical engineering provide an excellent training ground for both
undergraduate and graduate students. Former group members are contributing to
various areas of science and technology in academia, energy and defense
laboratories, and the private sector.