* 1605177
* GOALI: Predicting Biofilm Deformation and Detachment Using In-Situ Micro-Rheology and Phase-Field Modeling
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2019
* Robert Nerenberg, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 06/30/2019
* USD 329,889.00

1605177 Nerenberg

It is recognized in environmental technology and processes that bacterial
biofilms play an important role. However, the understanding of how they are
formed, their mechanical strength, and, in many cases, their contribution to
actual changes which are observed in the environment, are poorly understood. To
gain a better understanding of bacterial biofilms, this research will
characterize the mechanical properties of biofilms, especially counter-
diffusional biofilms relevant to the ZeeLung Membrane Aerated Biofilm Reactor
from GE Power and Water, to allow prediction of biofilm deformation and
detachment.

Biofilm deformation and detachment remains a black box, where there are no
reliable and mechanistic means to predict them. Also, few researchers have
considered the viscoelastic behavior of biofilms. This research will determine
the mechanical properties of heterotrophic, nitrifying, and combined
heterotrophic and nitrifying biofilms, considering their viscoelastic behavior.
It uses a unique, in-situ micro-scale technique to assess the spatial
distribution of mechanical properties. In addition to studying pure-culture
biofilms, this study will be the first to address the mechanical properties of a
co-culture biofilm, where a known nitrifier and heterotrophs co-exist. The pure
and co-culture results will be compared with an environmental biofilm at GE. The
composition of the extracellular polymeric substance matrix will be determined
in-situ and related to mechanical properties. The properties will be assessed as
a function of time and shear stress, and also will assess the effect of an
extracellular polymeric substance disruptor on mechanical properties. This is
the first research to address the micro-scale spatial variability of biofilms
relevant to environmental systems. It will also address a special type of
tubular, sheath structure observed in heterotrophic, counter-diffusional
biofilms, leading to dense, gelatinous biofilms. The research will develop novel
information on the spatial and temporal variation of mechanical properties in
biofilms under several environmentally relevant conditions, and will relate
these properties to extracellular polymeric substance characteristics. It also
will use a novel phase-field model to predict deformation and detachment, and
the impact of spatial heterogeneity.

The project will train one doctoral student, several undergraduate researchers
and research experiences for undergraduate students, and partially support a
post-doctoral researcher. It will provide an on-site experience at GE for a grad
student or post-doc. Workshops between Notre Dame and GE will disseminate
knowledge on biofilm research and process development at a global membrane
process company, and promote local workforce development.