* 1605050
* Collaborative Research: Dynamic simulation approaches to consequential life cycle assessment to evaluate recycling and substitution in metal and paper-derived products
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2019
* Randolph Kirchain, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 05/31/2019
* USD 240,870.00

1605050 (Olivetti)/ 1602916 (Beach)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Life cycle assessment
is a tool for modeling the environmental impact of products, processes and
services. Consequential life cycle assessment (cLCA) focuses on how changes,
resulting from a stakeholder decision, impact the market of study as well as
other markets. Current modeling approaches are either too restricted in scope or
too conceptually challenging, limiting their applicability to a small subset of
systems. The aims of this project are to develop the general methodology and
develop the qualitative aspect of cLCA with a focus on enhanced stakeholder
interaction. The methodology will be applied to the paper/paperboard and
aluminum systems with a focus on how the presence of separate markets for
primary and recycled material, as well as substitute materials, influences
policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will provide a general framework to
expand the number of cases to which cLCA can be effectively applied. Building
upon the research team's previous work evaluating materials markets and land use
impacts, this will be accomplish by: 1) quantifying the economic and response
characteristics of supply through a combination of empirical analysis,
econometrics, and material flow modeling 2) quantifying the economic and
response characteristics of demand through quantitative description of the
utility function and decision processes of key sectors, and 3) demonstrating a
simulation of supply-demand interaction coupled with parametric life cycle
inventories. This project will develop a combined environmental, physical, and
economic model in an endogenous feedback simulation platform. The recycling
policy arena consists of a diverse set of stakeholders and this work will
investigate how effective use of communication tools, such as material flow
diagrams, can make policy models both more transparent and more interactive. The
authors hypothesize that strong intellectual contributions can be forged in
melding methodological developments across the set of fields that model
consequences of change in complex materials systems, including materials
availability assessment and LCA. Policy measures such as subsidies and taxes are
often used to promote materials recycling or substitution to materials with
perceived improved environmental performance. The problem faced by decision
makers is how to direct policy to have the greatest positive impact given
limited legislative resources. Current analysis tools evaluate the direct impact
of recycling locally, i.e. for a specific material, product and region. The
methods described herein will inform industry and policy makers seeking to
evaluate the impact globally, i.e. maximize (and optimize) the benefits of
recycling over many materials, products, and regions. For example, this would be
useful for policy makers at the federal or state level wanting to understand the
net impact of a policy and the new baseline following change. While cLCA is
currently used to inform the US policy for biofuels, it may be extendible to
inform legislation towards improved materials sustainability. The cLCA approach
has the potential to answer questions such as: What would future scenarios look
like with and without proposed policies in materials recycling and substitution?
Which products should be recycled, landfilled, and used to produce energy? What
are the specific implications of policy for other parts of the economy? In the
case of the paper system, stakeholders have expressed a strong need for a tool
that is supplemental to the ones they currently use to assess environmental
impact of recycled paper (current tools are based on attributional LCA).
Excitement has been particularly strong for the possibility to communicate with
a broad set of stakeholders from the initial stages of model development and all
the way to the results. It is therefore expect that our final model will find
immediate use as decision-support tool for environmental policy in the pulp and
paper industry.