* 1605034
* Hybrid Chemical and Biological Valorization of Residual Biorefinery Lignin
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2016,11/30/2021
* Robert Brown, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 11/30/2021
* USD 299,459.00

PI name: Zhiyou Wen&lt;br/&gt;Proposal number:
1605034&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plant biomass such as wood, grass straw, and
agricultural residues represent an abundant, cheap, and renewable feedstock for
the production of liquid transportation fuels and chemicals. Biomass consists
mainly of the carbohydrate polymers cellulose and hemicellulose, and the complex
phenolic polymer lignin. The cellulosic biorefinery is in emerging platform for
large-scale biofuels production that converts the cellulosic and hemicellulosic
fractions to sugars, which are then fermented to produce bioethanol. A byproduct
of this process is the residual lignin in the plant biomass. After cellulose,
lignin is the second-most abundant biopolymer on Earth and accounts for 15-40%
of plant biomass. Although lignin is an energy-rich material, it is difficult to
convert into biofuels and is often simply burned for heat, a relatively low-
value application of this resource. A cost-effective method for utilizing lignin
is needed to improve economic viability and environmental sustainability of the
biorefinery. This project seeks to convert the lignin into a biofuel feedstock
by an innovative two-step process. The first process converts the lignin
byproduct into a dense oil by heating it up in the absence of air, a process
called pyrolysis, and the second process uses bacteria to break down the complex
pyrolysis oils to aromatic compounds which can be made into fuels and chemicals.
The educational activities associated with this project include hands-on
outreach activities for middle and high-school students on the topics related to
biomass utilization using Lego toys which resemble biomass
biopolymers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of the research is to develop
and gain fundamental understanding of a hybrid pyrolysis-bioconversion process
to make biofuel precursors from biorefinery residual lignin. The proposed
process enables the bioconversion of lignin-derived phenolic monomers to fuels
and chemicals in a two-step process. The first step focuses on the
thermocatalytic depolymerization of lignin into heterogeneous phenolic monomers.
In the second step, the various monomers generated by lignin pyrolysis are then
microbially converted into the catechol and protocatechute, which enter central
metabolism and are then converted into acetyl-CoA and pyruvate, two key
metabolic precursors for the production of various advanced biofuels and
chemicals. The project has three research objectives. The first objective is to
characterize of the lignin monomers derived from the fast pyrolysis process. The
second objective is to study the capability of selected bacterial strains to
utilize these lignin monomers, and then explore how tailoring the conditions of
the pyrolysis process makes beneficial changes in the pyrolysis oil that
improves the bioconversion efficiency of the lignin monomers. This will be
accomplished in part by emulsifying the lignin monomers in an aqueous phase and
strain engineering of bacteria for improved performance. The third objective is
to develop a bench-scale fermentation process for accomplishing objective 2 in a
scalable platform, and then use this information for preliminary techno-economic
and life-cycle analyses.