* 1605549
* Clustering methods for control-relevant decomposition of complex process networks
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Prodromos Daoutidis, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 06/30/2020
* USD 319,999.00

1605549 PI: Daoutidis&lt;br/&gt;Title: Clustering methods for control-relevant
decomposition of complex process networks&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Complex process
networks, consisting of interconnections of numerous reaction, separation and
heat exchange units, are very common in modern chemical and energy plants.
Effectively controlling such networks is a challenging problem that requires the
development of distributed control strategies. In order to develop such
strategies, constituent sub-networks must be identified that can be effectively
controlled and coordinated within the overall process network. However, a
rigorous control-oriented network decomposition framework that can be automated
and applied to large-scale networks is currently lacking. The main goals of the
proposed research are: i) to develop generalized methods for control-relevant
decomposition of complex process networks, and (ii) to apply these methods to
representative systems from the process and energy
industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will employ hierarchical
clustering methods that have been used extensively in network theory as a
powerful framework for analyzing the inter-connectivity of complex process
networks, and designing control structures for them. Within this framework,
fundamental methods for control-relevant decomposition of integrated process
networks will be developed. These methods will enable a systematic
classification of fully-resolved input/output cluster hierarchies, ranging from
a single cluster to individual collections of input/output pairs. They will also
determine the optimal modularity of such clusters on the basis of appropriate
measures of compactness and closeness. The developed network decomposition
methods will therefore facilitate the transition from a fully decentralized
control paradigm towards a more effective distributed paradigm for complex
process networks. Such efficient plant-wide control strategies are critical to
the economic viability, as well as the energy and environmental sustainability
of chemical and energy industries. The proposed research will provide a setting
for the effective training of graduate students in fundamental research, cutting
across mathematics and control theory, with a timely and important application
component. The research results will be broadly disseminated through
publications and presentations, whereas the open-source software that will be
developed will further enhance the infrastructure for research and education.