* 1605528
* Scalable and Durable Lithium-sulfur Batteries Utilizing Self-healing Solid-state Hybrid Electrolyte Materials
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2019
* Se-Hee Lee, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 05/31/2019
* USD 299,999.00

Rechargeable lithium ion batteries help to enable sustainable energy systems by
storing electricity generated by intermittent renewable resources such as wind
and solar energy, or by powering zero-emission electric vehicles charged by
electricity from renewable resources. A key challenge to improve performance and
to reduce cost of lithium batteries is to increase charge capacity. Solid-state
lithium batteries that use the element sulfur as the cathode have a theoretical
storage capacity that is nearly three times higher than conventional lithium ion
batteries, but suffer from low conductivity of the solid electrolyte needed
stabilize the battery. To improve the conductivity of the electrolyte, this
project will develop new solid electrolyte materials composed of ceramic
conductor materials mixed with polyimine materials. The key innovations are that
the ceramic materials will be engineered for high lithium ion conduction, and
the polyimines will improve the mechanical stability of ceramic conductor
material during repeated charging and discharging cycles. Furthermore, to
facilitate technology transfer to the private sector, the solid electrolyte
fabrication steps will be designed to enable scalable manufacture in the future.
The educational activities associated with this project include active
participation of undergraduates in research, particularly from under-represented
groups in engineering, with recruitment coordinated through a variety of
programs at the University of Colorado, Boulder.

The overall goal of the research is to develop solid-state hybrid electrolytes
for lithium-sulfur batteries composed of binary inorganic lithium sulfide and
phosphorous sulfide based ceramic conductors, and malleable self-healing
polyimines that serve as the binder material. The proposed solid-state hybrid
electrolytes are anticipated to have significantly improved mechanical
properties, lithium ionic conductivity, and cycling stability. Highly-
conductive, thin film electrolytes free of pinholes and defects will be
fabricated and integrated into the electrochemical cell. The effects of polymer
structure and surface chemistry at the polyimine polymer/ceramic conductor
interface on battery performance will be studied. The research plan has four
objectives. The first objective is to develop ion-conducting, malleable, self-
healing polyimine polymers to serve as the matrix of solid-state hybrid
electrolyte. The second objective is to identify conductive ceramic materials
with good surface adhesion to the matrix polymers. The third objective is to
develop a reliable process for fabrication of ion-conducting thin continuous
hybrid membranes, and the fourth objective is to study the structure-property
relationships of the solid-state lithium-sulfur batteries containing the new
hybrid electrolytes.