* 1605000
* Electrocaloric Cooling in Polymers: Multi-Scale Modeling and Experimental Characterization
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2016,01/31/2021
* Shi-Chune Yao, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Ying Sun
* 01/31/2021
* USD 360,000.00

Electrocaloric Refrigeration: A Polymer-Based Alternative to Conventional
Technologies&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A polymer is a long, chain-like molecule built
from smaller components called monomers. When grouped together, these polymer
chains form a solid that is light-weight, flexible, and easy and inexpensive to
make. When an electric field is applied to some polymer solids, it makes the
monomers rotate. This rotation causes the material's temperature to increase.
Removing the electric field causes the monomers to rotate back to their original
positions and the material's temperature decreases. The ability to increase and
decrease temperature using an electric field is called the electrocaloric
effect. Its presence in polymers indicates that they can be used to build a
refrigeration system with no moving parts, very different from the vapor
compression cycle that is ubiquitous in household, commercial, and industrial
applications. Estimates suggest very high efficiency for electrocaloric
refrigeration. The objective of this work is to use computer modeling and
experiments to develop an understanding of the origin of the electrocaloric
effect in polymers. The work will provide guidance in how to optimally select
the monomers used to build the polymers and the ideal conditions for making the
materials. To complement the research, outreach activities based on next-
generation cooling technologies will be developed and presented to middle-school
and high-school students. An undergraduate mechanical engineering course in
fluid mechanics will be flipped, whereby the initial student learning is done
outside the classroom and class time is devoted to active learning, where
students engage directly with the material through problem solving, discussion,
and small group projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research
program is to determine how the nanostructure and microstructure of PVDF-based
polymer thin films drive their electrocaloric cooling performance The
electrocaloric effect is a phenomenon in which polarization-related temperature
and entropy changes occur when an electric field is applied/removed from certain
ferroelectric materials, causing the rotation of internal monomer dipoles. The
large electrocaloric effect measured in environment-friendly polymers points to
untapped potential for application to thermal management. Atomistic
calculations, kinetic Monte Carlo simulations, and experimental characterization
tools will be applied to build fundamental knowledge of how composition and
structure across length scales from nanometers to microns contribute to the
electrocaloric effect. Specifically, (i) the mechanisms and energetics of the
dipole flipping events will be investigated using nudged elastic band method
calculations, and (ii) the correlation between the microstructure of the
crystalline and amorphous regions to the electrocaloric temperature change will
be explored using kinetic Monte Carlo simulations and experimental
characterization. This knowledge will inform what cooling performance is
possible and strategies for implementation into next-generation cooling
technologies. The electrocaloric effect has the potential to transform cooling
and thermal management at micro and macro scales. By combining scalable
manufacturing, excellent performance, and inexpensive, abundant, and light-
weight materials, electrocaloric-based devices will rival thermoelectrics as a
next-generation solid-state cooling technology.