* 1605406
* NSF/CBET-BSF: Effect of Sunlight Intensity on Functional Inhomogeneity and Stability of Organic-Inorganic Perovskite Solar Cells
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2019
* Vladimir Bulovic, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 05/31/2019
* USD 300,000.00

The sun represents the most abundant potential source of sustainable energy on
earth. Solar cells for producing electricity require materials that absorb the
sun's energy and convert its photons to electrons, a process called
photovoltaics. Recently, materials based on inorganic-organic halide perovskite
materials have achieved promising solar energy power conversion efficiency
approaching that of silicon solar cells, and can be made from earth-abundant
elements using lower-cost, solution based fabrication methods. However, present
organic-inorganic perovskite photovoltaic devices chemically degrade during
long-term service under both high sunlight and moisture in air. Furthermore,
present methods for their fabrication result in the inconsistent performance of
the final device. The goal of this project is to develop new fabrication methods
to improve the environmental stability and performance reproducibility of
perovskite-based photovoltaic devices to help enable their future practical use.
A unique aspect of this project is that the research will be carried out as part
of a formal international collaboration between the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology in the United States and the Ben-Gurion University of the Negev in
Israel. Both institutions bring unique and complimentary research expertise as
well as opportunities for student training.

The research plan will seek to improve environmental stability and fabrication
reproducibility of perovskite-based photovoltaic devices through four material
fabrication strategies: 1) introduce molecular species with specialized
functionality into the active layer, 2) adjust film formation kinetics, 3) tune
the chemical composition of photoactive films, and 4) add passivating agents
that reduce charge trap densities. These strategies will be investigated within
the context of three research objectives. The first objective is to develop a
fundamental understanding the origin of the grain-to grain variability in
electronic properties of methylammonium lead triiodide. The second objective is
to elucidate the origin of non-radiative decay in the microscale emission. As
part of this objective, the crystallographic structure and composition will be
correlated to characteristic luminescence emission and electronic properties at
the microscale. The third objective is to determine the factors limiting the
reproducibility and environmental stability of methylammonium lead triiodide,
with particular focus on identifying the mechanisms responsible for photovoltaic
deterioration that limits operational device stability under concentrated
sunlight.