* 1605319
* Resolving the effects of heterogeneity and technological progress on carbon mitigation costs
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2016,03/31/2023
* Eric Hittinger, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 03/31/2023
* USD 407,789.00

1605319&lt;br/&gt;Williams, Eric&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the cost of
mitigating carbon emissions is critical in planning societal responses to
climate change. Carbon interventions have broad sustainability benefits since
energy-related environmental emissions and resource challenges are also
mitigated. Market heterogeneity and technological progress are important but
poorly understood factors in mitigation cost. In many energy system analyses,
all adopters of a technology are considered the same as an average one. However,
there is often large heterogeneity in benefits to different adopters. If
mitigation efforts are focused on the most effective sub-groups, mitigation
costs can be significantly lower. In additional, if technological progress is
rapid, adoption by favorable subgroups can stimulate cost reductions, making the
technology more attractive to other consumers. In this research, a new Marginal
Abatement Cost Curve (MACC) will be developed for the United States that
accounts for heterogeneity and technological progress. A Marginal Abatement Cost
Curve orders interventions from least to highest mitigation cost combined with
the total mitigation potential for each technology assuming wide adoption.
Marginal Abatement Costs Curves provide insight into prioritization and relative
potential of mitigation options and are widely used in policy discourses at
national, state, and city levels. The new MACC curve covers technological
interventions from residential and commercial buildings, transportation and
renewable energy sectors. Heterogeneities in geography, behavior and technology
stock will be are analyzed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Examples of geographical
heterogeneity include availability of wind resources and climate-related
variability of heating and cooling demand in buildings. Behavioral heterogeneity
includes thermostat settings and usage patterns of appliances. Stock
heterogeneity refers to variation in the efficiency of current equipment or
infrastructure. The complexity of different heterogeneities will be managed
through cluster analysis to identify adopter subgroups with similar
characteristics. Cost reductions will be predicted with retrospective
forecasting approaches, mainly experience curves. Use of modern data analysis
techniques such as cluster analysis enables the integration of several federal
micro-data sets into technology adopter subgroups with distinct mitigation
costs. Accounting for the sequencing of adoption in heterogeneous markets
combined with technological progress leads to new insights into potential
reductions in mitigation costs. Accounting for heterogeneity and technological
progress is important beyond marginal abatement curves, as these factors also
affect results of integrated energy-economic models such as the National Energy
Modeling System (NEMS). The cost of mitigating carbon is a critical
sustainability challenge. Despite the importance of this question, treatment of
abatement costs routinely neglect important heterogeneities. Combining
heterogeneity with the potential of technological progress to reduce costs for
later adopters should reveal significant opportunities to lower mitigation
costs, which can directly inform US climate and energy policies. To engage
relevant communities, two workshops will be organized. The first workshop will
be held adjacent to the annual conference of the U.S. Association for Energy
Economics, and will engage academia, consulting firms and utilities. The second
workshop will be held in Washington D.C. for policy decision makers. The dataset
that describes heterogeneities will be of general interest to the energy
modeling community and will be distributed freely via the Internet. A high
school cohort from underrepresented groups will be engaged in a summer camp
covering energy issues and careers. Broader groups of students and faculty will
be reached through development of online modules and dissemination through the
Center for Sustainable Engineering.