* 1605195
* Near-contact motion and coalescence of inertial droplets in turbulence: simulations, laboratory experiments and field measurements
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Lance Collins, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 07/31/2021
* USD 400,000.00

PI: Collins, Lance&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1605195&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
comprehensive research approach, involving high fidelity computations,
experiments in a laboratory and field experiments is proposed to understand and
predict the behavior of drops suspended in turbulent flows. This problem is very
important for the behavior of clouds in the atmosphere. In addition to
atmospheric applications, there are many other application areas with
engineering interest, where this work can have an impact, including diesel
engines, sprays, atomization, and powder manufacturing and inhalation drug
therapy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite more than a half-century of research,
there remains considerable uncertainty on how turbulence enhances the
coalescence rate of suspended droplets. This study addresses that uncertainty
through the direct measurement of droplet collision/coalescence rates in direct
numerical simulations (DNS), experiments and in field measurements over a wide
range of conditions. The focus of the study will be on the direct measurement of
coalescence rates of droplets driven by turbulence. This has application to a
wide range of multiphase flows, but the application of primary importance to
this proposal is the processing of clouds in the atmosphere. Under certain
conditions, clouds evolve faster than microphysical models can predict. It is
believed that atmospheric turbulence could explain the acceleration of cloud
formation. This study will bring together a synergistic combination of three
scientific tools for analyzing natural turbulent flow phenomena: DNS; laboratory
experiments; and field measurements. The overarching goal is to generate
definitive coalescence data from high-resolution DNS and state-of-the-art
laboratory and field experiments under conditions of near parametric similarity.
This investigation will include the first experimental measurements of the
coalescence rate for inertial droplets in a turbulent flow field, both in the
laboratory and in natural conditions. Only with this collective effort can this
be achieved - any one or two of these techniques alone will not sufficient. In
addition to the engineering impacts of the proposed work, the proposed
activities include educational and outreach activities that are targeted towards
encouraging underrepresented minorities into the academy.