* 1605971
* (NANO)^2: gold nanoclusters in lipid nanodiscoidal bicelles as a potential nanodiagnostic platform: experiment and computer modeling
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2021
* Mu-Ping Nieh, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 05/31/2021
* USD 369,482.00

CBET - 1605971&lt;br/&gt;PI: Nieh, Mu-Ping&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lipid
nanocarriers containing solid nanoparticles are a promising platform for drug
delivery and imaging in biomedical applications. The entrapped solid
nanoparticles can be imaging contrast agents, which enhance the signal obtained
in various medical imaging techniques such as magnetic resonance imaging, X-ray
computerized tomography, and photoacoustic tomography. Placing the nanoparticles
inside the lipid nanocarriers increases their solubility and stability, and
provides a significant enhancement in luminescence due to nanoparticle
aggregation. The nanoparticle-complex can also be used to enhance local heating
in photothermal therapy, which uses infrared electromagnetic radiation to treat
tumors and other disorders. Aggregated gold nanoparticles can enhance signals by
several orders of magnitude, which is promising for high-sensitivity imaging and
sensing. The goal of this project is to develop well-defined lipid nanodiscs
(bicelles) that can serve as carriers for nanoparticles and investigate their
performance in imaging applications. A combination of experiments and computer
simulation will be used to determine the key parameters that affect arrangements
of nanoparticles in bicelles and then optimize lipid composition and nanodisc
formulation to achieve encapsulated clusters of nanoparticles with strong
fluorescence properties. The project will provide opportunities for students at
various academic levels to participate in research. Grade 5-12 STEM teachers who
participate in UCONN's da Vinci Project will be introduced to research projects
related to nanoparticle self-assembly. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The combination of
experiments and molecular dynamics simulations will provide fundamental
understanding of the interactions between lipid molecules and hydrophobically-
modified solid nanoparticles such as monolayer protected gold clusters and
hydrophobic quantum dots. Factors that affect solid nanoparticle solubilization
and clustering inside discoidal bicelles, including lipid and hydrophobic tether
chain lengths, nanoparticle size, and charge density of the lipids or
nanoparticle, will be examined. In addition, the relationships between local
nanoparticle concentration inside the bicelles, the distance between
nanoparticles, and the size of nanoparticle clusters trapped in the lipid
structure and their photo-physical properties will be investigated. The joint
experimental and computer modeling effort will help predict the range of desired
lipid/nanoparticle composition to optimize nanoparticle encapsulation,
clustering and retention. This new strategy of nanoparticle encapsulation by
lipid nanocarriers will provide a fast, robust, size-controllable and
environmentally friendly platform that can be easily adapted for manufacturing.