* 1605357
* Collaborative Research: SusChEM: A Robust Yeast Platform for the Synthesis and Engineering of Polyketide-Based Pharmaceuticals and Chemicals
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2021
* Nancy Da Silva, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 06/30/2021
* USD 300,000.00

1605357/1605877&lt;br/&gt;Da Silva, Nancy A./Tang,
Yi&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polyketide-derived natural products represent an
important class of pharmaceuticals with application to nearly all major types of
human diseases, including antibiotics, anticancer, and anti-
hypercholesterolemia. In recent years, polyketides have also been attractive as
renewable chemicals and fuels, due to the flexibility in their synthesis and
their structures. This research will engineer the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae
for the high-level synthesis of polyketides, leading to new methods for the
sustainable production of chemicals and pharmaceuticals. The research will also
enable the discovery of new enzymes and biochemicals. The research will impact
the field by providing new, renewable ways of producing a variety of
commercially important compounds. From an educational and outreach perspective,
the research will span the core disciplines of engineering, chemistry and
biology, and will therefore provide ample opportunities for student training in
multiple areas. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polyketides are microbial and plant
metabolites that have significantly impacted human health. They are synthesized
in bacteria, fungi and plants by polyketide synthases from simple primary
metabolite building blocks such as acetyl-CoA and malonyl-CoA. As more genome
sequences have become available and understanding of polyketide biosynthesis
grows, there are significant opportunities to engineer the production of these
compounds in model organisms such as Saccharomyces cerevisiae. This research
will combine polyketide chemistry and yeast metabolic engineering to outfit
yeast as a high-level production host for different valuable fungal and plant
polyketides. State of the art synthetic biology and genetic tools will be used
to optimize the capacity of yeast to supply the polyketide precursors, as well
as to abundantly express the bottleneck, rate-limiting polyketide synthases. The
engineered yeast will be applied towards the production of three sets of
polyketide compounds: i) compounds of therapeutic values from the fungal
kingdom; ii) biochemical building blocks and biosurfactants; and iii) novel
compounds new to science discovered from genome mining of sequenced fungal
species. This integrated approach will lead to yeast heterologous hosts that are
powerful, general and drop-in for polyketide production, and can reveal insights
into yeast metabolism and optimization of foreign (and difficult) protein
expression. The work on biochemical production using various polyketide
synthases can enable renewable production of value added chemicals, as well as
examine the dexterity of corresponding polyketide
synthases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award by the Biotechnology and Biochemical
Engineering Program of the CBET Division is co-funded by the Biomaterials
Program of the Division of Materials Research.