* 1605943
* Collaborative Research:   Understanding and Controlling Chemo-Mechanical Properties of Metal Coordinating Polymer and Inorganic Nanoparticle Composites
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Niels Holten-Andersen, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 08/31/2019
* USD 250,000.00

1605943/1605699&lt;br/&gt;Holten-Andersen, Niels/Tracy, Joseph B.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Interfaces between metal coordinating proteins and
inorganic surfaces have a vital role in the mechanical properties of some of the
most remarkable composites found in nature. From the underwater adhesive glues
of mussels to the tough shells of nacre, sticky interactions between metal
binding proteins and inorganic surfaces have increasingly been found to control
their mechanical properties. A simpler, synthetic system, where inorganic
nanoparticles serve as dynamic bridges for metal binding polymers, will be
investigated to learn principles of composite material design from nature and to
apply these principles for engineering new materials with controlled and
responsive mechanical properties. Potential applications for these materials
include drug delivery, self-healing composites, and 3D printing. The PIs will
develop learning modules based on these bio-inspired composites for use in
outreach activities to increase public awareness about nanotechnology and to
recruit more students into STEM careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
project is to utilize bio-inspired metal coordinating polymer-nanoparticle (MCP-
NP) composites as model systems for understanding how to engineer novel
mechanics via controlled MCP-NP interfacial dynamics. In contrast to previous
MCP materials with metal ion crosslinkers, NPs will serve as supramolecular
crosslinkers, with a tunable number of ligands bound per NP. Chemical and
physical parameters of the system will be adjusted to obtain a fundamental
understanding of how molecular interactions at MCP-NP interfaces affect the bulk
mechanical properties of MCP-NP composites and to demonstrate control over the
mechanical response. In comparison with traditional engineering composites and
other composite hydrogels, MCP-NP composites are viscoelastic and have tunable
interfacial bonding. Magnetically and optically responsive NPs have been
selected to also allow remote heating using light and magnetic fields. This
project will provide a deeper understanding of composite interfacial dynamics
critical for improved engineering of composite mechanical properties, such as
self-healing and tunable fluid-solid transitions. Insights about the
relationship between chemistry at MCP-NP interfaces and the mechanical response
will be applicable to other composite systems with dynamic interfaces.