* 1605957
* GOALI: Reclaiming Valuable Resources from Industrial Wastewater
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2024
* Laura Arias Chavez, Tennessee Technological University
* Continuing Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 07/31/2024
* USD 365,424.00

1605957&lt;br/&gt;Arias-Chavez&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While the reclamation of
materials and energy from municipal wastewater has received recent attention
from the environmental engineering community, the potential of industrial
wastewater as a resource has been largely overlooked. Sustainability gains may
be particularly significant for industrial wastewater in light of: 1) lower
composition and flow variability in industrial streams relative to municipal
wastewater and 2) the opportunity for immediate, on-site re-use of reclaimed
materials by their source generator. Therefore, new strategies for effective and
economical separation of industrial wastewaters for component re-use are
proposed in this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs propose an academic-
industry collaboration combining fundamental and applied research to investigate
a new strategy for reclaiming resources from industrial wastewater. A dual-
membrane process for recovering hydrocarbons, inorganic components, and water
from industrial wastewater associated with production of hydrogen, synthetic
fuels, electricity, and heat from biomass is proposed. Currently, wastewater
produced by the process represents an energetic, economic, and environmental
cost because it cannot be reclaimed and its components must be degraded or
sequestered to permit its discharge to municipal sewer systems. The PI has
research experience with membrane technologies suitable for reclamation of
water, other materials, and energy from conventional and emerging industries.
Together, the PIs will systematically investigate the separation of industrial
wastewater components by a forward osmosis/ reverse osmosis hybrid membrane
system, first at the bench-scale in the PI's lab, and then at the pilot-scale at
the co-PI's industrial facility. Technical and economic aspects will be
explored. Successful demonstration of this reclamation technology can transform
society's approach to industrial wastewater from one of hazard mitigation to one
of resource harvesting. The proposed work will advance the scientific
understanding of the transport of organic and inorganic components through
selective membranes in complex (multiple species) streams. The efficacy of pH as
a controlling factor in separating dissolved species through multi-barrier
membrane systems will be better understood. The resistance of forward osmosis
membranes to fouling by hydrocarbons will be explored, as will the removal of
foulants by minimally-disruptive methods. Probing the limits of forward osmosis
fouling resistance is critical for predicting maximum recoveries of hydrocarbons
and other industrial waste components with high fouling potentials. New
membranes specialized for this industrial wastewater will be fabricated and
evaluated. Undergraduates will join graduate students for investigations in the
research lab through system design and economic analysis performed in a senior-
level Chemical Engineering course.