* 1605894
* Magnetically activated chemical equilibrium and separations using recyclable magnetic surfactants and polymers
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Paul Scovazzo, University of Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 07/31/2021
* USD 299,995.00

Proposal Number: 1605894 PI: Scovazzo, P. Title: Magnetically activated chemical
equilibrium and separations using recyclable magnetic surfactants and polymers

This project will develop low energy magnetically driven methods to address the
growing energy demands for chemical and biological separations. The separation
methods will use recyclable magnetic chemical surfactants to drive magnetically
enhanced adsorption and liquid-liquid phase extractions. The project's
technology is envisioned as a magnetic controlled swing operation akin to
temperature and pressure swing adsorption systems. In order to complete the
research of the separation systems, the project will require the synthesis of
novel small-molecule and macromolecular magnetic surfactants, along with the
fundamental exploration of magnetically-aided adsorption and liquid/liquid
partitioning. The project will generate key data for the manipulation of
magnetic fields for low energy separations and provide a green alternative to
traditional separation techniques. The project will provide project-based
learning experiences graduate and undergraduate students. Additionally, the
project will design and implement a mini-course for K-12 outreach to enhance
STEM education through hands-on strategic thinking, engineering problem solving,
and engineering economics.

Unlike the previously studied paramagnetic materials comprised of suspensions of
nanometer- to micrometer-sized permanent magnets, this project's paramagnetic
materials are magnetic molecules where the "magnets" are on the molecular scale.
The project will require the synthesis of three types of novel magnetically
responsive species: ionic surfactants with magnetic counter ions; redox-
responsive magnetic surfactants; and block copolymer amphiphiles with multiple
magnetic moieties. Subsequently, the surfactant properties (e.g., critical
micelle concentrations, contact angles, and surface tensions) will be
characterized in response to a magnetic field. Using the designed surfactants,
the research team will develop magnetically-aided adsorption and magnetically-
controlled liquid/liquid partitioning processes. Each of the three magnetically
responsive classes will be evaluated for chemical separations of model organic
compounds such as benzene, phenol and ibuprofen, including controllable changes
in thermodynamics (solubilization) and transport phenomena (micelle
capture/release by turning a magnetic field on/off). The developed magnetically
driven separation processes will be evaluated against current technologies for
separation and energy efficiency.