* 1605999
* Universal platform for the bioconversion of single carbon feedstocks to fuels and chemicals
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2019
* Ramon Gonzalez, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 05/31/2019
* USD 299,846.00

There is increasing interest in developing more sustainable feedstocks for the
chemicals and fuels. One-carbon compounds, including carbon dioxide and methane,
are attractive alternative feedstocks for liquid fuel and chemicals production,
because utilization of these abundant feedstocks can upgrade these low-value
materials and at the same time lower greenhouse gas emissions. Photosynthetic
microorganisms such as algae can use carbon dioxide to make fuels, and other
microorganisms can metabolize methane, but not very efficiently. A more
fundamental and efficient framework for metabolism of one-carbon compounds,
designed at the molecular level from the bottom up, is needed to enable a viable
biological process. The goal of this project is to use the tools of synthetic
biology to engineer microorganisms to convert single carbon compounds, including
carbon dioxide and methane, directly into a variety of chemicals and fuels. The
educational activities associated with the project include the hosting and
mentoring of Hispanic middle and high school students from the Houston Harmony
Science in the laboratory of the principal investigator.

The research will develop a new metabolic platform for the assimilation of
single carbon compounds, including carbon dioxide or methane, directly into the
production of organic chemicals and fuels within genetically engineered
microorganisms. The proposed engineered platform defines a new metabolic
architecture that consolidates carbon fixation, central metabolism, and product
synthesis into a single pathway. The pathway uses formyl-CoA as a single carbon
extension unit, which bypasses the need for the production of common metabolic
intermediates and allows for elongation of a carbon backbone iteratively in
single-carbon increments. The proposed platform is inspired by the catabolic
alpha-oxidation pathway, and uses the enzyme hydroxyl-acyl-CoA lyase to catalyze
C-C bond formation between formyl-CoA and an aldehyde. The engineered platform
consists of three modules, including an activation module that converts a single
carbon molecule to an extender unit, an elongation module in which the extender
unit is added to a carbon backbone, and a termination module, which converts
intermediates of the elongation module to target products. There are four
research objectives to develop this pathway. The first objective is to
rationally design a pathway allowing for the iterative elongation of a carbon
backbone using 1-carbon extender unit formyl-CoA and the synthesis of longer-
chain products from the intermediates of this pathway. The second objective
involves the in vitro characterization of pathway components and functional
assembly of individual modules using molecular and biochemical techniques. The
third objective focuses on the in vivo construction and characterization of the
pathway to achieve product synthesis via microbial fermentations, and the fourth
objective focuses on a system-wide characterization of wild-type and engineered
strains. Toward this end, functional components for each enzymatic step will be
assembled in vivo by making use of synthetic biology tools to facilitate the
efficient conversion of single carbon feedstocks to valuable products via
microbial fermentation. The new C-C bond formation mechanism advanced by this
research will be expected to make fundamental and potentially impactful
contributions to one-carbon metabolism and biosynthesis.