* 1605568
* Resolving discrepancies in detailed kinetic models of combustion via automated transition state theory calculations
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2016,04/30/2020
* Richard West, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* John Daily
* 04/30/2020
* USD 259,990.00

1605568 West&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to develop cleaner and more efficient
engines, and to make better use of both petroleum-derived and alternative fuels,
engineers need a better understanding of combustion. Computer models that can
accurately predict how different fuels burn in different conditions will help us
develop new engines and new fuels. The goal of this research is predictive,
detailed kinetic modeling of combustion, in which many thousands of relevant
chemical reactions are calculated accurately. As a step towards this goal, the
research will detect and correct major discrepancies in the reaction rates
currently used in detailed kinetic models, and in so doing create a database of
reaction transition states, as well as algorithms to predict them. The proposed
work will use several novel techniques to identify and correct mistakes,
uncertainties, and approximations currently hidden throughout detailed kinetic
models of combustion. The project will remove the human bottle-neck in
performing quantum mechanical calculations of chemical kinetics, enabling
effective use of High Performance Computing for accurate calculation of reaction
rate expressions in the future. This high-throughput calculation of reaction
kinetics has been identified as a "basic research need for clean and efficient
combustion of 21st century transportation fuels", and by the Combustion Energy
Frontier Research Center as an "important grand
challenge".&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This three year project proposes to: (1)
automate the performance of quantum mechanics (QM) based Transition State Theory
(TST) calculations for combustion-relevant reactions in the open-source, kinetic
model building software Reaction Mechanism Generator (RMG); (2) use a newly
developed kinetic model importer tool to identify every elementary reaction
published in recent combustion models; (3) use the automated methods from step
one to calculate the rates of reactions from step two, creating a public
database of reactions, rates from the literature, rates calculated by TST, QM
calculation results, and transition state geometries; and (4) identify
discrepancies between reaction rates in published models and those calculated
via TST, and quantify the effect these discrepancies have on the model
predictions. Additionally, we will develop a related suite of Python-based
teaching materials suitable for undergraduate chemical engineering curriculum,
to introduce combustion science to a wider audience. A PhD student and several
undergraduate students will gain valuable research experience and training
whilst working on this project.