* 1605331
* MONOLAYER CATALYST AS TRANSFORMATIVE CONCEPT FOR EFFICIENT ELECTROLYTIC HYDROGEN ISOTOPE SEPARATION
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Stanko Brankovic, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 08/31/2020
* USD 388,526.00

1605331&lt;br/&gt;Brankovic, Stanko R.&lt;br/&gt;The study examines the effects
of positive strain in platinum (Pt) and palladium (Pd) monolayer catalysts on
the efficiency of electrolytic hydrogen isotope separation in applications such
as separation of heavy, deuterated water (D2O) from normal H2O. Improved
separation efficiencies would aid the production of cheaper moderator materials
for current fission-type nuclear reactors and provide crucial fuel components
for future fusion reactors. These technologies would help to achieve a secure
energy future for our Nation while promoting safe nuclear energy implementation
and proliferation. More broadly, the techniques developed for hydrogen isotope
separation can also be applied to a host of other electrolytic isotope
separations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The idea is built on the premise that
positive strain in a metal monolayer-thin film, induced by epitaxial misfit with
a substrate, increases the strength of the adsorbed hydrogen bond in the
overpotential region where recombination of hydrogen atoms is the rate
determining step in the hydrogen evolution reaction. As a result, an increased
hydrogen isotope separation efficiency of Pt and Pd monolayers is expected as
compared to bulk Pt and Pd electrodes. The positive strain also increases the
surface diffusion barrier for adsorbed hydrogen atoms. This effect favors
recombination of isotopes with smaller mass. As the surface is stretched, the
neighboring adsorption sites separate from each other which affects heavier
hydrogen isotopes more and results in their lower probability for recombination
thus increasing separation efficiency. To study these strain effects in Pt and
Pd monolayer catalysts we propose to synthesize continuous Pt and Pd monolayers
on Au(111) using electrochemical deposition and deposition via a surface-limited
redox replacement reaction pioneered by the principal investigator's group. The
adsorption strength of hydrogen isotopes will be studied by infra-red
spectroscopy. These results will be used as starting input in our DFT
calculations and theoretical analysis. The calculated ratio between the rates of
hydrogen and deuterium recombination and separation factors for Pt and Pd
monolayers and corresponding bulk electrodes will be compared to experimentally
measured ones. If necessary, additional sophistication of theoretical
model/calculations in terms of the input parameters, approximations and
considered effects will be implemented. This iterative procedure will help to
gain full understanding and quantification of separate strain effects on
separation efficiency of Pt and Pd monolayers. Furthermore, the project will
provide a highly inter-disciplinary learning environment for graduate students
involving elements of electrochemistry, materials science, and catalysis, all
critically important for technological leadership of our country.