* 1605564
* Engineering novel designer glycopeptides as molecular carriers for boosting protein secretion in plant cell culture
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2016,12/31/2020
* Jianfeng Xu, Arkansas State University Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 12/31/2020
* USD 443,154.00

1605564 &lt;br/&gt;Xu, Jianfeng &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With increasing needs for
high-value protein-based therapeutics, plant cells offer a safe and cost-
effective alternative bioproduction platform. However, low protein productivity
is a common bottleneck in the commercialization of this technology. This project
engineers plant cells to express foreign proteins that are secreted into the
cell culture medium. This is advantageous as the protein is now sequestered from
intracellular proteolytic degradation and can be readily recovered and purified.
Fundamental knowledge gained from this research will advance our understanding
of plant development, stress defense, and plant cell wall assembly. This is a
highly interdisciplinary research project that will present unique learning
opportunities for both graduate and undergraduate students at Arkansas State
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to leverage
a designer molecular carrier engineering technology in developing a commercially
competitive plant cell-based bioproduction platform for high-value proteins.
Specifically, this project aims to exploit the unique plant Hyp-O-glycosylation
'code' that precisely directs the O-glycosylation of a proline-rich peptide, to
develop novel Hyp-O-glycosylated peptides (HypGPs) that function as a molecular
carrier in excreting conjoined heterologous proteins to cell culture media. The
PIs will test the hypothesis that strategically designed HypGP carriers can
function to improve plant cell culture productivity by boosting the secretion of
several model proteins and stabilizing these products in culture media. The
precise Hyp-O-glycosylation process in tobacco BY-2 cells, and the key
mechanisms facilitating protein secretion will be dissected. Based on the
outcome of this study, optimal HypGP design in terms of peptide sequence and
chain length to achieve the highest protein yields will be established. In order
to assess the practical and broader applications of the designer HypGPs for
expressing larger and complex therapeutic proteins, expression of two distinct
and therapeutically promising proteins, human alfa1-antitrypsin (52 kDa) and
interleukin-12 (70 kDa) will be tested. Additionally, broader applicability of
Hyp-O-glycosylation 'code' to engineering functional designer HypGPs in monocot
rice cell culture will be investigated towards advancing our understanding about
the Hyp-O-glycosylation in monocot plants and achieving high protein
productivity in rice cell culture.&lt;br/&gt;This award by the Biotechnology and
Biochemical Engineering Program of the CBET Division is co-funded by the Systems
and Synthetic Biology Program of the Division of Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences and by the Experimental Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).