* 1605434
* Collaborative Research: Fluid Dynamics-based analysis towards control of sleep apnea
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2016,03/31/2018
* Jinxiang Xi, Central Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 03/31/2018
* USD 189,406.00

PI: Dong, Haibo / XI, Jinxiang&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1605232 /
1605434&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the proposed research is to investigate the fluid
dynamics mechanisms that can lead to sleep apnea and to develop fluid dynamics-
based strategies for intervention. The importance of understanding the reasons
for this condition at a fundamental level is very significant, since this
condition that can sometimes result in deaths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
the proposed research is to advance the fundamental knowledge of biological
fluid dynamics in prediction and control of human snoring through a combined
physiology-based modeling, physics-based simulation, analysis, verification, and
optimization approach. This approach is also applicable to a wide range of
engineering and biological systems, such as noise reduction and phonation. There
are mainly two objectives: (1) to develop a methodology for unveiling the flow
physics and sound-producing mechanism of biological fluid-structure coupling
problems and (2) to use the methodology for the investigation of optimal
intervention procedures in order to ease the vortex-induced snore symptoms
towards a better quality of life. The proposed work is highly interdisciplinary
and involves fundamental scientific problems in the fields of biology, physics,
physiology, and engineering. Snoring is an audible sign coded with richness of
information about human respiratory functions. The sound comes from a complex
interaction between compliant airway structures and the transient vortex
shedding which is induced by the narrowing of the airway passage. However, the
specific snore source mechanisms are still elusive, despite the significant in
vitro and clinical efforts. Physics-based numerical investigation of the snore
source will promise to quantify the relationship between the nonlinear response
of the flexible airways and the respiratory vortex dynamics for sound
generation. Currently, snore source diagnosis relies on expensive and time-
consuming procedures that are outsourced to special analytical laboratories.
Such challenges in performing in vivo and in vitro snore diagnosis will make the
numerical methods ideal investigative tools. The PIs propose to systematically
study the snore-producing mechanisms of different age and gender groups, paying
particular attention to the underlying physics of biological fluid-structure
interaction and associated sound sources. This is to be accomplished through the
use of a combined modeling, simulation, analysis, validation, and optimization
approach. The findings from the proposed research could provide pre-surgical
guidelines for alleviating the apnea-causing factors by minimizing sound
production of the system. Findings from this work could be used by acoustic
experts and respiratory therapists for understanding the sound source production
and control from its biological origin. The theories developed from this
research will promote accurate diagnosis of snore sources and effective
treatment of patients with snoring or other respiratory disorders. The research
work will also be the central theme in a multi-level education program in which:
(1) PIs will continue to provide summer undergraduate research experience to
attract and retain engineering students from under-represented groups; (2) the
proposed methodology will be incorporated into the PIs' existing graduate level
course on bio-inspired flow and respiratory aerosol dynamics; and (3) an
educational lab curriculum in snore specialty will be developed to provide
multi-disciplinary training and research opportunities for high-school and
college students and to support biomedical and bio-inspired engineering programs
in both University of Virginia and Central Michigan University