* 1606591
* Nonlinear and geometric effects in quantum condensed matter systems
* MPS,DMR
* 12/01/2016,11/30/2020
* Alexander Abanov, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 11/30/2020
* USD 270,000.00

Nontechnical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports research and
education in the development of theoretical methods to investigate strongly
interacting quantum systems. Despite many recent advances, understanding these
systems and developing appropriate theoretical tools remains one of the biggest
challenges in condensed matter physics. Hydrodynamic methods are among few
available approaches to the theory of strongly interacting systems. As the name
implies, in certain situations it is feasible to view the complicated
interacting quantum system as a fluid, and condense all the generally
intractable details into virtual properties: density, velocity, viscosity, etc.
As a result, phenomena well known from the study of fluids, such as vortices,
shock waves, and turbulence, find analogs in systems of cold atoms or electrons.
The project will lead the development of hydrodynamic approaches for a variety
of condensed-matter and cold-atom systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part of the
excitement associated with the proposed line of study stems from the opportunity
to apply findings across different areas of research. The developed theoretical
tools could be used in diverse fields of physics: quantum many-body theory,
nonlinear dynamics, fluid dynamics, nuclear physics, cosmology, etc. The
obtained results will be verified by numerical simulations and, ultimately, by
comparison with experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will
provide a rich environment for the comprehensive training of graduate students
in modern theoretical methods. The PI continues to give lectures on the uses of
topology and geometry in condensed matter physics, and plans to prepare lecture
notes for publication. The PI further plans to develop the notes into a book on
topological aspects of condensed matter physics aimed at the broader community
of scientists. The PI is enthusiastic about teaching math and physics to K-12
students in the enrichment program for children at Stony Brook, and to gifted
high-school students in Russia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports research and education in the
development of theoretical methods to investigate strongly interacting quantum
systems. Finding efficient ways to work with strongly interacting quantum
systems is one of the most fundamental problems in condensed matter physics. It
has been the focus of both experimental and theoretical research for the last
three decades. To make progress in understanding systems with strong
interactions, non-perturbative methods are needed. One of these few methods is
the hydrodynamic approach, which provides a general framework for treating
interacting quantum and classical systems. The project will develop new
geometrical methods in condensed matter physics and look for applications to
quantum transport phenomena.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research is in
the general direction of "geometrizing condensed matter physics", and progresses
through the essential use of symmetries and effective descriptions. The PI
expects to expand the understanding of the role of geometry in quantum many-body
systems. The research uses geometric ideas and the hydrodynamic approach in
studies of fractional quantum Hall systems and more general condensed matter
systems. The proposed projects include thermal transport, and boundary-bulk
relations for quantum Hall systems, anomalous hydrodynamics of quantum and
classical systems, transport in chiral materials, and geometric aspects of out-
of-equilibrium physics. Geometric ideas will be applied to analyze specific
experiments on quantum transport.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part of the excitement
associated with the proposed line of study stems from the opportunity to apply
findings across different areas of research. The developed theoretical tools
could be used in diverse fields of physics: quantum many-body theory, nonlinear
dynamics, fluid dynamics, nuclear physics, cosmology, etc. The obtained results
will be verified by numerical simulations and, ultimately, by comparison with
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will provide a rich
environment for the comprehensive training of graduate students in modern
theoretical methods. The PI continues to give lectures on the uses of topology
and geometry in condensed matter physics, and plans to prepare lecture notes for
publication. The PI further plans to develop the notes into a book on
topological aspects of condensed matter physics aimed at the broader community
of scientists. The PI is enthusiastic about teaching math and physics to K-12
students in the enrichment program for children at Stony Brook, and to gifted
high-school students in Russia.