* 1606890
* Probing Nuclear Structure with Fast Neutrons
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Steven Yates, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 06/30/2020
* USD 880,000.00

Atomic nuclei are composed of protons and neutrons and exhibit a variety of
shapes. Some nuclei are spherical, while others have non-spherical shapes
(similar to an onion, a zucchini, or a pear); the shape of the nucleus is unique
for each isotope of each element. Because we cannot take an ordinary photograph
of the nucleus to investigate its shape and structure, other methods must be
employed. Through reactions at the University of Kentucky particle accelerator,
neutrons are produced and then scattered from the nucleus. In the process, the
nucleus gains and subsequently releases energy that can be detected. This
information is used to deduce the shape of the nucleus and to gain an
understanding of how the neutrons and protons in the nucleus contribute to its
properties. Graduates of this research program receive hands-on experience with
particle accelerator operation, nuclear science instrumentation, radiation
detection, and data acquisition systems, and emerge as well-trained nuclear
scientists who are capable of important contributions to our national needs.

The broad-based research program at the University of Kentucky Accelerator
Laboratory includes studies in several forefront areas: nuclear structure
relevant to neutrinoless double-beta decay; nuclei undergoing shape transitions;
deformed structures and shape coexistence; nuclear structure contributions in
support of searches for fundamental symmetries. In this research, the inelastic
scattering of fast neutrons is used to examine low-energy collective nuclear
excitations and to obtain information, e.g., level lifetimes and transition
multipole mixing ratios for non-yrast states, which is inaccessible with other
reactions. Detailed investigations of stable nuclei complement advances in
nuclear structure achieved by studying nuclei at extreme conditions of
temperature and angular momentum or in regions far from stability. Experimental
innovations in the laboratory, e.g., the development of capabilities for
measuring lifetimes in heavy nuclei, have played a key role in this research.
These advances, coupled with the unique capabilities of this laboratory for the
production of high-quality, time-bunched monoenergetic neutrons, probe important
questions and make meaningful contributions to our knowledge of nuclear
structure.