* 1606557
* XPS: EXPL: FP: Symmetric Queries as a Building Block for Efficient Parallel Query Evaluation
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2015,08/31/2020
* Yuqing Wu, Pomona College
* Standard Grant
* Wei Ding
* 08/31/2020
* USD 297,592.00

Today's applications frequently feature massive and heterogeneous data and
complicated computational requirements. There have been many efforts towards
efficient parallel query processing and optimization. However, the full
potential of parallelism has not been realized by existing techniques and
frameworks in scaling to massive datasets, especially for applications that
inherently demand recursive data accesses.

The project offers a theoretical methodology for tackling the problem of
parallel query evaluation on massive data. The PI conjectures that to maximize
parallelizability of generic queries, e.g., queries that are used frequently in
analytical and transactional applications, one needs to examine queries that are
inherently parallelizable as the basic unit of study. She identifies symmetric
queries as a set of queries that are potentially highly parallelizable and will
use such queries as a stepping stone to study parallelizable query languages and
leverage the findings to design techniques for efficient evaluation of generic
queries. In particular, the project focuses on three separate, yet highly
related tasks: (1) design and study a set of query languages whose queries are
symmetric, investigate the properties of these languages, and propose and prove
theoretical bounds on the computational complexity of the languages, in terms of
scaling and data skew; (2) investigate and propose data structures and
algorithms for efficiently evaluating queries of these languages in a parallel
manner; and (3) propose strategies including query rewrite and optimization
techniques for efficient evaluation of arbitrary queries, based on the new data
structures and algorithms that result from (2).

During the exploratory phase of this project, the PI is conducting research
activities in key areas in all three aforementioned topics. These will build the
theoretical foundation, form strong collaborations with experts in related
areas, and lay the groundwork for an effort suitable for a full-size XPS
project. The research result of this project will be beneficial to both the
database and the parallel computing communities as a new way to approach the
problem of integrating the techniques of each.

The research methodology and algorithms developed is to be integrated into the
undergraduate- and graduate-level database courses the PI teaches, as course
materials and topics for course projects. Graduate students are supported by the
project as research assistants. The PI works with various initiatives to recruit
and encourage undergraduate students to participate in research activities.