* 1606558
* Collaborative Research: RUI: Manipulation of Arylene Ethynylene Structures and Properties via Coordination, Halogen Bonding and Hydrogen Bonding
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2019
* Nathan Bowling, University of Wisconsin-Stevens Point
* Standard Grant
* Lin He
* 07/31/2019
* USD 261,870.00

The Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program of the NSF Division
of Chemistry supports this project to design and synthesize new carbon-based
molecules for potential use in flexible, high performance electronic devices.
The study of these molecules may lead to a better understanding of how to design
desirable properties as well as how these materials function. For example, the
ability to control molecular conformations in conjugated monomers, oligomers,
and polymers is not only important for manipulating their electronic properties,
but also for optimization of the bulk electronic properties of a material. While
free rotation within a material can lead to a variety of unpredictable, and
perhaps undesirable, molecular packing arrangements, strategies for enforcing
planarity can provide increased order and enhanced electronic properties.
Arylene ethynylenes that are conformationally constrained are, therefore,
important targets in the development of photovoltaic, thin-film transistor and
light emitting devices. Similarly, with their rigidity and predictable
geometries, arylene ethynylene structures can serve as hosts for guests of
specific sizes and shapes. Complete understanding and optimization of the
geometric parameters of these systems may lead to new sensing capabilities.
Undergraduates responsible for synthesizing and characterizing these novel
compounds gain hands-on experience in the laboratory, preparing them for careers
in chemical industry or additional study in graduate programs. This project is
conducted on two different campuses, University of Wisconsin-Stevens Point and
Missouri State University. The participation of professors from these campuses
in meaningful research enhances the education of not only the students working
directly on the research projects, but also students who benefit from the
transfer of knowledge and skills in the classroom.

The scientific objective of this project is to design and prepare novel arylene
ethynylene structures with features that allow molecular level control over
electronic properties, crystal design, and host-guest activity. Specifically,
incorporation of pyridinyl groups within conjugated systems offers an
opportunity for structural control via halogen bonding, hydrogen bonding, and
transition metal coordination. These interactions provide avenues for the
generation of novel liquid crystals, the enhanced effective conjugation of
unsaturated backbones, and highly specific host-guest pairing.