* 1606765
* GOALI:A Study of Point Defects in Thick, Free-Standing Acceptor-Doped GaN
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2021
* Mary Ellen Zvanut, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* James H. Edgar
* 08/31/2021
* USD 402,012.00

Nontechnical description: Semiconductors are a class of materials that has
enabled the development of most modern electronics including tablets, cell
phones, and medical diagnostic equipment. Gallium nitride, the semiconductor
studied in this project, was the focus of the 2014 Nobel Prize in Physics
because its special material properties made possible the energy efficient LED
lighting now familiar to many homeowners. Surprisingly, material and structural
imperfections are a necessary part of the successful application of this
semiconductor. For this reason, the present research project investigates the
properties of a certain class of imperfections that act as traps for electrons.
Both fundamental and practical information are determined from the electronic
and structural studies. In addition to the basic educational benefits afforded
students working on this technologically significant issue, students gain first-
hand knowledge and learn about potential advances from industrial personnel who
actively grow the materials and devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
description: The project is designed to better understand the acceptor
impurities in GaN by microscopically investigating their structure and charge
state. The specific focus is electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) measurements
of mm-thick free-standing crystals of GaN doped with technologically important
acceptors such as magnesium and carbon. Until recently, EPR of GaN has been
hampered by the limited total number of defects and non-uniform strain inherent
to thin films. The availability of thick free-standing GaN crystals increases
the number of detectable centers and minimizes strain, thus enabling the study
of characteristics uniquely addressed by EPR, such as charge state and local
structure. In addition, the potential influence of the defects on device
properties is investigated with the help of a GOALI partner, Kyma Tech. The
study provides previously unavailable fundamental properties such as defect
symmetry, and the determination of practical information such as association of
a specific defect with an energy level. Overall, the results enhance the
understanding of the role of point defects in both bulk and thin film acceptor-
doped GaN.