* 1606814
* Systems far from equilibrium: relaxation processes and steady-state properties
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2021
* Michel Pleimling, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 05/31/2021
* USD 290,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research and
education toward developing a theory of systems far from the unchanging and
familiar state of equilibrium. Nonequilibrium phenomena are omnipresent and
range from weather patterns to life itself. For systems that are out of
equilibrium two complementary aspects, both equally relevant, can be
distinguished. These are stationary states, wherein the system will remain if
not pushed from the outside, and the relaxation towards these stationary states.
Gaining a better understanding of both the stationary properties and the
relaxation processes are needed in order to fully understand the world around
us, and to develop new ways to use these processes for tailoring the properties
of various systems of interest, ranging from novel materials to biological
systems and ecosystems. &lt;br/&gt;The study of systems far from equilibrium
poses many challenges, both on the fundamental and on the practical level.
Whereas there is a well-established theoretical framework for equilibrium
systems, a similar comprehensive framework for non-equilibrium systems and
processes remains elusive. This project aims at exploiting a variety of
analytical and numerical techniques to advance understanding of non-equilibrium
phenomena. The project covers both fundamental and applied aspects. One
important activity focuses on the investigation of the stability of food webs to
various perturbations, as for example species extinction, species migration or
seasonal changes. Related to this is the question of ecomanagement and the
targeted intervention in predator-prey systems in order to achieve specific
goals, as for example maintaining biodiversity or removing a detrimental
species. Another activity investigates the relaxation properties in model
systems used to describe synchronization phenomena in biology. This
investigation will allow to explore possible relationships between physical and
biological aging.&lt;br/&gt;The project is designed so that both undergraduate
and graduate students can learn and contribute in a substantial and meaningful
way. This training through research approach allows to involve students at every
level in cutting-edge research
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award
supports theoretical research and education toward developing a theory of
systems far from equilibrium. Non-equilibrium processes in nature and in human
activities, such as making and processing materials, abound, and a unifying
theoretical description of non-equilibrium interacting many-body systems remains
elusive. The study of specific model systems can lead to progress in
understanding systems far from equilibrium through revealing universal
properties, using the large toolbox of numerical and analytical methods provided
by statistical physics. The PI will combine advanced analytical and numerical
techniques to address fundamental questions and potential applications of
systems far from equilibrium through three different research thrusts. The first
research thrust focuses on directed spin models that are prototypical examples
of system that evolve to the equilibrium Boltzmann-Gibbs distribution even
though detailed balance is violated due to the irreversibility of the dynamics.
Preliminary results for the two-dimensional directed Ising model show that in
the low temperature phase directedness yields a remarkable acceleration of the
dynamics, manifested by a change in the value of the dynamical exponent. The
research on directed spin models, addresses both fundamental aspects, such as
change in dynamic properties due to irreversibility, and applied aspects, such
as algorithmic tools to accelerate convergence to equilibrium. New insights into
the properties of systems that violate detailed balance but fulfill the weaker
condition of global balance are expected to result. For some classes of systems,
directed models have the potential to become an algorithmic tool to accelerate
convergence to equilibrium, which could have impact on many disciplines. The
second research thrust proposes to investigate relaxation processes and the
responses to perturbations in many-species systems. Food webs, discussed in the
context of population dynamics, allow to gain insights into generic issues
related to biodiversity and species extinction. Many of these food webs exhibit
remarkable space-time patterns in a spatial setting that warrant an in-depth
characterization. The PI plans (1) to study the stability of an ecological
system, more specifically its response to perturbations, both small and large,
and how it relaxes to the steady state, and (2) to investigate the control of an
ecology, for example in order to assure biodiversity and avoid species
extinction. Optimal control theory will be exploited as an analytical tool for
understanding targeted interventions in predator-prey systems. This study is
expected to yield valuable insights into the ecomanagement of non-trivial food
webs. The third research thrust is devoted to the study of physical aging in
coupled classical rotators. Coupled classical rotators and related systems
present a class of systems with dynamic properties reminiscent of spin glasses.
The PI will study the aging properties of these systems, investigate their
responses to perturbations, and explore the existence of memory and rejuvenation
effects. This study of coupled oscillators and related systems, with known
biological applications, will provide an opportunity to explore possible
relationships between physical and biological aging.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Due to
the ubiquity of non-equilibrium processes in nature, this research project may
have impact beyond the boundaries of condensed matter physics. Gaining a better
understanding of transient and steady-state properties in systems amenable to an
in-depth investigation using the large toolbox of statistical physics should
contribute to the development of a more general theory that describes systems
far from equilibrium. This project is designed so that both undergraduate and
graduate students can learn and contribute in a substantial and meaningful way.
This training through research approach allows to involve students at every
level in cutting-edge research projects.