* 1606181
* Label-free, chemiresistive, paper microfluidic nanobiosensor array for multiplexed detection
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Ashok Mulchandani, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 06/30/2020
* USD 406,484.00

PI: Tsutsui, Hideaki&lt;br/&gt;Proposal No: 1606181 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project proposes to develop a paper-based molecular sensing platform. The
primary advantages are its low cost and ease of use. The proposed work is
expected to broadly expand the capability and applications of paper-based
sensors for a variety of fields, such as medical, agricultural, and
environmental testing and
diagnosis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Paper-based microfluidic
devices have recently emerged as promising sensing platforms for serving the
diagnostic needs in many sectors of society. Advantages of paper-based
microfluidic sensors include fast detection, ease of fabrication and use,
minimal instrument requirements, lightweight, portability, and low cost.
However, its widespread use beyond research laboratories has been hampered
because of a lack of highly sensitive detection methods that can be easily
implemented on a paper substrate. The overall goal of this project is to develop
a label-free, highly sensitive, chemiresistive nanosensor platform. This goal
will be achieved through a series of research tasks: 1) development of an
ultrasensitive carbon nanotube chemiresistive biosensor on paper; 2) development
of an effective fluid handling technology; and 3) integration and demonstration
of label-free, multiplexed detection of cardiac biomarkers as model antigens.
Intellectual merits include a highly sensitive sensing element made of
semiconducting single-walled carbon nanotubes and technological innovations of
microfluidic transport, which collectively enable the proposed nanosensor.
Broader impact of the research program is expansion of the capability and
applications of the paper-based microfluidic-facilitated biosensors. In
particular, the proposed label-free chemiresistive biosensor array is expected
to be highly sensitive, facile, and economical. It is also expected to be
readily applicable to the multiplexed detection of analytes in a variety of
complex fluid matrices such as food, water, plants, and body fluids. In
conjunction with research activities, this project will develop and integrate
several outreach and educational activities, including new curricula development
on paper-based microfluidic biosensors, research training of both undergraduate
and graduate students, particularly underrepresented minorities and women, and
outreach efforts to engage K-12 teachers and students of the Inland Empire
region of California.