* 1606014
* The Differences in Onset Times of Hemispherically Conjugate Auroral Stations
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* James Weygand, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 08/31/2018
* USD 145,505.00

This is a one-year pilot study of a project classified as "high risk - high
reward". The project will study hemispheric differences in the onset times of
individual substorms and other auroral events observed simultaneously in the
northern and southern auroral regions. Magnetic substorms (as they are called)
reshape the Earth's magnetotail far out in Geospace. This process explosively
releases energy powering an immediate intensification of currents and energetic
charge particle precipitation closer to Earth in the ionosphere at the foot
points of the affected field lines, and an intensification of auroral emissions.
The investigation will take advantage of recently completed pairings of
magnetometer stations located at the two Earthward ends of magnetic field lines
that thread through the Earth's magnetotail where substorms are initiated.
Differences in timing as well as the sequence of auroral features that precede
the onset in each hemisphere will provide new information about, and place
additional constraints on, controversial and still intensely debated theories
about the underlying physical process(es) responsible for these extremely
dynamic events. Significant closure risk is introduced in this project (which
has never before been attempted) by the need to separate out the difference in
timing due to the substorm process itself in the magnetosphere from other
sources of timing offsets, for example, due to slight inter-hemispheric
differences in the propagation path of a substorm onset signature into the
magnetometer field of view. Whether these additional sources of timing
differences can be removed using auroral images or other information, and the
true substorm-related timing differences extracted, is the primary focus of this
pilot study. The high reward of this technique, if proven feasible, is a new
view into a long standing Geospace puzzle that continues to hinder progress in
understanding severe space weather in the Earth's vicinity. Progress is
important because in the hazardous radiation environment in near-Earth space,
astronauts carry human enterprises into space and satellites that are key to
important societal infrastructures orbit. The intense abrupt changes in the
magnetic field associated with these explosive events induce currents in the
solid Earth threatening long-term damage and shorter-term (potentially
dangerous) disruptions in the operation of electric power grids. This pilot
study will provide an educational experience to an undergraduate and a graduate
student, contributing to the development of the future scientific workforce.

The project is a statistical study that aims to identify significant difference
between the hemispheres in the onset time for individual substorms as measured
by signatures of the onset in ground-based magnetometers. Given this
information, it may be possible to determine which of two prominent substorm
models are more consistent with the timing observations. The second phase of the
project will look to identify causes of the differences by examining the
orientation of the interplanetary magnetic field, solar wind conditions, and the
Universal Time during the substorm onset. A smaller study will compare onset
differences with those observed in a pair of conjugate all-sky imagers, when
available.