* 1606406
* EFRI-BioFlex: A Flexible Glucose Fuel Cell
* ENG,EFMA
* 11/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Rahul Sarpeshkar, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 08/31/2018
* USD 957,251.00

This proposal attempts to create a flexible glucose fuel cell and associated
ultra-low-power bioelectronics for self-powered brain implants of the future.
The flexible glucose fuel cell enables a 20x increase in volumetric density with
320 uW of power available from a biocompatible 1cm (d) x 4 cm (l) device, which
is implanted in the subarachnoid spaces of the brain and spinal cord. Thus,
fully implantable brain implants for paralysis with novel state-of-the-art
ultra-low-power electronics for neural recording, stimulation, decoding, and
wireless communication, which consume 95 uW in total, can be powered with a
safety factor of 3x that allows for fuel-cell output variation over time. This
proposal attempts to test a fully functional brain-implant system in a smaller
geometry 3 mm (d) x 3mm (l) device in a rat to ensure chronic (&gt; 6 months)
long-term biocompatibility and performance that meets our power budget. The use
of the cerebrospinal fluid as a power source, which has a 200x lower protein
count, and almost million-fold lower cell count, and only a 2x lower glucose
content, provides a novel site for implantation significantly different from
prior work in blood plasma or interstitial fluid. This novel intended site of
implantation along with our use of materials and techniques that have been
proven to increase biocompatibility, such as Nafion encapsulation, enhance
longevity. The flexible glucose fuel cell will be fabricated using well-known
semiconductor fabrication techniques on a silicon wafer enabling manufacturing
scalability and ease of integration with electronics on the same wafer.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: &lt;br/&gt;This work combines
innovations and knowledge from several disciplines to potentially create a
paradigm-changing capability in the field of medical implants: 1) Prior enzyme-
based glucose fuel cells have been plagued by enzyme-degradation issues that
have led them to be inefficient after a few short-term months. Abiotic fuel
cells are more suited for long-term chronic operation but have relatively low
power outputs. The creation of an abiotic flexible glucose fuel cell increases
the volumetric density of available power by more than an order of magnitude
while preserving the benefits of long-term abiotic operation. 2) The use of
ultra-low-power bioelectronics that achieves state-of-the-art performance in all
aspects of a brain-implant system enables miniature glucose fuel cells to meet
the power budget needed for intended medical applications with even a safety
factor of 3x and to fit within tightly constrained body spaces. 3) The use of
standard semiconductor fabrication techniques enables entire flexible medical
implants with their own power source and electronics to be cheaply fabricated in
a rolled-up geometry without sacrificing performance as in systems made with
flexible organic electronics. 4) The glucose-rich cerebrospinal fluid is highly
abiotic (free of cells) and highly protein free making it an ideal source for
providing fuel while not causing electrode bio-fouling. This work could enable
glucose fuel cells to become practical after four decades of
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:&lt;br/&gt;Glucose fuel cells have
use in the treatments of cardiac arrhythmia, diabetes, epilepsy, deep brain
disorders, and cancer tumor monitoring. Rolled-up ?sugar powered batteries? may
be used in non-invasive wireless medical monitoring or in wearable and flexible
electronic systems. The flexible glucose fuel cell can help solve a national
challenge for non-toxic (unlike batteries), renewable, carbon-neutral, energy
sources that are practical. The PI plans to introduce an in-vitro glucose-fuel-
cell powered ECG as a project in his course in bioelectronics at MIT that has
been taught for over 10 years at MIT The Research Team further plans to develop
a module that will use microfluidic setup to monitor output protein
concentrations in cells at the fuel-cell output voltages and introduce the
platform to the do-it-yourself community at MIT through programs such as
Lifelong Kindergarten and ?Science Saturday? at Lincoln Lab. The PI plans to
recruit under-represented students from his active participation in the
admissions programs of the Computational and Systems Biology, Biophysics,
Synthetic Biology, and Bioelectrical endeavors at MIT. The investigators will
participate in SEED (Saturday Engineering Enrichment and Discovery) Academy,
which enrolls students from Boston, Cambridge, and Lawrence Public Schools; they
will also work closely with the Society of Women Engineers (SWE) to attract
promising young women into biomedical and bioengineering research; and, they
will work actively with the MIT Summer Research Program (MSRP), which has
traditionally included underrepresented students into research programs. Thus
the proposal will have broad technical impact, broad educational impact, and
broaden societal participation.