* 1606764
* P2C2: Hydroclimatic response of the tropical Pacific to past changes in mean state: Observations and synthesis
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2019
* Michael Evans, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 07/31/2019
* USD 140,988.00

How will El Ni単o events change as the climate changes? There is currently no
consensus on the answer to this question from climate change projections for the
21st century. Yet even small changes in El Ni単o event strength, duration or
frequency have significant effects, both in the US and internationally, on water
resources, wildfires, agriculture and ecosystems. This project will contribute
new observations and analysis of El Ni単o/Southern Oscillation (ENSO) activity
during two past time intervals for which there are very few data from the
tropical Pacific, yet for which the global climate is thought to have been
relatively warm and relatively cold, respectively. Results will be compared to
climate simulations for the same periods, so that we can better understand if,
how and why global climate change can cause changes in El Ni単o activity. The
project will also provide mentored, international, collaborative, and
multidisciplinary training for a PhD student and an undergraduate researcher,
including educational, outreach and dissemination activities. It will contribute
inputs for modeling the interactions between people, fisheries and climate in a
location and region with a rich archaeological history of pre-modern settlement,
voyaging and exploration. These studies, which are beyond the scope of this
project, may ultimately help us understand how societies have and may adapt to
past and future climate change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, paired oxygen
isotope and Sr/Ca data series will be developed from existing and diagenetically
screened coral samples dating to the Little Ice Age (LIA) and Medieval Climate
Anomaly (MCA) time windows from Aitutaki, southern Cook Islands (18.85S,
159.79W). Preliminary analysis suggests interannual variations in present day
(PD) coral oxygen isotopic composition from the region primarily reflect sea
surface salinity (SSS) variability resulting from changes in the position and
strength of the South Pacific Convergence Zone associated with ENSO activity. In
conjunction with other hydroclimatic and oceanographic paleoclimate data
available for these time windows and the PD, the research team will test whether
there were differences in interannual event amplitude and recurrence interval in
the LIA and MCA relative to the PD. The team will compare the results to those
obtained from similarly sampled, PMIP3-compliant physical climate simulations
with both complete and single external radiative forcings. Comparison of
observations and simulations, within the context of their uncertainties, will be
used to assess if and the extent to which the observed hydroclimatic response is
forced or unforced, and by what mechanisms.