* 1606806
* The impact of teachers' nonverbal behaviors on children's intergroup attitudes
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Kristin Pauker, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 08/31/2018
* USD 198,088.00

The Directorate of Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences offers postdoctoral
research fellowships to provide opportunities for recent doctoral graduates to
obtain additional training, to gain research experience under the sponsorship of
established scientists, and to broaden their scientific horizons beyond their
undergraduate and graduate training. Postdoctoral fellowships are further
designed to assist new scientists to direct their research efforts across
traditional disciplinary lines and to avail themselves of unique research
resources, sites, and facilities, including at foreign locations. This
postdoctoral fellowship award supports a rising scholar investigating how and
why children come to endorse negative stereotypes for members of certain racial
groups in early elementary school, and in particular, the role of teacher
nonverbal behaviors in contributing to children's racial biases. Racial
achievement gaps persist across the United States despite years of education
research, hundreds of millions of dollars in federal programming, and countless
teacher training programs. Early elementary school, when achievement gaps first
emerge, is also the time when majority children begin to show racial bias, and
when minority children are able to detect discrimination related to their
membership in a particular social group. Therefore, school settings may play a
key role in guiding children's racial biases. The goal of this research project
is to examine one aspect of school settings that might contribute to children's
early race biases: differences in teacher nonverbal behaviors toward members of
different racial groups. This research will broaden the participation of
underrepresented groups in the sciences through including undergraduate research
assistants from a variety of backgrounds in the research design, data
collection, and analysis of this project, and through partnering with local
educators and school programs to collect data and disseminate findings.
Additionally, this research takes place in the community surrounding the
University of Hawaii. This context provides a unique and understudied setting to
analyze the emergence of children's racial bias in school because of the high
level of diversity in most elementary classrooms, and the prevalence of racial
group stereotypes and achievement gaps that exist in the community. Research on
children's racial attitudes in this context is critical, not only to gain a
better understanding of the racial tensions that exist in this specific
community, but also to illuminate the processes that underlie the emergence of
children's racial bias more broadly. Finally, by examining one possible source
of children's early racial biases, this work could aid in the development of
interventions designed to reduce or prevent children's biases when they first
emerge and ultimately promote the academic success of students from stigmatized
groups.

Although children begin to show racial bias and endorse racial stereotypes
around the age of school entry the role of school settings in contributing to
the emergence of these attitudes has gone largely untested. Previous research
suggests that children are adept at using nonverbal information to make
judgments about unfamiliar individuals and that nonverbal behaviors can guide
children's attitudes for individuals from different racial groups. Moreover,
researchers in education have found that teachers often differ in their
nonverbal behaviors toward children from different racial groups. This research
is the first to examine whether children might use teacher nonverbal behaviors
to guide their racial attitudes. Study 1 determines whether young children use
differential teacher treatment to guide their inferences about children from
different groups using a novel groups design. Study 2 analyzes teacher behaviors
toward students from different racial groups in relation to teachers' implicit
bias and classroom diversity. Study 3 tests whether viewing positive teacher
behaviors toward students from negatively stereotyped groups results in a
reduction in children's racial biases. This research allows for a more complete
understanding of the mechanisms that drive children's early racial biases and
lays the groundwork for educational interventions designed to reduce or prevent
these biases when they first emerge.