* 1606659
* Fundamental Devices in 2-D TMD Semiconductors
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2016,12/31/2021
* Ji Ung Lee, SUNY Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Prem Chahal
* 12/31/2021
* USD 388,000.00

Transistor scaling, best embodied in Moore's law, has enabled the unprecedented
advancement in computing technologies over the past quarter century. Scaling,
however, is expected to slow down significantly due to fundamental limitations.
In response, new materials are sought that can continue the historical rate of
scaling. Transition metal dichalcogenide semiconductors are promising new
channel materials because they are naturally thin. Thinning of the channel is
one of the most important recent developments in the manufacturing of advanced
semiconductor devices that help to achieve better electrostatic control. To that
end, the dichalcogenide systems are expected to provide the thinnest
semiconducting channel material, surpassing the limit that can be achieved in
bulk semiconductors. In the proposed research, students and researchers will
fabricate devices in the dichalcogenide systems. The principal investigator will
train both graduate, undergraduate, and high school students, particularly those
underrepresented in science, to fabricate and characterize semiconductor
devices. These devices will be used as hands-on learning tools in the courses
offered at the university. Also, the principal investigator will work with at-
risk urban youth from Albany, Troy, Schenectady, and Newburgh to educate them on
the growing opportunities in the regional semiconductor industry. The principal
investigator will also work with staff to host two one-day summer workshops for
secondary school teachers on classroom integration of nanoelectronics modules
developed under the proposed middle school/high school outreach efforts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New materials and device concepts are needed to continue
the historical increase in functionality of computing devices. In the proposed
research, a reconfigurable device will be developed that can morph into the
three most fundamental devices. These devices are p-n diode, metal-oxide-
semiconductor field-effect transistor, and bipolar junction transistor. Using
these devices, the principal investigator will demonstrate basic logic functions
with fewer transistors. These research thrusts are possible in the recently
discovered transition metal dichalcogenide semiconductors because they are
naturally thin, which is particularly suited for implementing the gating
technique pioneered by the group. Because a single device can accomplish all
three device functions, the proposed research can uniquely provide fundamental
linkages between material properties and device performance that would be
difficult to attain had the devices were fabricated individually. This research
will use the state-of-the-art 300mm fabrication facility located at the
university to fabricate highly scaled devices. It will train students on the
challenges of device integration and to the opportunities such an advanced
fabrication facility provides. At the fundamental level, this research will
provide a unique insight into how the three devices are intimately linked. These
devices can achieve rectification, switching, and current amplification,
respectively. This research will measure the key figure-of-merit of each device
and provide linkages to material properties, including the interface trap
states. With reduced dimensions, many-body effects become important. Although
many-body effects are not needed to understand the properties of modern
transistors, their role will become significant as transistors continue to
shrink. The proposed research will help to inform the semiconductor
manufacturers to the importance of many-body effects by measuring the excitonic
properties and the band gap, which can renormalize when the semiconductor is
doped. The results of this research will be disseminated to the growing number
of semiconductor companies that are co-located at the university.