* 1606057
* GOALI: INFEWS N/P/H2O: Real-Time and Low-Cost Monitoring of Orthophosphate Ions Using Novel Graphene-Based Transistor Sensors
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2021
* Guanglong Tian, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Continuing Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 08/31/2021
* USD 330,000.00

1606057&lt;br/&gt;Chen&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Phosphorus is one of the macro
nutrients necessary for the growth of plants and animals. In instances where
phosphorus is a growth-limiting nutrient, for example in some natural surface
waters, the discharge of raw or treated wastewater, agricultural drainage, or
certain industrial wastes may stimulate the growth of photosynthetic aquatic
micro- and macro-organisms in large quantities. This project focuses on
developing a low-cost, ultrasensitive, and real-time water sensor for continuous
monitoring of phosphate in agriculture runoff, wastewater, and surface water.
The ability to provide field-deployable, inexpensive, and environmentally- and
energetically-sustainable sensors for real-time application and monitoring of
phosphorus-containing species while reducing the amount of these species in
waste or run-off streams would benefit food production, benefit water quality,
and result in significantly less energy consumption. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project benefits from major innovations in a sensing platform in the PI's
laboratory. The superior sensing performance could be directly used for low-
concentration and real-time monitoring of phosphates in water and the new and
reliable method to differentiate phosphates through coupling between target ions
and chemical probes functionalized on the reduced graphene oxide surfaces. The
proposed research is transformative since the new sensing platform combines the
outstanding properties of reduced graphene oxide (e.g., low cost, large specific
surface area, and high electronic sensitivity) with reliable probe
immobilization on the reduced graphene oxide surface. Based on preliminary
results, the novel phosphate ion sensor had a detection time on the order of
seconds and a lower detection limit of 0.01 mg/L. Therefore, this high
sensitivity platform offers a simpler and faster route to detecting phosphates,
as well as significantly lower cost, as compared with existing methods.
Experiments will be carried out to optimize the technical performance of the
sensor in terms of sensitivity, while a long-term deployment in a water system
will be conducted. Expected outcomes of the project include: (1) prototypes of
real-time and ultrasensitive sensors to continuously monitor phosphate in
various water systems; (2) field deployment and validation data of the sensors
in agriculture runoff, wastewater, and surface water systems; and, (3)
entrepreneurship training courses/activities for students and faculty and
internship opportunities for students. A sensor innovation platform will be
created in Milwaukee's Global Water Center to help students learn about the
innovation and technology transfer process. The proposed education plan features
proactive efforts to improve entrepreneurial engineering education; to attract
underrepresented students into STEM fields; extensive integration of research
and education; and, broad dissemination of water sensor research and educational
findings.