* 1606396
* Haptic-Based Learning Experiences as Cognitive Mediators for Conceptual Understanding and Representational Fluency in Engineering Education
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/2016,12/31/2020
* Ida Ngambeki, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Dana L. Denick
* 12/31/2020
* USD 325,081.00

Haptic-Based Learning Experiences as Cognitive Mediators for Conceptual
Understanding and Representational Fluency in Engineering
Education&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Statics is a backbone course for several
engineering disciplines, a direct pre-requisite for dynamics and mechanics of
materials, and a pivotal player in engineering structural design. Researchers
have identified Statics as a major impediment for students to succeed in follow-
on core courses (therefore affecting retention in engineering) as well as on
practical design capstone courses. It is known that students enter Statics with
misconceptions that are not corrected through traditional instruction. This
project investigates the use of feedback devices, known as haptics, in which
students can manipulate a computer-generated structure and feel the forces that
are generated. It is hypothesized that the use of the haptic device will provide
students specific feedback to help them develop a better conceptual
understanding of Statics. This project targets a foundational topic in
engineering education known to significantly affect both future performance and
retention. The results of this research are broadly relevant to institutions and
their students, as essentially all students in mechanical, civil, aerospace, and
biomedical disciplines take Statics. Similarly, the products of this research
inform learning interventions in related concepts in science and engineering
(e.g., buoyancy, electricity and magnetism, and dynamics, among
others).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research advances understanding of haptic-
mediated learning by exploring specific affordances and constraints of visuo-
haptic simulations in a laboratory experiment emphasizing statics
misconceptions. Visuo-haptic simulation using force-feedback devices for
education is timely, yet understudied. This research significantly extends the
community's understanding of the affordances and constraints of using haptic
devices for teaching difficult concepts. Following a design-based research
approach, this project develops new knowledge about how haptic-based learning
experiences can mediate conceptual understanding and representational competence
of difficult concepts in statics. It investigates how we can best use touch
technologies to help students connect system behaviors in terms of governing
forces and their different representational forms. This proposal focuses on the
following specific research questions (RQs): &lt;br/&gt;1. To what extent do
haptic-based learning experiences improve student conceptual understanding and
representational fluency? Working hypothesis: the force feedback of haptic
devices reinforces representations (mathematical, visual) of mechanics systems
and improves conceptual understanding. &lt;br/&gt;2. How do the short-term,
long-term, and transfer learning gains between visual-only-enhanced, physical
manipulative-enhanced, and haptic-enhanced learning activities compare? Working
hypothesis: students experience greater learning gains when instruction includes
haptic devices. &lt;br/&gt;3. What are the differences in students' explanations
and representations of experienced phenomena before and after using the haptic-
based learning experiences? Working hypothesis: haptic devices and learning
experiences provide a new platform on which students can build understanding,
and provide a new vocabulary for articulating device structure, function, and
performance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The newly derived knowledge will inform our
understanding about how students "learn by touch" as well as our understanding
of the interplay between conceptual understanding and representational
competence. Our long-term goal is to identify the extent to which interacting
with haptic-based learning experiences (HABLE) mediates students' conceptual
understanding and representational fluency of difficult concepts in statics.