* 1606005
* Quantitative Measurements and Modeling in Partially-Premixed Cellular Tubular Flames
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2016,09/30/2021
* Robert Pitz, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 09/30/2021
* USD 339,000.00

1606005 - Pitz&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To design efficient and clean combustors,
simplified chemical kinetic and molecular transport models are needed for
accurate and efficient prediction of combustion used for heating, land and air
propulsion. Cellular tubular flames mimic practical flames and are an efficient
platform to predict and experimentally validate simplified combustion models.
The flame cells are arrayed in a cylindrically symmetric geometry that can be
mathematically simplified and predicted on a desktop computer. The symmetrical
flame cell pattern can be measured quickly in the laboratory with advanced laser
methods to assess predictions using the simplified combustion models. Validated
simplified chemical kinetic and molecular transport models can then be used in
computer codes to accurately predict combustion and pollution emission in
practical car engines, house furnaces and aircraft jet engines. Success of this
research will lead to cleaner and more efficient combustion in the U.S. to help
the economy and the environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will study
cellular tubular flames with quantitative measurements and modeling in order to
evaluate simplified models of molecular transport and chemical kinetics. The
detailed two-dimensional (2D) simulation will be validated with laser imaging
and measurements of major species concentration by Raman scattering and radial
species (OH, H, O) by laser-induced fluorescence (LIF) in cellular flames that
are premixed, non-premixed and partially premixed. The H and O atom
concentrations are measured with a femtosecond (fs) laser to avoid interference
from laser photolysis that plagued earlier efforts. With the validated
computationally efficient 2D tubular flame models, simplified models of
molecular transport (e.g., mixture-averaged transport and approximate Soret
effect models) and reduced species chemical kinetic mechanisms can be developed
for more accurate turbulent combustion models burning hydrogen, methane and
propane. Once the detailed 2D model is validated, simplified transport and
chemical kinetic mechanisms will be developed and/or evaluated for use in
turbulent combustion modeling. Quantitative 2D models verified by multi-scalar
measurements of cellular structures will provide data for development of
simplified models of hydrogen and hydrocarbon flames used for practical
combustors in heating, energy production and propulsion. Development of H and O
atom quantitative measurements with femtosecond lasers will lead to adoption of
the fs-LIF method by other research groups in the world. Graduate students and
undergraduate students will be involved in research with an emphasis in
recruiting underrepresented minorities. Students will present their results at
research conferences. Students will collaborate with the Air Force Research
Laboratory/Spectral Energies in Dayton, Ohio on femto-second laser measurement
giving them a broad exposure to the latest computer simulation and laser
diagnostic facilities.