* 1606903
* Course-Based Undergraduate Research for All: Preparing the Future STEM Workforce
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2021
* Jennifer Broatch, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 08/31/2021
* USD 296,751.00

Opportunities to conduct authentic research improve students' understanding of
science and promote their self-identification as scientists. Course-Based
Undergraduate Research Experiences (CUREs) allow many more students to be
exposed to authentic research than the traditional mentor-mentee,
apprenticeship-style approach to undergraduate research. The investigators will
develop CUREs in which all STEM majors in the School of Mathematical and Natural
Sciences at the West campus of Arizona State University (ASU) will enroll. The
courses will focus on research questions, and in them the students will become
scientists -- generating hypotheses, developing protocols, performing
experiments, generating data, and analyzing the results. By designing
interdisciplinary CURE modules, testing them at ASU West, and disseminating them
widely, the project will enhance an evidence-based pedagogical approach that
will improve the education of the future STEM
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CUREs to be developed will focus on topics
in food science, remediation, cell biology, and population dynamics. Tentative
module titles include "Native Bees of Arizona: Bee Species Diversity and
Relative Abundance," "Phytotoxicity and Phytoremediation of Mine Site Soils,"
and "Analysis of Ethanol Production and Flocculation in Brewer's Yeast." All of
the modules will be geared toward data generation, analysis, and publication and
will advance the understanding of their research topics. The investigators will
develop pedagogical methodology that integrates all aspects of the scientific
method -- namely, hypothesis generation, experimental execution, and data
analysis -- and will analyze the ability of the CUREs to increase students'
interest, abilities, and retention in science. The methodology will incorporate
a "common course outline," which will standardize the teaching of common
components of scientific inquiry and will be flexible enough to be applied to
diverse research topics. To encourage the use of CUREs by faculty at other
institutions, the investigators will sponsor workshops on the nature of CUREs in
general, their particular CURE model and modules, and assessment techniques.