* 1606296
* Study of In-Scale/Out-Of-Scale Energetics/Scale Interactions for the Understanding of a Mechanism for the MJO using DYNAMO Data Sets
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2020
* Ruby Krishnamurti, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 04/30/2020
* USD 280,921.00

This project aims at understanding the mechanisms that drive an important
tropical mode of intraseasonal variability called the Madden Julian Oscillation
(MJO). The main observational data used for this study are datasets from ships,
radar and satellites collected during the 2011-2012 interagency field campaign,
Dynamics of the Madden-Julian Oscillation (DYNAMO). The following question on
scale interactions will be addressed: How do cloud systems whose scale is of the
order of a few kilometers and a life time of less than one day interact with the
MJO whose scales are 10,000 km and 40 days? This project will provide insights
on how different scales in the atmosphere communicate with each other, viz.
clouds, cloud organization, the synoptic scale that defines weather disturbances
such as lows and depressions, the diurnal cycle, the MJO, and the annual cycle.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The passage of the MJO is known to be important for the
weather and climate of Africa, Asia, Australia, and the western Pacific Ocean.
More recently the presence of the MJO time scale has been invoked for
understanding how atmospheric wave trains emanating from Asia impact the Arctic
weather. Better modeling of all such features requires a much deeper
understanding of the mechanism for the maintenance and the life cycle of the
MJO. It is anticipated that improved understanding of the MJO through this
project will contribute to improvements in weather and climate forecasts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide an opportunity to train a post-
doctoral candidate in scale interactions, tropical meteorology and high
performance computing. In addition student visitors to the laboratory will be
exposed to the study of weather impacts arising from the passage of MJO waves
over different parts of the tropics.