* 1606522
* RUI:   Computational Gravitational-Wave Research for the Era of First Observations
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Geoffrey Lovelace, CSU Fullerton Auxiliary Services Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 06/30/2019
* USD 135,000.00

A century after Einstein predicted their existence, the Laser Interferometer
Gravitational-Wave Observatory (LIGO) has made the first observation of
gravitational waves--ripples of warped space and time. The waves came from a
pair of merging black holes over a billion light years away. This award will
help scientists to observe as many gravitational waves as possible while
learning as much as possible about the waves' astronomical sources.
Specifically, this award supports a research program that uses supercomputers to
predict the gravitational waves from merging black holes and neutron stars and
to study the most important source of noise limiting LIGO's reach. Through their
participation in this program, students at California State University
Fullerton, a primarily undergraduate-serving and Hispanic-serving institution,
will learn transferable skills in research and computing while playing important
roles in the inauguration of a new era in astronomy. The imminent gravitational-
wave discoveries could dramatically change our understanding of the
universe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award renews support for California State
University Fullerton's computational gravitational-wave research program. The PI
and undergraduate and master's-level researchers will address two crucial
challenges in computational gravitational-wave physics using high performance
computing. First, they will use the Spectral Einstein Code (SpEC) to model
merging black holes and neutron stars--the most promising sources for Advanced
LIGO--focusing on the challenging but astrophysically important case of rapid
black-hole spins. The resulting simulated gravitational waveforms will help
maximize LIGO's reach, in part by leading to better approximate waveform models
for future LIGO searches; the simulations will also reveal how warped spacetime
behaves under extreme conditions never before modeled. Second, the PI and
student researchers will use high-performance computing to model thermal noise--
one of the most significant fundamental limits to detectors' astrophysical
sensitivities--focusing on a highly promising avenue for improvement,
crystalline mirror materials. Leveraging these highly sophisticated techniques
will allow for breakthroughs in the understanding of the fluctuations in complex
elastic structures, including mirrors with crystalline coatings. These new
insights will allow for substantial improvements in the thermal noise of high
precision measurements, currently a limiting noise source for gravitational-wave
detection, atomic clocks, and inertial sensing.