* 1606506
* Functional Brain Connectivity, Peer Influence, and Risky Behavior
* SBE,SMA
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2018
* Jason Chein, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 07/31/2018
* USD 223,712.00

The Directorate of Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences offers postdoctoral
research fellowships to provide opportunities for recent doctoral graduates to
obtain additional training, to gain research experience under the sponsorship of
established scientists, and to broaden their scientific horizons beyond their
undergraduate and graduate training. Postdoctoral fellowships are further
designed to assist new scientists to direct their research efforts across
traditional disciplinary lines and to avail themselves of unique research
resources, sites, and facilities, including at foreign locations. This
postdoctoral fellowship award supports a rising scholar investigating risky
behavior in adolescents, using interdisciplinary approaches drawn from
neuroscience, cognitive science and developmental psychology. Adolescent risk-
taking is a significant threat to public health, and contributes to a variety of
adverse outcomes, including drug and alcohol abuse, teen pregnancy and STIs, and
violent crime. Two elements are known to contribute significantly to likelihood
to engage in risk-taking: first, youth are more likely to take risks in the
presence of peers, and second, risk-taking increases when youth are under the
influence of alcohol. While alcohol consumption often takes place in a social
setting, little research has considered how alcohol use and peer presence
interact to influence adolescent decision-making. The present study uses a
neurobiological framework to examine how the combination of peer presence and
alcohol consumption affects brain responses during risk-taking tasks.
Specifically, the project examines how peer presence and alcohol affect
connections between brain areas known to be involved in risky decision-making.
The project also examines how individual differences in brain responses relate
to individual tendency to engage in risk-taking, give in to peer pressure, and
abuse drugs and alcohol. Ultimately, the goal of this project is to develop a
more sophisticated understanding of the mechanisms underlying suboptimal
decision-making in adolescence, and to identify potential neural or behavioral
factors that predispose some youth to greater risk.

Adolescence is a time of considerable brain development, and a significant body
of research suggests that two neural systems mature along different trajectories
throughout this period. The differing developmental time courses of 1) cognitive
control and 2) affective/reward processing are thought to contribute to
adolescents' tendency to engage in risk-taking. The neural regions involved in
these processes are well-characterized in the literature. However, much less is
known about the way these regions interact during development, and how this
interaction is affected by contextual factors that impact risk-taking. Previous
research has identified two contextual factors that contribute significantly to
adolescents? likelihood to engage in risky decision-making: first, adolescents
are more likely to take risks in the presence of peers, and second, risk-taking
increases when youth are under the influence of alcohol. While alcohol
consumption in adolescence often takes place in a social setting, little
research has considered how alcohol use and peer presence interact to influence
decision-making. The present project addresses the limitations in the current
literature by 1) utilizing fMRI analytic techniques that test models of
interaction between multiple neural systems and 2) investigating the combined
role of peer presence and alcohol intoxication on adolescent decision-making in
a single experimental design. This project tests the hypothesis that peer
presence and alcohol intoxication significantly diminish connectivity between
cognitive control and affective processing regions during decision-making,
thereby contributing to increased risk-taking. The project will also examine how
neural responses relate to individual tendency to take risks and give in to peer
pressure. In the field of developmental cognitive neuroscience, the predominant
theories of adolescent decision-making posit a causal relationship between brain
activity in multiple neural systems during risk-taking. However, the extant
literature has relied on analytic approaches that are not designed to test
causal interactions between brain regions. This project utilizes fMRI analytic
approaches that test functional and effective connectivity between regions
(Psychophysiological Interaction and Dynamic Causal Modeling), in order to
directly investigate the way these regions interact and the direction of
effects. Furthermore, this project will shed light on the combined role of peers
and alcohol during risky decision-making, leading to a more sophisticated
understanding of the way biological and sociocultural factors interact to
produce outcomes in adolescence. The project and postdoctoral training require
an interdisciplinary approach, utilizing analytic techniques from cognitive
neuroscience, theories from developmental psychology, and experimental methods
drawn from both clinical psychology and functional neuroimaging.