* 1606333
* Exploring Aspects of Large Mass-Ratio Black Hole Binaries using Time-Domain Perturbation Theory
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2017
* Richard Price, University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 08/31/2017
* USD 19,995.00

This award supports research that will advance the science behind the emerging
discipline of gravitational wave astronomy -- an area which the US is deeply
invested in through the NSF LIGO project that recently made the first ever
direct detection of gravitational waves, confirming Einstein's 100 year old
prediction. This research area has had breakthrough advances, generated
significant spin-off technologies, and generated strong public and youth
attention towards STEM disciplines. This project focuses on the calculation of
gravitational waves emitted from merging objects such as black holes or neutron
stars. It includes undergraduate students in research and therefore directly
contributes to student mentorship, traineeship and retention in a STEM area. The
computational skills that students develop are highly portable, and open them up
to a variety of career options, including in areas of great national need.
Previous research projects by the PI have been discussed in the general media,
and thus this work has great potential at being successful for outreach to the
general public.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This proposal is about the development and
application of a time-domain model for the gravitational wave emission from a
large mass-ratio black hole binary system using point-particle perturbation
theory. The planned work will significantly advance the approach with the goal
of not only making major improvements to the capabilities of the time-domain
model, but also contribute towards various scientific applications. Significant
contributions will be made to the development of effective-one-body models and
gravitational waveform generation, that will ultimately positively impact the
data analysis of current and future detectors (such as LIGO and future space-
borne missions). In addition, the planned work will bring about a better
understanding of the plunge phase radiation and quasi-normal ringing in the
context of decaying binary systems due to gravitational wave emission.