* 1606190
* RUI: Characterizing the Sources, Fates, and Transformation Products of Conjugated, Free, and Halogenated Estrogens in a Sewage-Impacted River
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* David Griffith, Willamette University
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 08/31/2020
* USD 325,157.00

1606190 Griffith

Globally, wastewater can be a significant source of carbon, nutrients, and
contaminants to surface waters. Endocrine disrupting chemicals such as steroidal
estrogens, which have adverse effects on aquatic vertebrates at low
concentrations, are among the compounds which can be in the wastewater. This
study will be accomplished through a combination of laboratory, field, and
modeling experiments, and will take advantage of previously optimized analytical
techniques in the PIs laboratory.

The overarching goal of this study is to improve the understanding of the
fundamental processes that control wastewater derived sources and the
environmental fate of estrogens and halogenated estrogens in aquatic systems.
This study has the potential to transform our understanding of estrogen flux
from typical wastewater treatment plants that utilize activated sludge secondary
treatment and hypochlorite-based disinfection. The objectives of this project
use a combination of laboratory, field, and modeling experiments to address: 1)
halogenated estrogen formation and distribution in wastewater treatment plant
effluent, 2) photolysis and biodegradation at environmentally relevant
concentrations, and, 3) fate of halogenated estrogens in a sewage-impacted
rivers. The data collected during this project will provide direct numerical
inputs into simple mass balance and transport models that will be used to
predict estrogen concentrations in the Willamette River, which is representative
of many rivers that receive combined inputs from wastewater and storm water.
This project will generate kinetic data and transformation product information
for a range of estrogen structures that can be used to develop quantitative
structure-activity relationships in the future, parameterize existing fate
models, and determine the impact on the formation and fate of similar
pharmaceuticals and organic contaminants in wastewater and natural waters. The
PI and media experts at Mind Open Media will produce and distribute podcasts
focused on the concepts and applications of wastewater treatment, and, the fate
of chemicals in the environment. The PI will provide the research findings to
state entities with a vested interest in wastewater treatment technologies and
the health of river systems. Lastly, the project also funds undergraduate
students to conduct research at a larger institution where they will be able to
utilize the mass spectrometry facilities.