* 1606959
* An Interdisciplinary Approach to Reducing Disparities in Social Captial
* SBE,SMA
* 08/01/2016,09/30/2018
* Leor Hackel, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 09/30/2018
* USD 227,520.00

The Directorate of Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences offers postdoctoral
research fellowships to provide opportunities for recent doctoral graduates to
obtain additional training, to gain research experience under the sponsorship of
established scientists, and to broaden their scientific horizons beyond their
undergraduate and graduate training. Postdoctoral fellowships are further
designed to assist new scientists to direct their research efforts across
traditional disciplinary lines and to avail themselves of unique research
resources, sites, and facilities, including at foreign locations. This
postdoctoral fellowship award supports a rising interdisciplinary scholar in
order to expand the Fellow's experience beyond traditional disciplinary
boundaries and focus on a key psychological problem of broad interest and
importance. The Fellow will study how people develop social capital-the
collected resources available through relationships with other people. Examples
of social capital include loans, jobs, time, and advice. Social capital proffers
crucial advantages to individuals, but economically disadvantaged people often
also suffer from poor access to social capital, limiting their social mobility.
Little is known about psychological processes that lead to these disparities. In
this work, the fellow will generate a laboratory model of social capital
inequality, and test an intervention to increase equitable social capital. In
doing so, this research will draw from social psychology, cognitive
neuroscience, and sociology, crossing traditional disciplinary lines to
characterize how people learn about one another and develop social capital. By
characterizing and ameliorating disparities in social capital, the proposal may
offer benefits to individuals and society as a whole. By developing an
interdisciplinary approach, this project offers new insights to several fields,
promoting scientific progress. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops a
subfield at the intersection of several disciplines: instrumental social
learning, or the study of how people learn about others through interaction.
This subfield can offer new insights to its parent fields of cognitive
neuroscience and social psychology, and can link individual psychology to
sociological patterns. First, the proposed work will test how people form
impressions of one another during interaction and how interactions influence
later decisions to help others. By examining how people learn about others
through active experience, this project links impression formation to decision-
making and to neural models of reward-based learning. Second, the proposed work
highlights the fact that people learn by experiencing the valuable social
qualities of other people, such as generosity, in addition to learning about
material benefits others bring to the self. Third, the present proposal will
test whether social psychological interventions shape reward-based learning,
which has most often been studied in isolation of social context. Finally, these
findings would tie psychological processes of learning and decision-making
within individuals to broad sociological patterns of social capital, linking
social cognition "down" to neural models of learning and "up" to societal-level
outcomes. The proposed research links disparities in social capital to the way
in which individuals learn about one another through interaction, examining how
people build social ties that can promote reciprocity. Specifically, the current
research tests whether people reciprocate more with others who bring them
material rewards through interaction, above and beyond those who display
positive character traits and intentions (Experiments 1 and 2). In addition, the
present proposal tests a social psychological intervention (empathic mindsets)
to shape patterns of reward-based learning (Experiment 3). To propagate the
impact of this research, the Fellow will disseminate findings to the scientific
community through journals and conferences, and to the public through science
communication outlets. To facilitate the development of interdisciplinary
science, the Fellow will create quantitative tools for researchers in social
psychology to use computational models of social learning and decision-making.