* 1606984
* International Congress of Neuroethology, Montevideo, Uruguay,  March 30 - April 3, 2016
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2016,04/30/2018
* Jose Pena, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Sridhar Raghavachari
* 04/30/2018
* USD 30,250.00

This award will provide support to US-based students and post-doctoral fellows
and junior scientists to attend the 2016 International Congress on
Neuroethology. This conference is recognized as the major, mid-size meeting in
Neuroethology, bringing together outstanding senior and junior scientists for
discussions of the recent advances in the field. Invited speakers across many
areas of neuroethology, will present their findings on how the activity of
animal brains give rise to natural behaviors. The meeting feature sessions that
will showcase how biological solutions inform new conceptual and technological
advances in bio-inspired robotics, smart machines and neural modeling. The
results presented at the meeting will have the potential to guide future
developments in multiple areas, including neurally inspired design of engineered
systems that will have considerable societal benefits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of this meeting derives from its small size, which promotes
interactions between participants, and the assembly of many top scientists whose
research spans neurobiology, engineering and neuroethology. It spans a wide
variety of experimental systems and focuses on areas of exceptional activity or
promise. This combination leads to fruitful comparative analyses, raises new
questions about underlying mechanisms and often leads to new collaborations. By
maximizing both formal discussion and informal interactions, the meeting will
highlight exciting new developments in neuroethology and engineering approaches
in neurobiology. With respect to broader impacts, this meeting will benefit the
larger community in multiple ways. First, it will help train and inspire the
next generation of scientists, by exposing students and postdoctoral fellows to
exciting science and scientists. Second, special mentoring sessions will be
organized to help junior researchers make informed choices about scientific
careers in academia and beyond. Finally, a concerted effort will be made to
recruit scientists from under-represented groups.