* 1606912
* A Search for Weakly-Interacting Particle Dark Matter with DarkSide
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2019
* Andrea Pocar, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 07/31/2019
* USD 285,000.00

Multiple astronomical observations have established that about 85% of the matter
in the universe is not made of normal atoms, but must be otherwise undetected
elementary "dark matter" particles that do not emit or absorb light. Deciphering
the nature of this so-called Dark Matter is of fundamental importance to
cosmology, astrophysics, and high-energy particle physics. A leading hypothesis
is that it is comprised of Weakly Interacting Massive Particles, or WIMPs, that
were produced moments after the Big Bang. If WIMPs are the dark matter, then
their presence in our galaxy may be detectable via scattering from atomic nuclei
in detectors located deep underground to help reject backgrounds due to cosmic
rays. Direct detection of WIMP dark matter would solve a fundamental mystery in
particle physics and cosmology, providing a unique window to learning about the
primary matter constituent of the Universe and of physics beyond the Standard
Model of particle physics. This award will fund the continued participation of
this group in the DarkSide-50 (DS-50) Dark Matter experiment at the Gran Sasso
underground national laboratory in Italy. A detailed understanding of the DS-50
backgrounds and performance is key to the design of future liquid argon (LAr)
dark matter detectors with substantially better sensitivity for heavy WIMPs. The
UMass effort is centered on studies of radon, alpha-decays, and surface
backgrounds to maximize the DS-50 physics output and to understand scale-up
implications for such future, larger detectors.

The PI has a diverse population of students, graduate and undergraduate, working
in his lab on hardware and software projects. Their work reaches beyond the
UMass walls, as they experience research at the forefront of particle physics in
most cases for the first time. Fully involved in international research
collaborations, they have the opportunity to travel to prime science
laboratories and institutions, meet fellow students and scientists of
international renown, and have hands-on experiences on leading experiments. The
PI has an established track record for promoting diversity in his research
group.

DS-50 searches for WIMPs with a dual-phase liquid argon Time Projection Chamber
(LAr TPC) in which WIMPs could deposit energy into both scintillation and
ionization signals. Exploiting the different time profile ("pulse shape") of the
scintillation light of nuclear and electron recoils, DS-50 has demonstrated
beta/gamma background suppression of 1.5x10^7. The continued run of DS-50 will
include the full information of ionization signals in a background-free dark
matter search with spin-independent WIMP-nucleon cross section sensitivity of
~Â­10x^-45 cm^2 for 100 GeV mass WIMPs.