* 1606685
* Inhibition of Water Crystallization by 3D Confinement in Supramolecular Hydrogels
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Robert Weiss, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 08/31/2021
* USD 299,999.00

1606685 &lt;br/&gt;PI: Vogt, Bryan &lt;br/&gt;Title: Inhibition of Water
Crystallization by 3D Confinement in Supramolecular Hydrogels
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Water is critical for sustaining life, yet it still
remains a puzzle with regard to full understanding of its properties. Its
thermodynamics is highly anomalous with multiple solid-state phases including
several amorphous states. When confined to small spaces, water exhibits
different thermodynamic states, including a resistance to crystallization.
Similarly, the function of proteins is driven by modulation of the hydration and
structure of water locally, which can inhibit ice crystallization, but synthetic
analogs have been challenging to achieve. The main idea of this proposal is that
a hydrogel crosslinked by hydrophobic associations is a good model of water
under confinement that mimics natural systems. The proposed research will employ
a supramolecular hydrogel, crosslinked by hydrophobic associations, as a model
to study the dynamics of water under confinement that better mimics natural
systems than porous inorganics. The working hypothesis is that the nanoscale
hydrophobic domains, at sufficient concentration, can confine water to yield
supercooled water with fast dynamics. The research addresses fundamental
questions in the physics of supercooled water, which may solve problems in the
low temperature use of hydrogels (e.g., fracture when water expands upon
freezing), an important commercial
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Supramolecular hydrogels with dynamic
crosslinks formed by self-assembly of hydrophobic nanodomains in copolymers of
dimethyl acrylamide, a water soluble monomer, and 2-N-ethylperfluorooctane
sulfonamidoethyl acrylate, a hydrophobic monomer, exhibit a well-defined
nanostructure with smaller than 15 nm hydrophilic regions separating the
hydrophobic nanodomains. The copolymer composition can be varied to tailor the
length scale of water confinement. This proposed project focuses on
understanding and controlling the dynamics of supercooled water in hydrogels.
The proposed research seeks to 1) understand how the structure of hydrogels
correlates with suppressed ice formation, 2) determine the effect of the
hydrophilic polymer on supercooling efficacy, and 3) develop structure-property
relationships to describe and predict the distribution of water states within
supramolecular hydrogels as a function of chemistry and composition. A wide
array of sophisticated characterization tools will be employed to study freezing
thermodynamics and dynamics of water. In addition to training graduate students,
the PIs plan to engage undergraduate and high school students in
interdisciplinary research projects and recruit minority students into STEM
careers. Proposed outreach activities will include hands-on demonstrations and
discussions of hydrogels and water properties with local K-12 students and
distribution of videos of ice formation and hydrogels in collaboration with the
Akron Global Polymer Academy.