* 1606673
* OP: Investigating High-K Modes in Metamaterial Structures
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Stephanie Law, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* James H. Edgar
* 07/31/2020
* USD 467,991.00

Nontechnical description: This project addresses the properties of metamaterials
- layered structures comprising alternating thin films of electrically
conducting and insulating materials. The optical characteristics of these
metamaterials depend on the properties of the conductor and the insulator, as
well as the structural details of the layers. Metamaterials alter the normal
propagation of light, enabling effects like imaging of objects much smaller than
the wavelength and backwards bending of light. The overarching goal of this
project is to better understand such effects and how they may be harnessed in
novel applications. First, the research team is investigating how these
metamaterials may be used to focus light into ultra small spots, to enable
intense light concentration. Second, light absorbing materials are being placed
inside the metamaterial to understand how the unusual light propagation alters
their properties. Such structures may enable efficient sensors for environmental
gas monitoring. During the summer months, female undergraduate students and a
high school intern work together with the research group, to help broaden the
participation of underrepresented groups in science. This research is also being
used to develop a science education module, to be made available to the local
community at various outreach events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
description: The goal of this project is to understand and control light
propagation through infrared hyperbolic metamaterials (HMMs). These HMMs
comprise alternating layers of doped and undoped semiconductors grown by
molecular beam epitaxy. This method enables the growth of crystalline HMMs with
low losses, sharp interfaces, high lateral uniformity, tunable optical
properties, and atomic control over layer thickness. Light transmission through
subwavelength gratings is the first topic of investigation. Near-field imaging
is used to examine extreme subwavelength focusing and imaging of subwavelength
features. The second topic aims to incorporate quantum wells into the HMM
structure. This enables modulation of the overall optical properties of the
structure via strong coupling between the quantum well intersubband transition
and the HMM optical states. This research develops the fundamental understanding
required for the creation of monolithically integrated infrared optical systems
based on designer semiconductor HMMs.