* 1606196
* FORCE16
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2016
* Melissa Haendel, Oregon Health & Science University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 12/31/2016
* USD 36,888.00

This award provides funds to support travel of students and post-doctoral
fellows from the US to attend the Future of Research Communication and
e-Scholarship conference (FORCE2016) to be held in Portland, OR, April 17-19,
2016. This conference is the successor to the highly regarded Beyond the PDF
conferences, which has been held twice since 2011, and the Force2015 conference,
which was held in Oxford, UK, in January 2015. The meeting is organized by the
FORCE11, a grass roots community dedicated to transforming scholarly
communication through technology. FORCE11 brings together researchers,
librarians, publishers, technologists, funders and administrators for a truly
trans-disciplinary summit and lively discussion around opportunities,
challenges, and progress in advancing research scholarship through new
technologies and practices. FORCE2016 examines current issues and tools, and
connects individuals and communities who are working on overlapping or
complementary aspects of various problems. The conference is unique in its
breadth of participants and its success in mobilizing and coordinating global
activities across groups that have traditionally worked separately, but each of
whom has something unique to contribute to the discussion. We believe that the
topic of the conference is particularly important in the sciences, with issues
like incorporating new practices and content into current systems, such as data
sharing, data citation, nanopublications, and research objects. When science is
done more efficiently and effectively, all of society benefits. The conference
exposes students and postdocs to new disciplines, tools, role models and ways of
thinking around the issues of scholarly communication.