* 1606818
* Racial Identity as a Resilience Factor for African American Students
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Jacqueline Mattis, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 08/31/2018
* USD 199,950.00

The Directorate of Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences offers postdoctoral
research fellowships to provide opportunities for recent doctoral graduates to
obtain additional training, to gain research experience under the sponsorship of
established scientists, and to broaden their scientific horizons beyond their
undergraduate and graduate training. Postdoctoral fellowships are further
designed to assist new scientists to direct their research efforts across
traditional disciplinary lines and to avail themselves of unique research
resources, sites, and facilities, including at foreign locations. This
postdoctoral fellowship award supports the training and research of a young
scholar who studies the effects of racial identity in African American
adolescents and college students. These populations are often academically and
psychologically vulnerable when they experience racial discrimination in their
daily contexts. This project explore the ways in which they cope successfully
with negative race-related experiences and remain resilient academically and
psychologically. The Fellow is affiliated with the Center for the Study of Black
Youth in Context (CSBYC) where she has the opportunity to mentor high school and
college students of color who are affiliated with the CSBYC and developing
skills for careers in STEM fields. Specifically, she serves as a mentor to
African American high school students who work on independent projects as part
of the center's Undergraduate Research Opportunity
Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project contributes to the theory and
research seeking to understand African American adolescents' and college
students' racial discrimination experiences and the ways their racial identity
beliefs interact with discrimination experiences to influence academic
engagement and psychological health. This work contributes to the larger
research literature in several ways. For instance, it will examine whether there
are negative race-related experiences that African American college students
experience that are not captured in traditional quantitative measures used to
assess racial discrimination. This work examines the ways college students
perceive their racial identity beliefs as influencing their academic engagement
and motivation and psychological well-being after they have experienced racial
discrimination. Additionally, the incorporation of information from data
collected using a daily diary method can add complexity in the ways in which
relations between discrimination, racial identity, and outcomes have
traditionally been studied among African American adolescents. This project has
potentially very high broader impacts for society in general and STEM education
is particular.