* 1606410
* Macromolecular Metamorphosis: Transformable Polymeric Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2019
* Brent Sumerlin, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 05/31/2019
* USD 397,104.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

This project seeks to develop a new paradigm in the area of materials science by
considering the effects of transformable molecular shape on final materials
properties. The architecture of a polymer molecule directly affects the
properties of the materials they are used to prepare. Polymers are designed to
have a characteristic and static molecular structure selected for a specific
application. This project involves the development and investigation of polymers
composed of reversible bonds that enable dramatic transformations in their
architecture when triggered. This concept introduces a new paradigm in the field
of responsive polymeric materials. The resulting polymers will be structurally
robust while also allowing themselves to be healed when damaged. Applications of
stimuli-responsive materials are continually being developed, with significant
promise having been demonstrated in the area of drug delivery, smart coatings,
and self-healing materials. Polymers that undergo architectural transformations
in solution may have potential utility as additives in motor oil or personal
care products. Materials that demonstrate self-healing and recyclability before
being fixed at elevated temperatures could address one of the fundamental
limitations of many materials constructed via reversible linkages, namely their
propensity to slowly deform over time. The project also includes outreach and
education activities directed toward local K-12 students and training of
graduate and undergraduate students in emerging areas of chemistry and polymer
science.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

Currently, most examples of stimuli-responsive polymers derive their response
from changes in molecular size through alterations of chain conformation or
changes in polymer-solvent or polymer-polymer interactions. However, the
fundamental characteristic of molecular architecture has not typically been
considered a variable because a macromolecule's topology is "locked" by its
covalent primary structure. This project challenges this convention by
investigating materials that transform their covalent architecture when
triggered by an external stimulus.

By preparing polymers capable of exchanging irreversible bonds for reversible
bonds, a new class of responsive materials that adapt to their surroundings by
transitions in their covalent architecture can be achieved. Specifically, three
systems are being considered: (1) macromolecules capable of topological
transformations in solution; (2) adaptable organogels that modify their covalent
structure; and (3) transformable bulk materials with "switchable" crosslinks.
The first system involves polymers with complex chain architectures that
irreversibly transform into new architectures when triggered. The second and
third systems involve reversibly-crosslinked polymer networks that are
structurally-dynamic, meaning they can be triggered to significantly rearrange
their internal structure to become irreversibly crosslinked (i.e., "fixed").
These three areas have been chosen to investigate the potential of this approach
across a wide spectrum of sizes (nano to macro) and material states (solution,
gels, and bulk) and to dramatically expand the definition of stimuli-responsive
materials.