* 1606141
* Nanowire quantum effect devices for field effect single-molecule DNA sequencing
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2020
* Stephen Levene, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 05/31/2020
* USD 410,000.00

PI: Wu, Walter &lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1606141&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During
the past decade, we have witnessed accelerated development of genome sequencing
from second generation to next-generation sequencing (NGS), which is
transforming the nature of biological inquiry. In particular, benefiting from
the electronics industry's development, DNA sequencing technology has reduced
the cost per genome to about $1000 at a rapid rate and improved accuracy. This
project investigates the downward scalability of semiconductor sequencing
technology towards single-molecule of DNA.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of
this project is to investigate the scalability of field effect semiconductor DNA
sequencing method to a resolution of single molecule. The key idea is to utilize
serpentine nanowire (sNW) quantum effect device (QED) as a sensor for localized
detection of intrinsic charge of DNA phosphate backbone during a modified Sanger
sequencing process of a single DNA molecule. The sensor device is a molecular
scale Si nanowire with diameter less than 10 nm defined by e-beam lithography.
At this length scale, strong quantum confinement induces quantization of sub-
bands and higher carrier mobility. Together with Coulomb blockade effects, the
sensitivity to its surface charge can be significantly enhanced to enable
single-molecule DNA sequencing. Techniques of surface hydrolysis, molecular
layer deposition of linker molecule, as well as the use of HfO2 as gate
dielectrics are proposed to improve surface stability and therefore signal to
noise ratio of DNA sequencing. The novel serpentine NW morphology would enable
fast kinetics during the DNA binding to the sensor surfaces and considerably
reduce surface binding competition between nanowire and its surrounding area,
without the use of difficult selective chemistry. Chips are designed to fit
commercial next generation sequencing systems to take advantages of fluidic
management and data acquisition capability. The successful scaling of
semiconductor field effect sequencing technology to the single molecular level
would have high impacts to the field of DNA sequencing. At large, this
technology may ultimately allow downward scalability of sequencing time to a few
hours and cost to below $100/genome. The research findings would likely
contribute new knowledge to the fields of nanoelectronics, biosensing, DNA
sequencing, and quantum mechanics, etc. The program will utilize existing
programs, such as NSF REU and "e-Biosensor Discovery" to generate significant
educational impact, including integration of research and education, promoting
diversity, and outreach to K-12, the underrepresented women and Hispanic student
body at University of Texas at Dallas, and local community colleges as well as
the workforce in the Dallas and Fort/Worth area.