* 1606364
* GOALI: Using Tapered Copolymers to Understand Nanoscale Interfaces within Polymeric Materials and Their Influence on Macroscale Properties
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2020
* Joe Zhou, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 05/31/2020
* USD 401,793.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New materials with controllable
properties are always needed to meet constantly-evolving requirements in the
automobile, medical, electronics, and consumer products areas. Examples include
lighter but tougher materials, materials free from additives that can cause
health or environmental hazards over time, or materials with simplified
compositions but superior mechanical performance. Professor Jeffery White and
his research group, in collaboration with Chevron Phillips Chemical Company,
seek to discover how to control the creation of useful new polymeric materials,
made from very simple components, with final properties that can be tailored to
fit a wide range of applications even when the chemical composition of the
material remains fixed. These new types of polymer materials are called tapered
copolymers, and the spatial arrangement of the individual chemical components
within the large molecule structure has the potential to impart variable, but
controllable, physical properties through the creation of unique nanometer
length-scale interfaces. By choosing which two types of polymer starting
materials are used to make the molecule and their order of arrangement within
the molecular structure, different final physical properties can be achieved,
including soft versus hard, low versus high temperature stability, and tough
versus brittle. Due to the special aspects of this collaboration between
university and industrial scientists within the State of Oklahoma, students from
all levels will have the opportunity to participate in research, and observe
differences in the practice of science and technology in academic and industrial
environments. Further, the proposed schemes for making new materials may be
suitable for eliminating the necessary addition of toxic additives that have
caused problems in earlier materials, thus creating new opportunities for use in
medical applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent advances in controlled living
polymerization techniques have led to the design of many new polymeric
materials. An exciting subset of the new materials afforded by these advances
includes copolymers whose comonomer ordering varies in some systematic manner
across the length of individual chains. One method, called tapered copolymer
synthesis, offers significant promise for interfacial morphology control in
copolymers. In a previous project, the PI demonstrated that different
interfacial types in tapered copolymers significantly impacted molecular and
some physical properties in styrene-butadiene copolymers, even when the
comonomer composition was essentially held fixed. Using the experimental
approaches developed during an extensive history of characterizing complex
amorphous polymer systems, the PI in collaboration with the GOALI partner co-PI
Dr. Joe Zhou of Chevron Phillips, will investigate the degree to which
controlled nanoscale interfaces can be created in tapered copolymers, and the
impact of those interfaces on final macroscopic properties. An extensive array
of tapered and inverse-tapered copolymer materials will be prepared by the co-PI
using a pilot-scale anionic polymerization reactor, which enhances the
probability that the conclusions reached through the program can have practical
implications for large-scale materials synthesis and applications. The PI's
expertise in understanding complex macromolecular blends and composites using
advanced characterization methods will be used to develop widely-applicable
structure/synthesis/property relationships in the area of gradient and tapered
copolymers, the impact of which should extend far beyond styrene-butadiene
copolymers.