* 1606553
* Closed-Loop Experiment-Simulation Approach to Designer Materials: GaAsSbBi for Optoelectronics.
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Joanna Millunchick, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* James H. Edgar
* 08/31/2019
* USD 410,000.00

Nontechnical description: There is a strong national need for efficient
optoelectronic devices that operate in the infrared and far infrared regime.
Applications for infrared sources and detectors include night vision and
surveillance, wireless communication, and chemical and biological sensing. Most
current infrared applications rely on expensive and hazardous materials. Bismuth
containing III-V semiconductors are non-toxic and may be directly integrated
into existing fabrication lines, further reducing cost. However, growing these
materials is nontrivial due to the complex interactions of Bi with the other
elements in these compounds. In this project, the growth and optical properties
of Bi-containing compound semiconductors are examined with an eye on infrared
detector applications. The mode in which this research is performed is also
important, because it combines experimental and computational methods to speed
the pace of discovery. This project also develops pedagogical modules that are
used in a variety of situations, thus augmenting our infrastructure for
education and broadening the participation of underrepresented groups in science
and engineering related majors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description: The
novelty of this research is in coupling experiments with computations when
studying an unknown and highly complex alloy system. A calculate-verify cycle is
used to establish the growth parameters and to obtain films that have the
desired lattice parameter and band structure. ab initio statistical mechanics
combines Density Functional Theory, cluster expansions, and statistical Monte-
Carlo to calculate the equilibrium properties, including band structure of the
GaAsSbBi alloy. In tandem, growth modeling based on kinetic Monte Carlo is used
to understand deviations from equilibrium behavior. Robust experimental methods
for the growth (Molecular Beam Epitaxy) and atomic-scale characterization (Atom
Probe Tomography, X-Ray Diffraction, Rutherford Backscattering, etc) are
employed. Using experiments coupled with computation greatly reduces parameter
space and speed the path to optimization of this new class of materials suitable
for infrared devices.