* 1606872
* Exploring the STEM Engagement of Minority and Women College Students
* SBE,SMA
* 07/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Alysha Hall, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 08/31/2018
* USD 226,074.00

The Directorate of Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences offers postdoctoral
research fellowships to provide opportunities for recent doctoral graduates to
obtain additional training, to gain research experience under the sponsorship of
established scientists, and to broaden their scientific horizons beyond their
undergraduate and graduate training. Postdoctoral fellowships are further
designed to assist new scientists to direct their research efforts across
traditional disciplinary lines and to avail themselves of unique research
resources, sites, and facilities, including at foreign locations. This
postdoctoral fellowship award supports a rising scholar at the University of
California-Davis exploring the STEM engagement of minority and women college
students. Currently, women and ethnic minorities are significantly
underrepresented in science, technology, engineering and math (STEM) related
fields. This underrepresentation is a problem because it can serve as a
hindrance to advancements in all areas of STEM. Previous research has started to
identify factors both pre- and post-college that may encourage people from
underrepresented groups to continue in STEM-related fields. However, we know
little about students' day-to-day experiences as they go through the early
college years, when many students exit STEM majors. There is reason to expect
that diversity in the STEM workforce can lead to innovative solutions to very
complex problems. Thus, findings from this project will impact not only emerging
scholars in STEM fields, but also future academics, researchers, and STEM
employees. This project will broaden the participation of scientists from
currently under-represented groups: 1) the project aims directly address the
underrepresentation of women and ethnic minorities in the US STEM workforce and
identifies solutions to improve this; and 2) during the 2-year fellowship, the
principal investigator will engage in mentoring activities to encourage other
women and ethnic minorities to become or stay involved in the sciences. As part
of the project, study findings will be broadly disseminated to inform and
transform existing interventions implemented by various entities within the
university community (i.e., dorm administration, student service groups,
university administration).

In the United States, women and ethnic minorities continue to be
underrepresented in science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM) areas of
study This is despite the fact that women make up slightly more than half of the
US population and ethnic minority groups are increasing their representation in
the US, including in undergraduate institutions. The proposed study will offer
critical insights to share with the university community on ways to increase the
numbers of underrepresented groups in STEM, as well as ways to retain them. In
the proposed study, 300 college freshmen majoring in a STEM field will be
recruited (projected ethnic breakdown based on oversampling are 25% Caucasian,
20% Black/African American, 25% Hispanic/Latino, and 30% Asian descent; 60%
women) from a larger study of 1800 college freshmen in order to: 1) explore the
daily associations between stereotype threat (feelings of being treated a
certain way due to race or ethnicity) experiences and STEM satisfaction, and
whether this association strengthens over time; 2) evaluate self-efficacy for
STEM field success as a mediator of the association between daily stereotype
threats and daily STEM satisfaction; and 3) examine the potential protective
role of diversity exposure on continuation in STEM-related fields. To address
these aims, the study will use a structural equation model within in a
longitudinal framework (four time points across 2 years) with 5-day daily report
periods embedded within 3 of those time points.