* 1606285
* Workshop on Events in Language and Cognition 2016
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2016,01/31/2017
* Joshua Hartshorne, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 01/31/2017
* USD 6,491.00

Language and communication are fundamental to being human. Alone of all animals,
humans can tell one another their thoughts and pass along proposals,
instructions, warnings, and other ideas. Despite great scientific and
technological advances in understanding formal properties of language such as
grammar, relatively little is known about how language conveys thought. One
major reason is that in order to explain how language conveys thought, we need
to understand the structure of thought itself. The structure of thought is not
well understood, particularly when it comes to thoughts about events (building a
house, eating dinner, etc.). As a result, our understanding of how language
conveys events is particularly poor. Without this missing piece, our
understanding of human nature is incomplete and our language technology is
limited. One difficulty in accounting for how humans use language to describe
and discuss events is that--in addition to the fact that events are highly
abstract and thus difficult to study--work on event representations is scattered
across different scientific fields with different theoretical underpinnings,
methods, and terminologies. This workshop has been organized to bridge these
differences by bringing together leading researchers to share recent advances,
assess the state of the research, build ties between research fields, and plot a
way forward.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The one-day workshop will consist of two
invited presentations, seven juried talks, a poster session with approximately
20 posters, and a closing discussion. The poster session will help ensure ample
opportunity for student presentations and involvement. In keeping with the
interdisciplinary focus of the meeting, one invited speaker is a linguist and
the other is a psychologist who specializes in language acquisition, and the
closing discussion will be led by two researchers who study events from a non-
linguistic perspective. Juried talks and posters will be chosen with an eye
towards diversity in seniority, demographics, research tradition, and phenomenon
of interest. The workshop is co-located with the premier American
psycholinguistics conference (the CUNY Human Sentence Processing conference),
since many attendees at that conference have research expertise relating to both
language and thought.