* 1606868
* Learning in laboratories:  Investigating interactions between engineering research communities and undergraduate workers
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Michael Gorman, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Julie Martin
* 08/31/2018
* USD 58,570.00

Undergraduate research is often touted as an important aspect of the college
experience. The laboratory is intuitively a valuable learning space, in which
students can gain hands-on research experience as well as personal mentoring and
support from expert researchers. But there are few studies about what student
laboratory workers actually learn, or about how their presence affects the work
of the laboratory community. To better understand and thereby improve how
undergraduates learn research skills and other professional skills, this study
investigates the experiences of undergraduate workers and the professors,
graduate students, technicians, and others who work with them in two engineering
laboratories. Specifically, do undergraduates learn technical skills by working
with machines and conducting experiments, or do they perform simple repetitive
tasks, such as washing glassware or soldering? Are they integrated into the lab
community in apprenticeship-style immersion and mentorship, or are they
segregated as "just undergrads"? Do they acquire the skills of a professional
engineer, such as how to design a research project and how to present their
work, or do they mostly learn general employee skills, such as punctuality and
following directions? How are they learning these lessons? How does working in a
lab shape students' senses of identity as engineers, including their own race,
gender, and class? This study uses the answers to these questions to identify
best practices for student learning and personal development as well as for the
laboratory community's effectiveness and efficiency, focusing on behaviors and
policies that can be achieved by researchers, university research
administrators, and undergraduates.

Studies show that students from underrepresented groups benefit significantly
from mentoring relationships, and are more likely to continue in science and
engineering careers as a result. Yet the processes behind these beneficial
experiences are not well understood, because most previous studies examine only
quantitative, retrospective surveys of students and faculty. This study applies
qualitative research methods, including interviews, participant observation, and
concept-mapping activities, to gain a valuable direct view of how students
interact with and learn from a lab's principal investigator and other workers.
By examining such interactions as instructions, work assignments, questions, and
subtle exchanges that immerse students in the tacit knowledge of professional
engineering practices and behaviors, this study investigates whether and how
students acquire T-shaped expertise (i.e., deep, broad, and interdisciplinary
knowledge) and develop a personal sense of identity as an engineer.
Understanding these processes will inform the development of best practices to
create laboratory communities that are places of learning, work, inclusion, and
professionalization. This information will support the future formation of a
more diverse, research-savvy, and professionally-skilled population of
engineers.