* 1606627
* Standing Committee on Medical and Public Health Research During Large-Scale Emergency Events
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2016,04/30/2017
* Jack Herrmann, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 04/30/2017
* USD 49,999.00

1606627&lt;br/&gt;Herrmann&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In March 2014, an unprecedented
outbreak of Ebola virus disease began in Western Africa. The Assistant Secretary
for Preparedness and Response requested that the Institute of Medicine establish
a rapid and agile process for convening subject matter experts to address
adverse health effects of medical and public health emergencies and disasters
when they occur. The goal of the process is to prioritize scientific research
needs in the immediate aftermath of a disaster. This will culminate in a summary
report of the strategic science questions most relevant to promote a better
response, recovery, or enhanced resilience in the affected community.
Environmental engineers and scientists play an important role in disaster
response as noted is several recent situations such as the Elk River
(Charleston, West Virginia) chemical spill, the Dan River (North Carolina) coal
ash spill, and the lead and microbiological contaminated drinking water in the
Flint River (Flint, Michigan).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Institute of Medicine
will convene an ad-hoc committee whose composition would vary based on the
nature of the emergency/disaster. The committee could include experts in public
health, epidemiology, environmental health, first responders, emergency
medicine, infectious diseases, nursing, emergency management, bioethics, medical
countermeasures, state and local government, operations research national civic
organizations, and risk communication. The process convened by the Institute of
Medicine would also provide a connection to the local communities affected by
the disaster by including important stakeholders such as non-government funders
or other organizations. The committee will identify fast track-activities
required to assist with evolving public health emergencies and disasters. The
process will provide a venue for on-going communication among the medical and
public health communities, as well as other relevant stakeholders involved in
planning and response activities. The Institute of Medicine would assist in the
planning and development of related ad hoc activities undertaken by separately
appointed committees as appropriate. The process would be triggered by a large
scale disaster event, at the request of the Assistant Secretary for Preparedness
and Response, and may be initiated in the affected locality. In addition, the
committee will formulate a strategic report of scientific priorities, gaps,
recommended prospective studies, or recommended or required administrative
infrastructural support of such science. Further, as needed, the standing
committee will be involved in the planning, development, and oversight of
related fast-track ad hoc activities undertaken by separately appointed
committees operating under its auspices that will be able to help prioritize
scientific research needs during a public health event or in the immediate
aftermath of a disaster. The Standing Committee on Medical and Public Health
Research During Large-Scale Emergency Events will coordinate with units across
the National Academies to provide a venue for discussion of issues related to
short- and long-term strategic planning. The committee will provide a venue for
a dialog between the federal, state, and local governments, the private sector,
academic community, other research funders, as well as other relevant
stakeholders involved in emergency preparedness and emergency response services.