* 1606404
* SusChEM: On the Role of Molecular Baskets in the Activation of Hydrocarbons and Stereoselective Recognition in Water
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2021
* Jovica Badjic, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 08/31/2021
* USD 568,000.00

With increasing rate of the population growth in the world, it is of prime
interest to develop novel methods for the effective production of food,
pharmaceuticals and advanced materials from sustainable resources and to reduce
the reliance on petroleum-based chemicals. As the reserves of natural gas are
large, Professor Badjic of Ohio State University explores the development of
environmentally friendly and energy efficient ways to convert simple compounds
that are abundant in natural gas into more complex structures with desired
properties. In addition, his research group designs complex molecular "baskets"
and investigates their potential use in chemical separation and as scavengers of
toxic substances for cleaning the environment and recycling chemicals. This
project enhances cultural and gender diversity by engaging underrepresented
minorities and women in research. Outreach activities are designed to educate
general public and high school students about the importance of sustainability
for the progress of our society.

There are two main goals for this project. The first one is to improve our
understanding about the role of proximity and molecular encapsulation in the
activation of carbon-hydrogen bonds of hydrocarbons. Specifically, Professor
Badjic's research group studies the assembly of trivalent ligands and molecular
baskets into ionic capsules that bind metal ions and examines their capacity to
act as supramolecular catalysts in 'green' aqueous media for converting cheap
and abundant hydrocarbons into valuable products. Another goal is to advance our
knowledge about the kinetics and thermodynamics of stereoselective encapsulation
and provide basic rules for predicting the recognition of chiral substances
within the baskets and stereoselective activation of prochiral molecules. The
resulting knowledge is expected to facilitate the design of chemical scavengers
that can remove toxic substances and recycle useful chemicals from aqueous
systems.