* 1606914
* Accelerated Sintering in "Nano-Duplex" Dual Phase Nanostructured Alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Christopher Schuh, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Judith Yang
* 08/31/2019
* USD 412,533.00

Nontechnical Abstract

For decades, researchers have been pursuing so-called "nanocrystalline" alloys
as next-generation materials. These materials have very finely controlled
internal structures at the scale of just a few dozen atoms, and show dramatic
improvements in strength, wear resistance, corrosion resistance, and many other
functional properties. While laboratory work has succeeded in producing small
samples of nanocrystalline material, this has not yet translated to commercial-
scale production of "bulk" alloys, i.e., materials big enough to make
engineering componentry from. This project is developing a scientific approach
to solve the problem of scalability for these advanced materials. It explores
the science of alloying in nanostructured powders that can be consolidated at
high temperatures into bulk components, while still retaining the
nanocrystalline structure.

Scientifically, the project aims to develop a deep understanding of
nanocrystalline alloy powders, their structure, and their processability. The
project combines experimental and simulation-based tools, and focuses on a model
alloy system based on the metal tungsten, used widely in cutting tools and
machining equipment. Technologically, the project will identify alloys and
processes that are significantly more cost-effective and energy-efficient than
any known today. The broader impact of the proposal thus combines possible
commercial advances in premium structural materials, with a wide range of
educational benefits in the training of undergraduate and graduate students
involved with the project.

Technical Abstract

The proposed work will develop the fundamental physics of a new class of
thermodynamically stabilized nanostructured materials, called "nano-duplex"
alloys, as well as a newly discovered rapid sintering mechanism that can only be
induced in this class of nanostructured materials. Because these alloys exhibit
the potential for rapid powder consolidation while retaining a stable nanoscale
structure, they may hold the key to cost- and energy-efficient, scalable, and
broadly commercially applicable synthesis of bulk nanostructured metals. These
discoveries enable nanostructured alloys with nanoscale grain sizes that are
stable through a full high-temperature consolidation cycle to full density,
without the need for applied pressures or fields.

In terms of intelletucal merits, the project will explore this new class of
nanostructured alloys and the mechanisms by which they sinter. A systematic
experimental study is proposed on the W-Cr system, exploring the role of alloy
composition, temperature, impurity content and other processing variables on the
mechanisms of densification. Kinetic parameters such as activation energies and
activation volumes will be quantified, and compared with observations of
microstructure evolution. Additionally, a new kinetic Monte Carlo simulation
approach will be developed, calibrated, and applied to study the mechanisms of
densification and to identify the separate roles of interfaces and nano-scale
second phases on sintering. In the out years of the project additional alloying
systems will be explored to demonstrate the broader applicability of this
sintering mechanism to other technologically relevant alloys that are amenable
to powder route production. In terms of broader impacts, the proposal combines
possible commercial advances in advanced structural materials, with a wide range
of educational benefits in the training of undergraduate and graduate students
on the new sintering method itself as well as on the different characterization
and modeling methods that are used in the project.