* 1606519
* International Symposium on Observations and Modeling of Land Surface Water and Energy Exchanges across Scales: Learning from the past and looking to the future
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2017
* Eric Wood, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 12/31/2017
* USD 42,240.00

The planned symposium will focus on advances in observations and modeling of
land surface exchanges of both water and energy. It will explore societal
connections to operational hydrology, including data assimilation approaches for
improving hydrological forecasting for water management, as well as for drought
and flood prediction. It is expected that the symposium will attract more than
150 attendees from around the world, including from developing regions. The
symposium keynote/invited speakers will be specifically asked to reflect on past
progress, future challenges, and emerging new opportunities, which will form the
basis for a synthesis paper that will serve as a major milestone in hydrologic
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the past ~25 years there has been an expansion
of research in process understanding, observations and predictions at a range of
scales related to land surface water and energy exchanges. The space-time
variability in precipitation interacts with the spatial heterogeneity of
landscapes to produce spatially and temporally variable fields of runoff and
soil moisture. This variability impacts many areas of hydrologic research
including flood and drought estimation, water resource management, climate
change impact assessments, and water quality predictions. Land-atmosphere
interactions also affect the linkages between land surface states and fluxes, as
well as transport through the atmospheric surface and boundary layers and the
associated modulation of convection, clouds and precipitation. These
interactions operate over decision-relevant time scales, from diurnal (weather)
to seasonal and inter-annual (climate). The planned symposium will review and
synthesis progress and new knowledge in this field. The meeting will bring
together multiple generations of scientists covering the scope of the problem.
The results focusing on hydrologic predictability and its relationship to land
surface memory, land-atmosphere interactions, global teleconnections and climate
predictability as well as the human impacts on hydrologic variability and
extremes, and associated coupled human-water system feedbacks will be a
significant contribution to the field of hydrometeorology.