* 1606575
* I-Corps:  Glucose meters for the detection of pathogens
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,09/30/2016
* Suri Iyer, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 09/30/2016
* USD 50,000.00

Early and rapid detection of toxins, viruses and bacteria is very important for
countermeasures. For example, the 2009 "swine flu" influenza strain spread
rapidly and infected people in over 200 countries within weeks of the initial
outbreak. Point of care diagnostics are very useful in such situations to
control the spread of infection. Rapid biosensors should satisfy the ASSURED
(which stands for Affordable, Selective, Sensitive, User-friendly, Rapid and
Robust, equipment-free and Deliverable to endusers) criteria for wide
acceptance. This project focuses on the development of ASSURED diagnostics for a
number of infectious agents, with specific emphasis on influenza viruses because
influenza viruses spread rapidly and lead to millions of infections and deaths
every year. The idea is to repurpose personal glucose meters that are already
used by diabetic patients worldwide to monitor glucose levels to detect
influenza viruses and other pathogens. It is anticipated that these new
diagnostics would directly benefit society since these biosensors can be used to
accurately identify infected patients to treat them and control the spread of
disease. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long term goals are to develop an unique
concept that uses glucose meters in conjunction with synthetic small molecules
to detect infectious agents. The specific goal of this project is to detect
influenza virus, a highly transmissible respiratory pathogen by focusing on its
surface enzyme, Neuraminidase (NA), that cleaves terminal sialic acids from the
surface of mammalian cells. Exposure of a synthetic sialic acid-glucose
conjugate to NA or influenza viruses leads to glucose release, which can be
measured using a repurposed glucose meter. Since glucose meters are widely
available and are ubiquitous and have been used primarily to test blood glucose,
now can be recalibrated to test nasal or throat swabs from sick patients for
influenza. This strategy has broad scope since it could potentially be used to
detect other infectious agents or human disorders. The next technical steps
towards the translation of this basic discovery to the clinic is to optimize
conditions to improve analysis time, while maintaining the ASSURED criteria that
include selectivity and sensitivity and validate the results with gold standard
laboratory techniques such as cell culture and PCR. In addition to the technical
tasks, the goal of this project is to meet potential customers, consider their
requirements, explore new products/market and develop strategies to meet those
goals.