* 1606027
* Systematic Process Intensification of Gas Separation, Conversion, and Storage
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* M. M. Faruque Hasan, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 06/30/2020
* USD 291,970.00

1606027 &lt;br/&gt;Hasan, M. M. Faruque&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Process
intensification involves the combination of reaction, separation and other
operations in a single unit, which leads to substantially smaller, cleaner,
safer, and more energy-efficient technologies. This proposal aims to develop a
new unified process synthesis and intensification approach for optimizing the
conversion, separation and storage of industrially-important gases. There is
presently a lack of systematic methods for the identification of intensification
opportunities in process operations and for the synthesis of optimal intensified
processes at the flowsheet level. The proposed approach can potentially have a
significant impact on the development of clean and sustainable energy
technologies as well as on retrofitting existing chemical processes to make them
more energy efficient and economical. The PI plans to demonstrate the efficacy
of the new technique by developing a single-step separation and storage
technology for natural gas from conventional and unconventional sources, and a
combined carbon dioxide capture, conversion, and hydrogen storage
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to develop a systematic
methodology for combining process design with process intensification within a
single optimization-based framework. The objective is to make significant
contributions in three distinct areas of process systems engineering: process
intensification, design of gas separation systems, and development of efficient
optimization methods. The integration of synthesis and intensification along
with the use of building blocks that capture both process activities and flows
will allow the efficient identification, automated generation, and incorporation
of all plausible intensification alternatives in a single flowsheet. The
technique employs a new mixed-integer nonlinear optimization algorithm for
process intensification and global optimization, and a framework which pertains
to material screening and intensification for combined separation, conversion
and/or storage of process gases. The approach will not be specific to gas
processing and could be applied to integrated design and intensification of a
broad spectrum of chemical process. The proposed educational and outreach
activities include training of graduate students, developing research
experiences for undergraduate students, developing a new graduate-level course,
participation of the PI in a high school summer camp, and engaging women and
minority students in process intensification research through the Louis Stokes
Alliances for Minority Participation program.