* 1606840
* NSF/DMR-BSF: Origin of Large Electromechanical Response in Non-Classical Electrostrictors
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2016,11/30/2016
* Anatoly Frenkel, Yeshiva University
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 11/30/2016
* USD 447,438.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Materials with strong mechanical response to applied
electric field are of great importance for a wide range of applications ranging
from actuators for portable cameras to transducers for audio-speakers and
sonars. Since discovery of a giant electromechanical response in gadolinium-
doped cerium oxides in 2012, this material is considered as a new type of
ceramic that generates strain due to a small fraction of their structural units,
called electromechanically "active". The main challenge towards understanding
this mechanism and rational designing new electromechanical materials with the
desired response has been the inability to decipher atomic architecture of these
units and "catch them in action", that is, to take a snapshot of these units
while the strain is generated under electric field. In order to fully
characterize the structure of active units "in action", the investigators are
studying thin film doped cerium oxide ceramics under electric field by high
energy resolution methods (such as X-ray absorption spectroscopy) and modeling
the results by advanced theoretical methods. The project impacts the field of
ceramic materials through the development of fundamental understanding and
design criteria for this new class of electromechanical materials. The project
fosters international ties between Yeshiva University in New York and Weizmann
Institute of Science in Rehovot, Israel. The broader impacts of this project are
realized through establishing connections between faculty and students from both
institutions, and in engaging underrepresented groups (such as women) in science
and engineering disciplines. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: Thin films
of cerium oxide that have trivalent metal impurities possess intriguing
structural, electric and mechanical properties, including ionic conductivity,
non-linear elastic effects and strong mechanical stresses in response to the
application of electric field. Anatoly Frenkel (Yeshiva University), his
international collaborator Igor Lubomirsky (Weizmann Institute of Science) and
their respective groups are working to understand the mechanisms of
electrostriction (a particularly large electromechanical response that is
quadratic with electric field). The investigators strive to answer such
fundamental questions as the effects of impurities on the generation of strain
and stress in the lattice. They are applying advanced methods of X-ray
absorption spectroscopy with high energy resolution in situ, under applied
field, to identify the active species - cations that are located in the
distorted units - in order to understand, in detail, the behavior of these units
and their role in the electrostriction. Data analysis is being carried out by
modeling structural distortions theoretically and comparing their simulated
X-ray absorption spectra with experimental ones. This project offers research
opportunities and training at advanced national research facilities at the post-
graduate, graduate and undergraduate levels with significant inclusion of
underrepresented female students.