* 1606743
* Single-Photon Subradiance, Superradiance, and  Emergent Cooperativity in Cold Atomic Matter
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2021
* Mark Havey, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 07/31/2021
* USD 543,450.00

The merger of quantum optics and cold atom physics has revolutionized several
areas of scientific and technical development. Quantum optics is the field of
study of particles of light, photons, and their interaction with matter. Cold
atom physics is the investigation of cold atoms and their interaction with light
and with other matter. (Atoms can be cooled to as low a temperature as about 50
picokelvin, a thrillionth of a degree above absolute zero. For comparison, the
cold near vacuum of outer space is about 3 Kelvin, and room temperature is about
300 Kelvin.) These joined scientific areas have led to improved atomic clocks,
development of sensors of magnetic and electric fields, measurements of
gravitational forces, and rotational motion, to name a few. At the same time,
entirely new areas of practical and fundamental investigation been developed,
including quantum simulations of materials and plasma physics, and the dynamic
research area of quantum informatics. This project is focused on experimental
and theoretical study of single-photon super radiance and sub radiance in cold
atomic gases. These are emergent effects, which do not occur for single atoms by
themselves, but require cooperative interactions among a group of atoms. In
super radiance, light emitted from a gas of cold atoms does so at a rate much
faster than from a single atom. The light also is emitted in a narrow cone and
behaves like a jet of photons. In sub radiance, the converse is true; light
emerges on the average in all directions, at a very slow rate, and can even be
stored for a long period of time in the gas. These fundamental quantum optical
processes are accompanied by a shift of the frequency (or wavelength) and loss
of the purity of the color of the emitted light. As such, these effects can have
a negative influence on the performance of atomic clocks or other precision
sensors. Thorough understanding of super and sub radiance, one of the main goals
of this project, is thus essential to optimizing the operation of these devices.
On the other hand, it is possible to use these effects to advantage to form the
basis of a single photon memory for light. In this case, a photon is taken up in
a super radiant state, and quickly transferred to a long lived sub radiant
configuration. At a later controllable time the atomic gas can be switched back
to a super radiant state, in which the stored photon is reemitted into its
original mode. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main scientific focus of this project
is to study and understand the phenomenology of single photon super and sub
radiance in cold atomic gases, and to learn about the impact of these processes
on quantum sensors, and possible applications to single photon quantum memories.
In the project, a dense and cold sample of cold rubidium atoms is optically
prepared and interrogated by a narrow-band and near-resonance probe beam. The
atomic sample is elliptical with large aspect ratio, and is typically optically
excited along the long axis. This geometry has been shown theoretically to lead
to an enhanced collective Lamb frequency shift in the forward scattered light.
The probe beam is prepared as a temporally short pulse for time resolved studies
and is considerably longer and spectrally narrower for frequency shift
measurements. Enhanced and rapid emission is observed in the near-forward
direction, while both super radiant and sub radiant emission is studied in an
off-axis configuration. In initial studies, single photon super radiance is
observed; the rate for the process is found to increase linearly with increasing
optical depth, characteristic of a cooperative process. A spectral shift of the
resonance to lower frequency, with linear dependence on the optical depth, has
also been measured. Current and developing aspects of the project include study
of (a) superradiant pulse propagation effects in the dense gas. These can modify
the linear cooperative scaling and limit the practical applications; (b) few-
body collective effects including two-body super and sub radiance; (c) the
influence of inhomogeneous broadening process, such as Doppler broadening and
trap induced light shifts on mixing and controlled coupling between super and
sub radiant configurations.