* 1606226
* GOALI: Enhancing Cartilage Tissue Engineering through Synergistic Influence of Co-Culture, Mechano-Chemical Factors, and 3D Printed Scaffolds in a Novel Centrifugal Bioreactor
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2016,11/30/2022
* Juana Mendenhall, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 11/30/2022
* USD 703,592.00

1606226 &lt;br/&gt;Van Wie, Bernard J.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cartilage, the
smooth tissue at the end of bones, can withstand enormous loads and provides
ease of motion in articulating joints. However, when cartilage is damaged due to
injury or aging, osteoarthritis develops. Cartilage has a limited ability to
regenerate and to date, no treatment capable of restoring its function exists.
Osteoarthritis affects many Americans and is on the rise. In this project, a
team from Washington State University, Regeneron Pharmaceuticals, Inc., and
Morehouse College, a Historically Black College, will use a novel bioreactor
housed within a centrifuge that supplies pulses of pressure to simulate loads
experienced by knees during walking for growing the tissue. The project provides
enabling technology for the biopharmaceutical industry for manufacturing new
tissues for regenerative medicine. Involving African Americans from Morehouse is
expected to enhance opportunities for minority undergraduate and PhD students
seeking degrees in the burgeoning field of
biotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Articular cartilage (AC), a connective
tissue lining moving joints, has a highly ordered structure for withstanding
enormous load transfers and a frictionless surface for ease of motion. However,
AC is vulnerable to lesions due to injury or aging, leading to osteoarthritis,
and has a limited ability to regenerate because it is aneural and avascular. To
improve success in regenerating healthy AC, new bioreactors capable of
introducing multiple stimuli simultaneously, including oscillating hydrostatic
pressures, perfusing with fresh medium containing chondrogenic factors, and
culturing in hydrogels and tri-layered constructs, 3D printed with a gradient of
cell types and growth factors, are needed. The central hypothesis in this NSF
GOALI is that optimal chondrogenesis will occur when strategically combining (1)
tissue co-culture of MSCs and AChs at optimum ratios, (2) oscillating
hydrostatic pressures to mimic in vivo conditions, accomplished by cultivating
in a unique centrifugal bioreactor, (3) growth factor stimulation through use of
TGF?Ã’1; (4) antioxidant nutraceutical laden hydrogels shown to enhance
chondrogenesis by reducing reactive oxygen species, and (5) mimicry of the tri-
layered cartilage tissue through biomanufacturing with flow-based direct-ink-
writing of 3-D constructs gradated in cell type, mechanical properties and
growth factor. Cartilage regenerative medicine for osteoarthritis will be
advanced significantly by improved understanding of the complex interplay of co-
culture and mechanical and biochemical stimuli needed to create healthy
cartilage, and by new protocols that will allow study of the cellular mechanisms
involved. Relevant knowledge will be gained by using atomic force microscopy to
determine tissue and cellular elastic moduli, and to map cell surface
beta1-integrin distributions that are implicated in producing healthy ECM. This
information will be combined with histology and mass spectrometry to fully
characterize phenotypic expression. Importantly, the GOALI industrial partner,
Regeneron Pharmaceuticals, Inc. will play a key role by providing comprehensive
companion genotypic information via qRT-PCR and next generation sequencing to
differentially assess the presence of chondrogenic versus osteogenic mRNA
markers as a function of culture conditions. Finally, new knowledge will be
gained about additive manufacturing of composite bio-constructs with mechanical
property and material content gradients using novel thermosensitive
hydrogels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award by the Biotechnology and Biochemical
Engineering Program of the CBET Division is co-funded by the Historically Black
Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)of the Division of
Human Resource Development and by the GOALI Program of the Division of
Industrial Innovation and Partnerships.