* 1606607
* Molecular-Based Studies of Metal, Metal Oxide and Metal Sulfide Nanoparticle Transformations in the Environment
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Vicki Grassian, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2020
* USD 450,000.00

In this project funded by the Environmental Chemical Sciences Program in the
Chemistry Division at the National Science Foundation, Professor Vicki H.
Grassian of the University of California San Diego is investigating how metal-
based nanomaterials change and transform in the environment. The proposed
activities focus on molecular-based studies to better understand chemical
changes in metal, metal oxide and metal sulfide nanoparticles in the
environment. Although in the past decade, a number of studies have focused on
environmental studies of nanoparticles in their native states, while only a few
studies have focused on the molecular details of how nanoparticles can change
due to chemical processing in the environment. Nanoparticles can age and undergo
transformations under ambient conditions of temperature, relative humidity and
in the presence of solar radiation. As these materials age and transform, their
properties are altered making it difficult to identify
structure?property?function and structure?property?hazard relationships. This
research studies the impact of nanoparticle in the environment as well their
interactions with biomolecules and biological systems. The broader impact of
these studies advance the goals of sustainable nanotechnology and provide a
foundation for broadening participation and training and engaging students at
all levels through research, teaching and outreach activities. These studies
provide students with an opportunity to engage in a highly interdisciplinary
research area that involves environmental science, nanoscience, engineering,
colloid science, materials and surface chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research program studies the cxidation of metal and metal sulfide nanoparticles
in humid and aqueous environments, carbonate formation of metal oxide
nanoparticles in humid environments, and surface ligand reactions (adsorption
and displacement) on nanoparticles in aqueous environments. These studies are
used to better understand the potential environmental and health implications of
nanoscience and nanotechnology and contribute to answering questions concerning
the transformation and fate of manufactured nanomaterials. As nanomaterials age
and transform, their properties are altered making it difficult to identify
structure-property-function and structure-property-hazard relationships.
Therefore aging impacts their behavior in the environment as well their
interactions with biomolecules and biological systems. In particular, the
proposed activities focus on better understanding transformations of metal,
metal oxide and metal sulfide nanoparticles (including Cu, CuO, CuS, Ag2S, ZnO
ZnS and TiO2) on a molecular level and how these processes impact nanoparticle
physicochemical properties important in the environmental, health, and safety
(EHS) considerations of these materials.