* 1606882
* Novel Graphene-based Label-free Biosensor Array for Smart Health and Drug Discovery
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2016,04/30/2022
* Kenneth Walsh, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 04/30/2022
* USD 402,000.00

PI: Koley, Goutam &lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1606882 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal is to develop bio-implantable sensors utilizing the unique material
properties of graphene and boron nitride, which would offer much higher
sensitivity for detecting concentration of various ions in blood and tissue in
real time, enabling prediction of the onset of disease states before their
clinical manifestation. The project activities would integrate research with
education and training of high school, undergraduate and graduate students, with
significant minority participation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of
the proposed research is to develop novel graphene-based flexible ion-sensitive
field effect transistor (ISFET) sensors for the measurement of K+, Ca2+ and Na+
ion concentrations and correlated ion fluxes in cardiomyocytes and glial cells,
with the overall objective of developing a new approach for assaying cell
membrane ion transport in primary cell culture. The detection of the
aforementioned ions is clinically significant as they serve as important bio-
markers for onset of myocardial ischemia and epilepsy. The proposed graphene
ISFET sensor array will enable critical understanding of K+, Ca2+ and Na+
membrane transport in glial cells and cardiomyocytes. The approach of ISFET
development utilizing the novel properties of boron nitride and graphene
addresses several critical issues including: (i) the complicacy, low throughput
and cell invasiveness issues of patch clamp and microelectrode array based
techniques, and (ii) the low sensitivity and degradation of commercially
available Si-based ISFETs. The experimental plan includes growing cells directly
on graphene and performing continuous, real-time and label-free measurements of
ion fluxes in cardiomyocytes and glial cells. The measurements acquired are
expected to provide electrophysiological properties of primary cells in culture,
especially regulatory and drug-induced changes in their electrical properties.
Successful completion would result in the development of useful ISFET sensors
for in vivo detection of the onset of myocardial ischemia and epilepsy. As part
of the educational and outreach activities, the PIs would each involve at least
one undergraduate and one high school student to work on this project every year
focusing strongly on recruiting minority students. The PIs would also integrate
research results in a graduate course, and disseminate them through conference
participation as well as research websites.&lt;br/&gt;&amp;#8195;