* 1606989
* Symmetric Many-Body Correlations in Atomic Ensembles
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Ivan Deutsch, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 08/31/2020
* USD 270,000.00

Many-body correlations lie at the heart of complex systems at the microscopic
level where the strange rules of quantum physics hold sway. Such systems occur
naturally at all scales, ranging from fundamental particles, to atoms,
molecules, and solid-state materials. In addition, such quantum complexity is
now understood to be a resource for processing information in ways that are not
possible in a world operating under the logic of classical physics. These dual
aspects of many-body correlations - defining the richness in the natural world
and opening the door to powerful new applications - are currently driving many
explorations in atomic, molecular, and optical physics. This project will push
the boundaries of this frontier. The research will enable new capabilities in
manipulating and understanding quantum many-body systems and their complex
dynamics, with potential applications in quantum information processing and
precision measurement. The project will contribute to the knowledge base of
quantum information science, and to the training of future scientists in this
highly interdisciplinary field. Students will be involved in all aspects of the
project, including education, research, and the dissemination of results. The
project is an integral part of the NSF-funded Center for Quantum Information and
Control. Activities include weekly group meetings, research seminars, and an
annual research retreat that strengthens the connections between junior and
senior members.

Two key aspects of the problem of many-body complexity; namely, creating and
detecting symmetric correlations, will be explored. The specific goals are to
develop protocols for implementing general quantum control to optimally and
robustly generate quantum correlations. Project personnel will study how a
measurement, in conjunction with control, can be used to extract information
about the initial correlations present in a many-body system. This builds on the
group's expertise in continuous measurement tomography, used previously to
reconstruct one-body correlations. They will extended these ideas to study the
reconstruction of two-body correlations, and beyond. Project personnel will also
explore the intricate relation between information gain, complexity of dynamics,
and quantum backaction in the continuous measurement of many-body systems.