* 1606117
* Plasmon-Enhanced Catalytic Ozonation for Water Treatment and Reuse
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Tingting Wu, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 08/31/2022
* USD 347,711.00

1606117&lt;br/&gt;Wu&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The stress of rapid population growth,
shortage of fresh water sources, a changing climate, and impaired water sources
due to industrialization and urbanization presents a major challenge to water
treatment technologies. To better insure high quality drinking water, new,
innovative, and cost effective processes are needed. This project is potentially
a transformative step to enhance catalytic ozonation for the destruction of
emerging contaminants of concern. Advanced oxidation processes usually involve
generation of hydroxyl radicals and can be used to remove recalcitrant organic
contaminants in water and wastewater. However, the current advanced oxidation
processes are usually energy intensive and may form undesired byproducts. This
project will examine an enhanced advanced oxidation process as an alternative
solution. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to investigate an innovative
advanced water treatment process involving plasmon-enhanced catalytic ozonation
to circumvent the limitations of current advanced oxidation processes which fall
short of high energy efficiency and low by-product formation. When the frequency
of photons (i.e. wavelength of the irradiating light) matches the natural
frequency of surface electrons, localized surface plasmon resonance occurs,
resulting in strong oscillations of the surface electrons against the positive
nuclei background. Plasmonic metals (e.g. Ag, Au, and Cu) support surface
plasmon polariton where electromagnetic waves couple to the collective
oscillations of valance electrons. It improves solar energy conversion
efficiency by enhancing the light absorption in the semiconductor (e.g. TiO2)
and directly transferring the plasmonic energy from the metal to the metal oxide
support to induce the charge separation. The proposed multidisciplinary research
represents one of the first attempts to systematically investigate and utilize
the plasmonic effect in advanced water/wastewater treatment. The underlying
hypothesis is that the catalytic ozonation of recalcitrant organic compounds can
be achieved at a much higher efficiency with minimum by-products formation by
using plasmonic effects of copper-based catalysts (earth abundant metal) on
metal oxide supports. Irradiating plasmonic nanoparticles with targeted
geometric and plasmonic properties with light at their plasmon frequency will
facilitate the generation of radical species via ozone decomposition and lead to
more complete oxidation of organic contaminants (low organic byproducts
formation). The results of the proposed work will provide insights into the
novel treatment technology, data for process performance, guidelines for
catalyst design and synthesis, and information of fate and transformation of
representative emerging contaminants through advanced treatment processes. With
LEDs (light emitting diodes) as the light source, this innovative process can be
easily implemented in water treatment especially where ozone is used for
disinfection. It can also be used in advanced treatment of wastewater for
direct/indirect potable reuse. The overarching hypothesis is, that the catalytic
ozonation of recalcitrant organic compounds can be achieved at a much higher
efficiency with minimum byproducts formation by using plasmonic effects of
copper-based catalysts (earth abundant metal) on metal oxide supports. To test
this hypothesis the PIs will: (1) Design and synthesize Cu-based catalysts with
targeted geometric structure and plasmonic properties using colloidal chemical
synthesis as well as atomic layer deposition; (2) Test the catalysts in
laboratory plasmon-enhanced catalytic ozonation process focusing on the degree
of mineralization, inhibition of bromate formation, and catalyst reusability and
stability; (3) Identify the active sites of the catalysts investigate the
reaction mechanisms; and, (4) Apply plasmon-enhanced catalytic ozonation in
various water matrices including surface water, secondary effluent and reverse
osmosis (RO) concentrate produced during water reuse. The PIs have also
developed a detailed and comprehensive educational plan that involves graduate
and undergraduate students, and high school students working in their
laboratories.