* 1606348
* CDS&amp;E: Numerical Investigation of Two-Particle Response Functions of Correlated Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Emanuel Gull, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2020
* USD 356,400.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Division of Materials Research and
the Division of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure jointly fund this award, which
supports theoretical and computational research aimed at understanding the
relationship between experimental measurements and numerical simulations of
materials in which strong electronic correlation effects are important. In
particular, the team will focus on obtaining computational data simulating a
variety of experiments such as nuclear magnetic resonance, neutron spectroscopy,
and resonant inelastic x-ray scattering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Materials consist
of electrons and ions arranged in a crystal lattice. In some materials, the
motion of an electron is strongly interdependent on, or correlated with, the
motion of many other electrons. As a consequence, these materials may exhibit
unusual behavior including superconductivity, magnetism, and interesting
electrical and optical properties. While these properties make them useful and
interesting for technical applications, our standard theoretical tools for
describing such materials are inadequate, and numerical methods are needed. The
subject of this project is the development and application of accurate and
controlled numerical methods that can describe correlated electron systems and
compute experimentally measured quantities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will contribute to broader impacts by supporting the development and maintenance
of sustainable open-source community software libraries, which will accelerate
the development of future codes as well as provide reliable and state-of-the-art
applications to the science community. The software libraries currently
maintained by the PI are among the few established open-source libraries for
calculations on strongly correlated systems. As part of the project, graduate
students will be trained in modern theoretical techniques and in scientific
software development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Division of Materials Research and the Division
of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure jointly fund this award, which supports
theoretical and computational research aimed at understanding the relation
between experimentally measured two-particle response functions and generalized
susceptibilities of effective low-energy lattice models in systems where strong
correlations are important. The project will combine newly developed numerical
methods with large-scale calculations to compute the response functions of
nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR), neutron spectroscopy, and resonant inelastic
x-ray spectroscopy (RIXS) and will investigate the extent to which observed
signals can be attributed to electron correlation effects.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Susceptibilities reveal important information about
collective excitations of a system and are directly measurable in experiment.
However, the strong correlation physics of generalized susceptibilities measured
by two-particle probes such as NMR, RIXS, or neutron scattering is theoretically
not well understood. As a consequence, several contradictions in the
interpretation of experimental results exist. This project will build on methods
that have shown to be reliable for single-particle excitations that are measured
in photoemission and scanning tunneling microscopy, and extend them to
investigate two-particle correlation functions. By providing reliable results
for the susceptibilities of fermionic lattice models and by computing response
functions, this work will facilitate the separation of true electron correlation
physics from model-dependent artifacts, which in turn will aid in the
interpretation of experiments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Correlated electron
materials are essential for modern technological applications such as
information technology, energy technology, materials science, and nanoscience.
By clarifying the basic behavior of susceptibilities and their relation to
experimental work, this project will contribute to our understanding of
correlated materials and their characterization. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will contribute to broader impacts by supporting the development and
maintenance of sustainable open-source community software libraries, which will
accelerate the development of future codes as well as provide reliable and
state-of-the-art applications to the science community. The software libraries
currently maintained by the PI are among the few established open-source
libraries for calculations on strongly correlated systems. As part of the
project, graduate students will be trained in modern theoretical techniques and
scientific software development.