* 1606994
* 2016 Software Infrastructure for Sustained Innovation (SI2) Principal Investigators Workshop
* CSE,OAC
* 01/15/2016,12/31/2017
* Francis Timmes, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Rajiv Ramnath
* 12/31/2017
* USD 104,947.00

This project will host a 1.5-day workshop in Arlington, VA, which will bring
together the community of SI2 awardees (with the goal of involving one principal
investigator from each SSE and SSI project, many of which are collaborative
awards) from approximately 250 awards. The workshop will have participation from
SI2 EAGER and RAPID awardees and selected awardees of the ACI VOSS program that
examines cyberinfrastructures from the social and organizational perspective. In
addition, the proximity to NSF will encourage participation by Program Officers
from across the Foundation. Goals of this workshop include: (a) providing a
focused forum for PIs to share technical information with each other and with
NSF Program Officers, (b) encouraging exploration of emerging topics, (c)
identifying emerging best practices across the supported software projects, (d)
stimulating thinking on new ways of achieving software sustainability, and (d)
disseminating the shared experiences of the researchers via an online web
portal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop is expected to host close to 150 SI2
and other awardees, other speakers and panelists. The workshop will use a hybrid
style, blending a traditional, top-down driven agenda with a interactive,
adaptive, participant-driven agenda. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed workshop
will support the exchange of ideas among the current software
cyberinfrastructure development projects. It will provide guidance on issues
related to the development of robust software and to the problem of software
sustainability. Involvement of program officers across NSF is expected to help
the interdisciplinary SI2 awardees understand the relevance and impact of
cyberinfrastructure throughout the NSF. The participation of these researchers
and program officers in a common forum will help ensure that the
cyberinfrastructure software developed as part of SI2 projects will be relevant
and broadly applicable to the most science and engineering domains possible. The
hybrid approach is innovative and holds the promise of creating rich
interactions among PIs, resulting in richer collaboration and learning. The
results of this workshop thus have the potential to guide cyberinfrastructure
development and cyberinfrastructure driven research for both the participating
projects and for the wider software development community.&lt;br/&gt;