* 1606833
* Elucidating the molecular mechanisms linking maternal choline supplementation to healthy cognitive aging
* SBE,SMA
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2018
* Salvatore Oddo, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 07/31/2018
* USD 221,882.00

Part 1: Non-technical Description&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported under the
SBE Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. Age-related cognitive
decline, hereafter referred to as cognitive aging, is a fact of life. To this
end, structural and functional brain changes invariably lead to decreased
cognitive functions even in otherwise healthy individuals. Although there is a
large body of work on ways to reduce cognitive deficits associated with disease
states, little is known about the mechanisms underlying cognitive aging. This is
concerning given that life expectancy is increasing and cognitive aging leads to
a deterioration of general health for the aging population. One option to reduce
cognitive aging is the supplementation of the maternal diet with choline (MCS),
an essential nutrient grouped with the vitamin B complex. Preliminary work has
demonstrated that MCS leads to amelioration of cognitive aging. The primary goal
of this postdoctoral project is to elucidate the underlying neural and molecular
mechanisms linked to MCS benefits. Additionally, the PI plans to examine genetic
targets within brain structures associated with memory formation to isolate
genes that are differentially altered by MCS and aging. This will likely reveal
various gene targets that will be the focus of future cognitive aging studies.
Because choline is a non-toxic nutrient found in food and can be easily
supplemented orally, the research team believes that any modifications to the
recommended daily intake amount to reduce cognitive aging will be expedited. To
this end, the results of this application may help establish new guidelines on
how a diet regimen of MCS should be implemented in expecting women to reduce
cognitive aging in their offspring. Data will be shared with both the scientific
and general community through presentations at conferences and public forums.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2: Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;The loss of
cognitive function is a pervasive and often debilitating feature of the aging
process. To this end, structural and functional brain changes invariably lead to
decreased cognitive functions even in otherwise healthy individuals. Recent work
has shown that supplementation of choline, an essential nutrient grouped with
the vitamin B complex, in the maternal diet (MCS) reduces cognitive aging.
However, the molecular mechanisms linked to MCS benefits remains elusive.
Elevated homocysteine levels correlate with cognitive aging, and aberrant gene
expression mediated by reduced DNA methylation may contribute to cognitive
aging. Choline is the major dietary source of methyl groups for the conversion
of homocysteine to methionine, and for the production of S-Adenosyl methionine
(SAM). SAM is a key substrate for epigenetic mechanisms, such as DNA
methylation. Therefore, we hypothesize that MCS may reduce cognitive aging
deficits by (1) reducing the buildup of homocysteine levels, and (2) by altering
fetal epigenetic mechanisms during development leading to functional
improvements in late life. Herein, we will breed 2-month-old C57Bl/6 mice. One-
third of the breeding pairs will be kept on a CTL diet (choline normal diet,
with standard choline content of 1.1 g/kg choline chloride), while the remaining
mice will be kept on a maternal choline supplemented (MCS) diet (5 g/kg choline
chloride), from conception through postnatal day 21. The offspring will be kept
on the same choline diet as the parents until weaning at postnatal day 21.
Notably, a group of dams from the MCS groups will be injected every other day
with a betaine-homocysteine S-methyltransferase blocker S-(Ã¤-carboxybutyl)-DL-
homocysteine (CBHcy) that prevents the choline-mediated decrease in homocysteine
levels. Thus, we will be able to determine whether the benefits of MCS are
directly linked to homocysteine levels. Mice will be tested behaviorally using a
longitudinal and a cross sectional strategy at 2, 8, 15 and 18 months of age to
collect data at multiple time points and control for re-test effects. Tissue
will be processed to (1) examine dendritic spine number and morphology within
the hippocampus and (2) to examine alterations of DNA methylation in the
promoter region of neuronal dendritic morphology-related genes (Dlg4, Rac1,
RhoA, Doc2b). We will complement this work by using an unbiased approach to
identify genes that are differentially methylated by MCS. These experiments will
be done exclusively in hippocampal CA1 neurons isolated by laser-capture
microdissection. If successful, our results would dissect the underlying
molecular mechanisms whereby choline supplementation reduces cognitive aging.
Understanding MCS benefits at the behavioral, neural and molecular level may
lead to a modification in the recommended amounts of choline required for
pregnant mothers for optimal cognitive functioning and prevention of cognitive
aging.