* 1606839
* Dynamic network models: Entrance boundary and continuum scaling limits,  condensation phenomena and probabilistic combinatorial optimization
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2020
* Sreekalyani Bhamidi, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 05/31/2020
* USD 99,999.00

The recent explosion in the amount of empirical network data, ranging from brain
networks of interacting neurons, to the Internet, transportation, social
networks, and other self-organized behavior, has stimulated vigorous activity in
a multitude of fields, including biology, statistical physics, statistics,
mathematics, and computer science to model and understand these systems. The aim
of this research project is to develop systematic mathematical theory to
understand dynamic networks: systems that evolve over time through probabilistic
rules. The investigator plans to develop robust mathematical techniques to
understand how macroscopic connectivity arises via microscopic interactions
between agents in a network. One important direct application is whether a
message or a disease is able to reach -- or at risk of reaching -- a significant
fraction of the population of interest. Mathematical techniques used to
understand such questions have unexpected connections to combinatorial
optimization, where one is interested in designing optimal networks between
individuals, particularly by considering an important concept known as the
minimal spanning tree. The project will also explore swarm optimization
algorithms (inspired by the collective behavior of simple individuals such as
ants) and their ability to solve hard optimization problems via probabilistic
interaction rules through stigmergy (where the network of interacting agents
changes the underlying environment which then effects the interaction of the
agents). An important component of the project is involvement of students at all
levels, including the development of undergraduate research seminars and
research projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the metric structure of
the giant component and the critical scaling window in inhomogeneous random
graph models has been daunting, yet for several decades the community of
combinatorial probabilists has seen it as key to understanding more complicated
strong disorder systems. The project aims to develop a unified set of tools
through dynamic encoding of network models to understand the metric scaling of
the internal structure of maximal components in the critical regime. The
investigator plans to show convergence to continuum limiting objects based on
tilted inhomogeneous continuum random trees and in particular to prove
universality for many of the major families of random graph models. Scaling
exponents of key susceptibility functions in the barely subcritical regime will
be studied. The relation between metric structure of components in the critical
regime and the entrance boundary of Markov processes such as the multiplicative
coalescent will be explored. The entire program is the first step in
understanding the minimal spanning tree on the giant component under strong
disorder. These models have spawned a wide array of universality conjectures
from statistical physics. The project will also study optimization algorithms
and meta-heuristics inspired by reinforcing interacting particle systems and
stigmergy, providing qualitative insights and quantitative predictions on hard
models in probabilistic combinatorial optimization.