* 1606549
* Establishing a Potential and Flux Landscape Theory for Stem Cell Fate Decision Making of Differentiation and Reprograming
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Jin Wang, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 08/31/2021
* USD 700,430.00

Decision making is essential for cell functions and realized through many
underlying cellular processes, such as signaling, gene regulation, the
development and differentiation in viruses, bacteria, yeast, metazoans, and
mammals. Understanding the cell decision making for differentiation and
reprograming, the biological process from a multi-potent stem or progenitor
state to a mature cell and back, is crucial not only for uncovering the
underlying mechanisms but also for the practice of tissue regeneration. Despite
significant efforts and progress made in this field, there are still major
challenges in the stem cell fate decision making: (1) how to define the cell
states and cell fates and how to uncover the physical mechanism and dynamics of
decision making; (2) how to quantify the differentiation and reprograming paths
for the fate decision process; (3) how to identify key factors determining the
cell fates; (4) what are the effects of epigenetics, micro RNAs and cell-cell
communications on differentiation and reprograming; and (5) how is the study
related to the reprograming and practice of tissue regeneration. Addressing
these issues is the goal of this project and specifically the quantification of
the stem cell fate decision making process, which is still difficult so far due
in part to the lack of a quantitative physical theory as the
foundation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will meet these challenges through
developing a physical landscape and flux theory for stem cell decision making.
There are three aims. In Aim 1 the PI will develop the landscape and flux theory
of stem cell differentiation and reprograming, and quantify cell states,
dynamical rates, kinetic paths, and key regulations of the stem cell decision
making process. In Aim 2, the PI will apply the theory to a core gene network of
the stem cell differentiation in embryo development. He will further explore the
mechanism of differentiation and reprograming. He will explore the effects of
epigenetics through slow regulatory binding on differentiation and reprograming
by modeling and experiments. In Aim 3, the PI will apply this theory to a
realistic network for stem cell differentiation and reprograming involved in
embryo development. He will quantify the underlying landscape topography,
dynamical rates and paths, taking into consideration epigenetics, micro RNAs and
cell-cell communications. He will also predict key genes and regulations for the
stem cell fates and decision making process essential for reprogramming, which
can be verified from experiments. This has potential applications on
reprograming and tissue engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is being
jointly supported by the Physics of Living Systems program in the Division of
Physics and the Systems and Synthetic Biology Cluster in the Division of
Molecular and Cellular Biosciences.