* 1606755
* I-Corps Teams: Pathways to Market of Piezoelectric Elastomer Composites for Additive Manufacturing of Flexible 3D Conformal Acoustic Emission and Ultrasonic Transducer Arrays
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2015,07/31/2016
* Jing Wang, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 07/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

Like every novel technology, piezoelectricity has contributed to important
scientific achievements to Acoustic Emission (AE) and ultrasonic sensor
technology, but there still are technical limitations that need to be resolved.
The concept of the technology proposed originated from the feedbacks from
professionals expertizing on structural integrity monitoring in Non-destructive
Testing (NDT) industry as well as several discussion with former doctoral
students dedicated to relevant research areas. The proposed piezoelectric-
nanocompostie based acoustic/ultrasonic transducer array technology has great
potential to resolve several of the performance limiting issues. In addition,
due to the high cost of traditional sensors and the requirements in terms of
sensor volumes, an alternative and more affordable transducer technology is
urgently needed for design teams in relevant technology companies. Modern
acoustic and ultrasonic sensing technologies are able to supply an enormous
amount of information of health conditions of aging civil infrastructure to
avoid a catastrophic failure, thereby making an important impact on the public
safety and economical investments. The technology proposed will expedite a wider
employment of acoustic emission or ultrasonic transducers on objects of unique
geometries or in special working conditions, while allowing substantial cost
reduction and shortening the design-cycle due to superb adaptability of the
piezo-composites processes. Therefore, with the new piezo-nanocomposite
technology introduced, it is reasonable to anticipate a marketing expansion in
different categories of business, such as NDT provider and wearable medical
electronics companies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key objective of this program
is to develop piezoelectric elastomer or thermoplastic nanocomposites that are
amenable to additive manufacturing of flexible or 3D conformal transducer array
prototypes for detection of acoustic emission or ultrasonic signals. One of the
most popular applications relying on the utilization of acoustic emission is to
determine if cracks are growing at the interior of a structure or to monitor its
degree of deterioration. However, oftentimes, it is very difficult and costly to
achieve an accurate or even accessible measurement readings on tested objects
because of some certain special technical requirement, e.g. unique geometry or
frequency selection. The proposed technology facilitates low-cost volume
production of acoustic emission or ultrasonic transducer arrays that are well
tailored for structural health monitoring of concrete, steel, and composite
structures and rotating machinery. In this I-Corps program a commercial
assessment of will be conducted on a new piezo-nanocomposite material technology
that enables customized design, molding or additive manufacturing (3D printing)
and ease of deployment of a new class of flexible and/or 3D conformal acoustic
and ultrasonic transducer arrays.