* 1606227
* Transient Quantum Optomechanics in Silica Microresonators
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2020
* Hailin Wang, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 07/31/2020
* USD 450,000.00

Vibrations of macroscopic mechanical oscillators such as a guitar string, a
tuning fork, or a drum membrane can be well described with classical physics.
This is no longer true, however, if the mechanical oscillators are cooled to
sufficiently low temperature such that thermal mechanical motion becomes
negligible. In this limit the mechanical oscillators can behave like quantum
mechanical systems that contain discrete amounts, or quanta, of vibrational
energy. Recent experimental and theoretical research has paved the way to use
these quantum behaviors for quantum information processing and to make better
sensors. Cooling mechanical oscillators to the required ultra-low temperatures,
however, is difficult. The primary goal of this project is to explore
experimental approaches that can maintain or preserve the desired quantum
processes or properties even in the presence of significant thermal noise (i.e.,
at elevated temperature). The project exploits special types of interactions
that return the mechanical oscillator to its original state after the completion
of the relevant quantum operations. These quantum operations can function at
elevated temperature without the complexity and technical challenge of cooling
the mechanical oscillator to its quantum ground state. The experimental project
also provides training opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students in
areas of both scientific and technological importance. This training prepares
the students for careers in academia, industry, or government.

The experimental research will be carried out in a multimode optomechanical
system that couples acoustic whispering gallery modes (WGMs) to optical WGMs in
an on-chip silica microsphere via triply resonant Brillouin scattering. This
system takes full advantage of optical WGMs that feature ultrahigh finesse and
acoustic WGMs that have no clamping loss. This research will use a class of
optomechanical Hamiltonian that returns the mechanical oscillator to its initial
state after the desired coherent operations, thus disentangling the optical and
mechanical systems. These operations resemble the Sorensen-Molmer mechanism for
entanglement of trapped ions in a thermal environment. Optomechanical pi-pulses
which can induce state swapping between two relevant optical modes, but leave
the mechanical system unchanged, will be used for the implementation of
mechanically-mediated optical state transfer. Detuned sideband coupling, such as
that which extends the Sorensen-Molmer entanglement scheme for trapped ions to
the bosonic optomechanical system, will be used for mechanically-mediated
optical entanglement. These thermally-robust optomechanical operations can play
an important role in developing optomechanical quantum interfaces that can
function in an easily accessible thermal environment.