* 1606874
* Interaction of Nitrogen and Sulfur Species with Oxygen Carriers in Chemical Looping with Oxygen Uncoupling
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2019
* BIHTER PADAK, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* John Daily
* 05/31/2019
* USD 240,000.00

1606874 - Padak&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Chemical looping is one of the promising
strategies for carbon capture. In the chemical looping oxygen uncoupling (CLOU)
process, the oxygen necessary for the combustion process is released from a
metal oxide, called the oxygen carrier, eliminating the direct contact between
air and fuel, causing carbon dioxide to be easily separated. The objective of
the proposed work is to investigate the interaction of nitrogen and sulfur
species with the oxygen carrier material employing various experimental
techniques as well as molecular modeling. This research will create an impact on
the chemical looping plants that will be built in the future, in the sense that
it will provide a fundamental understanding of the pollutant formation during
the CLOU process. This understanding would aid in the design of emission control
technologies, if a treatment of the carbon dioxide stream is required prior to
sequestration depending on the emission levels and regulations. Experimental
data that will be produced from this project will provide insight into the
effect of such pollutants on the activity of the oxygen carrier, which would
help the design of future oxygen carrier materials that would last for many
oxidation reduction cycles, thus reducing the cost of the
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There has been a great effort in the discovery
of oxygen carrier materials that are suitable for chemical looping applications;
however, there is a lack of a fundamental understanding of the heterogeneous
chemistry occurring on the oxygen carrier surface, especially for the
interactions with impurities. In the proposed work, various combinations of
copper and manganese-based oxygen carrier and support materials will be tested
under CLOU conditions while being exposed to nitrogen and sulfur species to shed
light into the heterogeneous reactions taking place on the oxygen carrier
surface. The oxygen carrier surfaces will also be simulated using density
functional theory and the reaction pathways will be determined. By employing
bench-scale experiments and theoretical simulations, this project will provide a
fundamental understanding of NOx (nitrogen oxides) and SOx (sulfur oxides)
formation mechanisms specific to the CLOU process.