* 1606759
* I-Corps:  Mini Notched Turbine (MiNT)
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2015,05/31/2017
* Sylvia Thomas, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 05/31/2017
* USD 50,000.00

The Mini Notched Turbine (MiNT) is suited to address the emerging technology
market for miniaturized energy harvesting generators, which can offer a reliable
and sustainable source of power to implantable, sensing or monitoring device
systems. There have been several research efforts and resources geared toward
continuous, sustainable, and efficient miniaturized power sources for
implantable devices, micro systems multisystem (bio, chemical, environmental)
sensors, and wearable and portable electronics. Particularly for implantable
devices, these initiatives seek to address the need for an alternative and/or
replacement for batteries, which have limited lifetime and require repeated
surgeries. In the United States there are approximately 400,000 implants
performed per year and more than 3 million patients with implanted cardiac
devices, many requiring some type of power source that supplies a continuous
power and requires little maintenance to work. The proposed system presents an
important solution by replacing the battery of an implantable medical device
that would otherwise have to be removed every 5 years on average. This solution
will ultimately benefit the end-users or patients who are most affected by the
current system. A profile of the typical customer of the proposed innovation
would be biomedical device companies, healthcare providers (hospitals,
doctors/surgeons), medical patients, and/or manufacturers of miniature
generators. The mini notched turbine technology has the potential to address the
frequency of repeatable implantable medical device (IMD) surgeries, power
multiple IMDs, and impact the quality of life for patients while addressing the
need for continuous power generation/delivery. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
the project is to design, produce and test a prototype of an energy harvesting
device capable of converting fluid flow kinetic energy to electrical energy by
use of electromagnetic induction. This energy harvesting system has a wide scope
since it can extract energy from gas flow lines, fuel lines, water pipes and
even the blood stream in a higher mammal or from any environment where there is
fluid flow energy present. The potential contribution of the proposed system is,
to produce a paradigm shift in the manufacture and use implantable medical
devices which will eventually reduce the cost burden to hospitals, insurance
companies and ultimately patients. This will also reduce the risk of repeated
surgeries, anxiety and pain to patients that have been implanted with a life-
saving device.