* 1606505
* Collaborative Research: ATD: Sequential quickest detection and identification of multiple co-dependent epidemic outbreaks
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Olympia Hadjiliadis, CUNY Hunter College
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2018
* USD 53,459.00

This project is key to the development of next generation quantitative
algorithms for detection of epidemic outbreaks. The investigators address two
focus problems that arise in epidemic surveillance, namely that of quickest
detection of (a) spatially and (b) pathogen heterogeneous outbreaks. An early
and accurate response is achieved by taking advantage of the co-dependent nature
of the corresponding syndromic observations and by appropriate modeling of this
dependency. To this end, the investigators develop innovative online quickest
detection and sequential classification techniques to analyze multiple
correlated data streams undergoing distinct changes. These techniques are
assessed through their ability to optimally issue timely outbreak alerts with
minimal false alarm rates. Moreover, the investigators address the problem of
early detection and identification of an epidemic outbreak by designing a
simultaneous min-max change-point detection and classification algorithm of a
single data stream with unknown post-disorder characteristics. In this way, the
investigators are able to also address the problem of model uncertainty and
build robust algorithms. Finally, the investigators combine their expertise by
carrying out a multi-faceted comparison of alternative formulations (especially
Bayesian versus min-max) for the focus problems, thus creating a model-free
state-of-the-art toolkit targeting highly complex bio-surveillance
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Statistical and mathematical methods are essential to
address some of the manifold challenges presented by the threat of infectious
epidemics. This project is vital to the improvement of public health
infrastructure for effective epidemic countermeasures. The investigators build
innovative techniques for the early detection and pathogen-type classification
of epidemic outbreaks spanning multiple geographic sites by taking advantage of
the co-dependent nature of such outbreaks. The developed methods will be
directly communicated to public health epidemiologists through outreach
activities. Thus, this project is expected to improve the effectiveness of bio-
surveillance and contribute to the health and well-being of our communities at
large. The interdisciplinary nature of the research activities assists in the
training of graduate and undergraduate students and expands the exchange of
ideas between Brooklyn College, the Graduate Center of CUNY and UC Santa
Barbara. The PIs? techniques constitute an innovative breakthrough in the
general methodology of detection and identification of threats in related but
distinct streams of observations. Thus, they provide a state-of-the-art platform
for threat detection and classification in other areas of engineering such as
communications, network intrusion and others.