* 1606426
* Acquisition of a Biolog Semi Automated MicroStation System for Environmental Research and Education at Alabama A&amp;M University
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2019
* Zachary Senwo, Alabama A&M University
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 07/31/2019
* USD 41,370.00

NSF funds will be used to acquire a Biolog Semi Automated MicroStation System
for soil microbial analysis. Soil microorganisms play a crucial role in one of
the most important ecological processes - the turnover of chemical element in an
ecosystem. Soil microbes break down complex organic molecules and release
inorganic molecules vital for life and environmental sustainability. The Biolog
Semi Automated MicroStation System will promote understanding of environmental
challenges in Alabama, fate of anthropogenic pollutants, and bioremediation of
polluted areas. The instrument will promote STEM -related teaching and research
training for underrepresented groups especially in an HBCU, generate 21st
century minority professionals in sciences, and strengthen interdisciplinary
collaborative interactions among faculty, staff, and students. The equipment
will be integrated into undergraduate and graduate curricula including eleven
(11) courses taught by the PIs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The equipment will expand
faculty resources for soil and environment research and to improve research
capability at Alabama Agricultural and Mechanical University (AAMU). The
proposed instrumentation will have profound impact on faculty research and the
quality of education and training at AAMU at various levels. The acquisition of
this instrument will be an opportunity for students to integrate theoretical
learning with hands-on practical skills, thus increasing their overall
competitiveness in the demanding job markets which has seen tremendous growth in
soil and environmental sector jobs. In addition to supporting the Department of
Biological and Environmental Sciences, this instrument also will benefit and
impact other faculty and students from neighboring Oakwood University.