* 1606619
* OP:Diffractive Imaging of Complex Isolated Molecules
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Martin Centurion, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2020
* USD 375,170.00

An important aspect in assuring the continued progress of science and technology
is to understand and control the flow of energy at the molecular level. Energy
conversion involves changes in the structure of the molecule, which plays a
critical role in biological processes such as photosynthesis, vision, and the
damage of cells due to absorption of ultraviolet light. From a technological
standpoint, the conversion of light into chemical energy and heat at the
molecular scale is important for solar energy conversion and storage. When a
molecule absorbs a particle of light, it's structure is often significantly
changed, but these changes are difficult to observe because of the very small
scale and the rapid pace with which the structure changes. Visualizing the
molecular structure and how it changes will improve our understanding of how
energy is transformed. In this project, the investigators will develop the tools
to capture three-dimensional images of isolated molecules with atomic
resolution. These methods can then be applied to observe how structures change
in time. In order to capture images, the orientation of the molecules will be
controlled using very short laser pulses with a duration of less than 1
trillionth of a second. Similarly short electron pulses will be scattered from
the molecules, and the structures will be retrieved by analyzing the scattering
patterns. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to capture three
dimensional images of isolated molecules with atomic resolution. Experiments
will start with small molecules and then continue with more complex molecules
such as Trifluorotoluene, Stilbene and Diiodotetrafluoroethane. The molecules
will be imaged in a cooled gas beam in vacuum. A femtosecond laser pulse will be
used to impulsively align the molecules, and a femtosecond or picosecond
electron pulse will be used to capture a diffraction pattern of the molecules
while they are aligned. The advantage of impulsively aligning the molecules with
femtosecond pulses is that the maximum alignment is reached a few picosecond
after the interaction with the laser, thus the molecules can be probed in a
field-free environment. First, the effect of the laser pulse on the angular
distribution and structure of the molecules will be investigated as a function
of laser intensity, to determine the optimal alignment parameters such that the
alignment is maximized without distorting the structure. Changes in the
structure caused by the laser can be detected as changes in the diffraction
pattern. Multiple diffraction patterns will be captured for different
orientations of the molecules with respect to the detector. Finally, the
structure will be retrieved from the diffraction patterns by combining the
information in multiple diffraction patterns and using phase retrieval
algorithms. If successful, the project will result in a significant advancement
in our capability to capture images of isolated molecules.