* 1606498
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award:   Social Organization And The Importance Of "Persistent Places"
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2017
* Andrew Seidel, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 04/30/2017
* USD 27,924.00

Over the past sixty years, a growing body of federal legislation has been
explicitly concerned with the preservation of Native American cultural
resources. Yet, despite these efforts, the management of traditional cultural
properties - places of special significance to indigenous groups - on public
lands remains a contentious issue. Contemporary collaborations between
anthropologists and Native American communities have demonstrated that the
importance of particular locations extends far beyond their economic utility and
that, over time, a given place may be important to multiple groups and for many
different reasons. Drawing on these insights, this doctoral dissertation
research project will explore the implications that such an understanding of
place has for the dynamics of landscape use in the past through a case study of
14 Adena (c. 500 BC - AD 250) sites located in northeastern Kentucky. The
results of this research will contribute to understanding of a poorly understood
period in American prehistory as well as enhance the infrastructure for research
and education by updating existing museum collections. Results will also have
implications for the repatriation process required by the Native American Graves
Protection and Repatriation Act. Consequently, this project demonstrates the
continuing relevance that archaeological research has for the development of
federal policy concerning cultural resources management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
explore the dynamics of landscape use in the past, this project focuses on the
relationship between the construction of monuments and territorial behavior on
the part of their builders - a long-standing paradigm within archaeological
research. Rather than inferring territoriality from the spatial distribution of
sites, this research takes a novel approach to investigating territorial
behavior by evaluating change over time in both (1) how specific monuments were
engaged with and (2) who was engaging with them. The former is assessed by
investigating the spatial distribution of shared practices as indicated by
similarities in mortuary behavior between discrete burial contexts. The latter
is assessed by quantifying the relative amounts of biological variability
present at multiple spatial scales. This is accomplished by using phenotypic
variance as a proxy measure for biological variability and by collecting and
analyzing data pertaining to a variety of cranial and dental metric and
morphological traits. If monuments served a territorial function, they can be
expected to have been embedded within relatively stable social configurations.
In other words, they would have been used by the same social group or groups
over time, resulting in spatial clustering of both shared practices and
biological variability. Alternatively, as work with contemporary indigenous
peoples suggests, monuments may have been engaged with by multiple social groups
and in multiple ways. In this case, monuments are unlikely to have served a
territorial function and, instead, can be expected to have been embedded within
a sequence of changing social configurations. This situation would result in the
loss of the spatial clustering of shared practices and biological variability
that is expected within a territorial scenario. The results of this research
will be compared to the expectations given above to provide a nuanced evaluation
of past landscape use.