* 1606842
* MppP: The First PLP-Dependent Hydroxylase/Deaminase
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,12/31/2019
* Nicholas Silvaggi, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Max Funk
* 12/31/2019
* USD 499,970.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Dr. Nicholas Silvaggi from University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
to study how protein structure affects its function. In particular he is
studying an enzyme known as MppP which reacts with molecular oxygen to add a
hydroxyl group into the amino acid arginine. What is most interesting about MppP
is that, while its structure closely resembles that of several other related
proteins, its chemistry is very different. By studying MppP the PI is learning
how to make educated guesses about the functions of the many uncharacterized
proteins uncovered in genome sequencing. In addition, understanding how MppP
works is improving understanding of natural products biosynthesis and the
processes by which existing enzyme structures are adapted to perform new
functions. As part of this project the PI is also developing the PX Lab
experience, a program designed to give exceptional students from area high
schools an immersive experience in modern structural biology research. The
students are working as a team with their teachers, and supervised by the PI and
his graduate students, to clone, express, purify, crystallize, and determine the
structure of a fluorescent protein. In this way, the research being done in the
lab is also training teachers and tomorrow's
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The non-proteinogenic amino acid
L-enduracididine (L-End) is a component of a number of bacterially-produced
natural products. The pathway for the production of L-End from arginine is
thought to involve some unique enzymatic activities, but the reactions catalyzed
by the three biosynthetic enzymes, MppP, MppQ and MppR, are unknown. Recent
findings show that MppP is a previously unknown class of oxygenase that requires
only PLP and molecular oxygen to insert an oxygen atom into an unactivated C-H
bond. This is an unprecedented activity for a PLP-dependent enzyme. The
objective of this work is to understand how MppP catalyzes this reaction and
which structural features account for its unusual activity.Ppre-steady state
enzyme kinetics, together with kinetic isotope effects, NMR spectroscopy, and
mass spectrometry are being used to probe the catalytic mechanism. Structural
features of MppP required for its hydroxylation reaction is being identified by
X-ray crystallographic and enzymes kinetics studies of mutant forms of MppP,
both alone and in complexes with ligands. The outcome of the research is
detailed mechanistic information about how MppP carries out its reaction, which
is helping understand how evolution has modified the Type I aminotransferase
fold to perform a new catalytic function. These outcomes are expanding knowledge
of PLP-dependent enzymes, specifically, of enzyme structure-function
relationships, as well as improving the accuracy of protein function
predictions.