* 1606531
* Theoretical Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Edward Witten, Institute For Advanced Study
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2019
* USD 1,099,026.00

This award funds the research activities of Professors Edward Witten and Peter
Goddard and a group of postdoctoral fellows at the Institute for Advanced Study
in Princeton.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is devoted to the study of
elementary particle physics, including its connections to other areas of study
ranging from astrophysics and cosmology to condensed matter physics and
geometry. Current and planned work of the researchers supported by this grant
covers a very wide range of topics, including the connections between gauge
theory (the modern language of elementary particle physics), string theory (a
speculative proposal for unifying the fundamental forces of nature), and
geometry. These researchers will also study the possibilities for new models of
particle physics that might be relevant at current and future particle
accelerators; new methods of computing and studying the ways in which elementary
particles scatter off each other; new experimental hints of the cosmic dark
matter which makes up most of the matter in the universe; and more. Research in
these areas thus advances the national interest by promoting the progress of
science in one of its most fundamental directions: the discovery and
understanding of new physical laws. The postdoctoral fellows supported by this
project will also gain experience working at a high level on these exciting
scientific problems, which have all attracted great interest nationally and
internationally. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More technically, Edward Witten has been
working most recently on applications of quantum field theory to boundary states
of topological insulators and superconductors, and is also currently developing
new interests in classical General Relativity, with a view toward implications
for quantum theory. Peter Goddard's focus is on new approaches to scattering
amplitudes in gauge theory and gravity. The postdoctoral fellows supported by
this project have a wide range of interests and work with each other on frontier
topics in theoretical high-energy physics as well as with Professors Witten and
Goddard and other local faculty.