* 1606916
* Episodic memory contributions to value-based decision making
* SBE,SMA
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2018
* Michael Shadlen, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 06/30/2018
* USD 219,091.00

The Directorate of Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences offers postdoctoral
research fellowships to provide opportunities for recent doctoral graduates to
obtain additional training, to gain research experience under the sponsorship of
established scientists, and to broaden their scientific horizons beyond their
undergraduate and graduate training. Postdoctoral fellowships are further
designed to assist new scientists to direct their research efforts across
traditional disciplinary lines and to avail themselves of unique research
resources, sites, and facilities, including at foreign locations. This
postdoctoral fellowship award supports a rising interdisciplinary scholar at the
intersection of psychology, neuroscience and economics. In this project, the
goal is to explore how decision-making is influenced by episodic memory, by
using tools and theories from the above-mentioned fields, with the addition of
computational modeling. Memory is essential to adaptive behavior, enabling
organisms to draw on past experience to improve choices. Yet, the neural and
cognitive mechanisms by which memory guides decision making are poorly
understood. Despite substantial advances in understanding neural mechanisms of
memory, on one hand, and those of decision making, on the other, remarkably
little is known about a central adaptive aspect of memory function: how memory
for the past is used to guide decisions. The proposed research aims to address
this gap by bringing together three fields: psychology, neuroscience and
economics. This NSF Fellow proposes a novel framework for beginning to
understand how memory for specific episodes ("episodic memory") is used to guide
value-based decisions. Our overarching hypothesis is that many value-based
decisions involve sampling evidence from memory to inform the decision. This
team will test their hypothesis by integrating computational modeling with
eyetracking and functional imaging (fMRI) in humans to investigate the neural
mechanisms by which episodic memory contributes to decision making. Determining
the brain and cognitive mechanisms by which memory guides decisions will lay the
foundation for potential future interventions which could radically shape
policy. Poor decision making has been linked to poverty and aging with cascading
effects on society more generally. The proposed results could help improve
individual and collective decision making with clear implications for improving
education and decision making across a diverse
population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although it may seem obvious that many
decisions are guided by memory, most studies on value-based decisions have
focused on how repeated rewards incrementally form habitual decisions, which are
distinct from pervasive more flexible and deliberative decisions that rely on
episodic memory. This team's overall approach draws on advances in the
neurobiological mechanisms of perceptual decision making. In perceptual
decisions, such as deciding the direction of moving random dots, visual motion
information is accumulated and when enough information is accumulated, a
decision is made. This accumulation process is reflected in the firing rates of
neurons in association and premotor cortices. Furthermore, the speed and
accuracy of the decision are explained by a threshold (or bound) applied to the
accumulation of information from the visual cortex. This team hypothesizes that
a similar process accounts for how memories guide value-based decisions; in
particular, we propose that sequential memory retrieval enters value based
decisions in the same way that visual motion information is accumulated towards
a perceptual decision. By linking memory, value and choice, this knowledge is
expected to have important implications for multiple fields, including
psychology, economics and neuroscience.