* 1606367
* EAPSI: Adapting to Life with Less Water: Immune Function of Cane Toads in Semi-Arid Australia
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2017
* George Brusch, Brusch                  George         A
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 400.00

Invasive cane toads (Rhinella marina) in Australia have been expanding their
range since they were first introduced in 1935. Their inherent toxicity has
resulted in dramatic population crashes of dozens of native species. Based on
temperature and water characteristics of their native habitats, it was assumed
their invasion would be restricted to tropical areas of Australia. However,
their invasion is rapidly expanding beyond the presumed limits, and this may be
a result of progressive adaptation to drier conditions. If cane toads can
rapidly evolve to new climatic conditions, then their range expansion might
exceed well beyond previously thought limitations and thus threaten a greater
portion of the continent. Through a combination of field and laboratory studies,
this project will focus on the immune system to evaluate the adaptability of
cane toads by testing the hypothesis that cane toads at the dry invasion front
are adapting a tolerance to water limitations in order to maintain effective
immune function. This project will be conducted in collaboration with Dr. Rick
Shine, a noted expert on the ecology of reptiles and amphibians, at the
University of Sydney, Australia. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will take an
ecoimmunological approach to assess the distribution potential of cane toads in
Australia. This study will compare naturally occurring hydration states and
immune performances of toads from the arid invasion front with those from the
mesic range core. These results will be complemented by a laboratory study that
will experimentally manipulate the hydration state of animals from both sites to
determine whether toads from semi-arid portions of Australia will have less
suppressed or even enhanced immune function when dehydrated compared to toads
found in more mesic areas of Australia where they were first introduced. The
results of these experiments would transform the way distributions are predicted
for this, and likely other, invasive species. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports summer
research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Australian Academy of Science.