* 1606192
* Heat transfer processes in patterned and rough microchannels
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Prabhakar Bandaru, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 08/31/2022
* USD 306,000.00

Any practical surface is rough, with the roughness extending over several scales
- from the atomic scale to that observable to the naked eye. The proposed work
aims to investigate how the influence of such characteristics would modify fluid
(liquid or gas) flow. For example, roughness could be related to a hydrophobic
aspect, where liquid would skim along the surface at a larger velocity (with
less friction and needing less driving force and energy) compared to a smooth
surface. For a heated liquid, such larger velocity may imply larger heat
transfer. However, the roughness on the surface is also comprised of air of low
thermal conductivity, which would be expected to reduce the efficacy of heat
transfer. Through such considerations, the amount and rate of heat transfer may
be sensitively regulated by controlling the amount of roughness and will be
studied, experimentally and theoretically, in this work. The consequent greater
understanding obtained would yield fundamental scientific insights into
roughness, friction, and the control of heat. It is also aimed to translate such
insights to the immediate design of microscale pipes and flows, with
applications ranging from the cooling of electronic components and devices to
biomedical diagnostics. Longer-term applications to enhancing the efficiency of
fluid flow, lubrication, and water filtering, with respect to reducing drag and
heat transfer across the interface are being considered.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal is to gain quantitative understanding
of multiphase flow and heat transfer over rough surfaces. The project will
investigate the influence of nano- and micro-scale surface effects in modulating
measurable macroscale properties such as temperature, pumping power, and heat
transfer, with very wide ranging consequences. From an experimental point, the
project mainly involves the: (a) development and analysis of patterned/rough
superhydrophobic surfaces, and (b) measurement of velocity profiles and
effective heat transfer coefficients in such surface constituted channel flow,
in concert with theoretical model validation. It is concurrently aimed to
develop and implement the theoretical and numerical tools for modeling
multiphase flow and heat transfer over ordered and spatiotemporally disordered
surfaces. Probabilistic frameworks and stochastic mapping of random flow domains
will be used to model the inherent variability of the surfaces and the resulting
flows. The research would substantially extend the state of the art in thermal
transport modeling involving ordered surfaces to random nanostructured surfaces.
The tuning of thermal transport processes, considered through the theoretical
and experimental efforts, would enable higher efficiency micro-/nano-fluidics
with a wide range of physical, chemical, and biological applications.