* 1606917
* OP: Establishing the Crystallochemical Principles Governing  Energy-Transfer Processes in Upconversion Nanocrystals
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2016,12/31/2020
* Federico Rabuffetti, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* James H. Edgar
* 12/31/2020
* USD 341,694.00

Non-technical description: There is a strong need for bright and multicolor
optical probes for biophotonic and photonic applications in fields such as
health care (imaging and sensing), energy efficient management (solid-state
lighting, photovoltaics, and displays), and defense (solid-state lasers).
Upconversion nanocrystals, which convert infrared into visible light, possess
unique properties that make them highly desirable optical probes. However, for
most of those crystals their implementation has been limited by their low
brightness and reduced color tunability. This project focuses on establishing
relationships between the chemical composition, atomic structure, and
luminescence of upconversion nanocrystals with a view towards designing bright
and color-tunable emitters. The project takes advantage of the versatility of a
series of nanocrystals whose composition and atomic structure can be finely
controlled, and is expected to expand the library of bright and multicolor
upconverters, while also generating fundamental knowledge of light-matter
interactions at the nanoscale. The project provides new opportunities to
contribute to workforce development at both graduate and undergraduate levels.
Graduate students are trained in the synthesis and advanced characterization of
luminescent nanomaterials. Educational activities are developed to integrate
scientific research into undergraduate education through Wayne State
University's Nanoengineering Undergraduate Certificate
Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description: Upconversion nanocrystals
offer several potential advantages over molecular downconversion fluorophores
traditionally employed in biophotonic applications such as optical imaging and
sensing. However, their implementation as optical probes has been limited by
their low efficiency and lack of full-spectrum color tunability. An ongoing
challenge in the field of upconverting nanocrystals is the rational design of
efficient and color-tunable emitters via manipulation of the chemical
composition and crystal structure. This project utilizes a series of chemically
flexible nanomaterials to enable compositional control of structural features
directly involved in energy-transfer processes relevant to light upconversion.
The goal is to establish a series of crystallochemical principles that create
the basis for the rational design of upconverting nanocrystals with optimized
energy-transfer pathways through a systematic analysis of composition-structure-
luminescence relationships. This project involves solution-phase synthesis of
colloidal nanocrystals with controlled chemical composition and size, evaluation
of their crystal structure using a combination of multiple spectroscopic
techniques (X-ray diffraction, X-ray total scattering, and X-ray absorption),
and thorough study of their light upconversion properties using
spectrofluorometry (steady-state and time-dependent).