* 1606206
* Model-guided systems re-engineering of Chlamydomonas reinhardtii
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2016,01/31/2020
* Nitin Baliga, Institute for Systems Biology
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 01/31/2020
* USD 298,700.00

PI Name: Nitin Baliga Proposal Number: 1606206

Microscopic algae are a promising future platform for the sustainable production
of biofuels. These organisms use sunlight, atmospheric carbon dioxide, and
nutrients such as nitrogen and phosphorous dissolved in liquid medium to make
lipids which can be processed into liquid transportation fuel. Most algal
biofuel processes require two stages. In the first stage, the algae consume
nutrients and grow. In the second stage, the lipids used to make biofuel
accumulate within the biomass, but only when all the nutrients are consumed so
that the biomass does not grow any more. In order to improve the economic
viability of algae-based biofuels, it is necessary to develop strains of algae
that can generate lipids for biofuel while producing more biomass that sustains
the process. The goal of this project is re-program the gene networks in a model
strain of algae named Chlamydomonas reinhardtii to enhance both biofuel and
biomass production at the same time. The research will attempt to make the
systems biology platform more generic that it can be extended to other
organisms. The educational activities associated with the project will develop
high school curricular materials for renewable green biotechnology topics.

A critical challenge with algal biofuel production is that nutrient starvation
is required to induce lipid accumulation. The proposed research will develop a
systems biology strategy to predictably manipulate regulatory and metabolic
networks using the model photosynthetic green microalga Chlamydomonas
reinhardtii in an effort to significantly enhance lipid accumulation without
growth arrest. A predictive Environment and Gene Regulatory Influence Network
(EGRIN) model will be developed to rationally identify gene targets for systems
level re-engineering. The EGRIN model will be built upon a compendium of
transcriptomes from cultures of C. reinhardtii grown in a diverse set of
nutritional and environmental conditions. Accuracy of the EGRIN model will be
improved by incorporating experimentally mapped open chromatin structure.
Further, the EGRIN model will be integrated with a metabolic network model to
identify gene targets for engineering. Finally, model-guided genome engineering
of algae using CRISPR/Cas9 technology will be used to enhance biomass or lipid
production. The proposed research will generate a fundamental, model-guided
strategy for predictably manipulating regulatory and metabolic networks in algae
through a generalized approach which can be customized to perform similar strain
engineering objectives other organisms.