* 1606982
* Center for Sustainable Materials Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2020
* Douglas Keszler, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Katharine Covert
* 08/31/2020
* USD 4,500,000.00

The Center for Sustainable Materials Chemistry (CSMC) develops new methods and
techniques to advance the manufacturing of electronics and energy technologies.
CSMC research synthesizes and characterizes thin films important in many
technology areas including electronics, reflective coatings, and solar cells.
CSMC designs these new chemical products in ways that minimize the use and
generation of hazardous substances. Center researchers and partner companies
commercialize products coming from this basic research. Students and trainees
receive advanced research training as well as professional development to aid
career success.

Thin-layer metal oxides are important in many technology areas, including
electronics, reflective coatings, and solar cells. The center has a broad set of
goals: discover new methods to synthesize new and known metal oxo-hydroxide
metal clusters and polyoxometalates as precursors to thin-layer metal oxides;
determine the structures of these compounds in solution and in the solid state
by combining diffraction, spectroscopic, and computational methods; understand
the detailed chemical changes that occur as metal oxo-hydroxide clusters or
polyoxometalates hydrolyze and condense to form intermediates and then dense
metal oxides; and elucidate the elementary steps of photolytic and radiolytic-
driven cluster condensation in films for nanopatterning. CSMC and its partners
explore many possible applications of metal oxide thin films, including
lithographic resists, photovoltaics, and electrical and optical devices. For
graduate students and postdocs, CSMC integrates research training with
professional development in the areas of innovation, entrepreneurship, team
performance, leadership, project planning, and science communication.