* 1606952
* Chalcogenides Superconductors: Nonconventional Superconductivity in New Phases
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Theo Siegrist, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 06/30/2020
* USD 420,000.00

Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Superconductivity is a quantum phenomenon in
which, below a critical temperature, the electrical resistance completely
vanishes. Conventional superconductors, discovered over 100 years ago, are
composed of simple metals, and the phenomenon was completely explained about 50
years ago. The applications of superconductors include the ability to transmit
many times more power than metals at the same temperature and cross-sectional
area. However, conventional superconductors are limited in that they have to be
cooled to very low temperatures. More importantly, they are limited in the
magnitude of current they can transmit (critical current) in an external
magnetic field (critical field). Over the years, conventional superconductors
have been improved and new areas have been discovered that enhanced these
current carrying capabilities in a magnetic field, making possible high-field
research magnets and applications that include MRI (Magnetic Resonance Imaging).
Enter the discoveries of unconventional superconductors about 40 years ago,
followed by the discovery of high-temperature superconductors 30 years ago,
these materials which are not good metals above their critical temperature, are
not completely understood, but many of these intriguing materials can transmit
much more current in extremely high magnetic fields than conventional
superconductors. Not only can the applications of unconventional superconductors
be transformative, but the fundamental physics explaining their normal and
superconducting properties remains elusive over all of this time. With the
support of the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program, the research group
will study unconventional superconductor phases that include metals such as
niobium and tantalum, as well as the nonmetallic elements sulfur, selenium or
tellurium. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Transition metal
chalcogenides comprise superconducting phases with high critical temperatures,
such as iron and molybdenum chalcogenides. The research effort focuses on new
ternary and quaternary niobium and tantalum chalcogenides, with some of these
phases showing unconventional superconductivity with very large critical fields.
At the core of this behavior are interactions between electron charge, electron
spin and the lattice (the crystal structure). Critically important are the
synthesis and growth of high quality samples for a detailed understanding of
structure-property relationships. Structural characterization using diffraction
techniques will be combined with investigations of physical properties,
including magnetic susceptibility, electronic transport properties and optical
properties. Furthermore, tuning of the physical properties by a combination of
chemical substitutions and stoichiometry variations are explored. Crystal growth
of such phases is well matched to the areas delineated in the National Academy
of Sciences report "Frontiers in Crystalline Matter: From Discovery to
Technology," which focuses on the opportunities for discovery and growth of
crystalline matter in the US. This research is a highly interdisciplinary
activity that requires a variety of skills. Training of students in the art and
science of crystal growth and characterization of materials at undergraduate,
graduate and postgraduate levels trains the next generation of scientists and
engineers active in this field and builds the highly skilled workforce needed to
address tomorrow's challenges.