* 1606738
* GeoPRISMS Office Support
* GEO,EAR
* 11/01/2016,10/31/2021
* Demian Saffer, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 10/31/2021
* USD 1,446,867.00

GeoPRISMS is a community-led program aimed at understanding active processes
along continental margins, through integrative approaches that merge field
studies, laboratory experiments, and theoretical analysis. The program addresses
first-order questions about Earth's most active tectonic, mass transfer, and
sedimentary systems, and which are relevant to major geohazards that affect
population centers, including large earthquakes, volcanic eruptions, tsunamis,
and landslides. The program supports interdisciplinary scientific research that
crosses the land-ocean boundary, and focuses these efforts at selected locations
where national and international collaborations can be leveraged; the focus
sites for GeoPRISMS include the eastern margin of North America, and the
subduction plate boundaries of the Pacific Northwest and Alaska.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;GeoPRISMS science is organized around two initiatives -
Rift Initiation and Evolution (RIE) and Subduction Cycles and Dynamics (SCD) -
that address the behavior and dynamics of continental margins, which host large
population centers and are critical regions to wide-ranging industrial,
economic, transport, and strategic activity. The two initiatives are further
linked by a suite of overarching themes that provide a context for integration
and process-based understanding of these complex systems. Taken together, these
two elements of the GeoPRISMS program target fundamental and outstanding
questions in the Solid Earth sciences including: feedbacks between fluids,
magmas, and deformation; controls on along-strike and temporal variations in
deformation behavior, earthquakes, and geochemical cycling; and links between
surface processes and deformation. The framework of the program, and the
activities of the office to coordinate a diverse scientific community, provide
an important intellectual incubator for the exchange of ideas, new
collaborations, and engagement of students and early career scientists. The
GeoPRISMS Office plays an essential role in this vibrant community-driven
program by developing, coordinating, and facilitating research collaboration,
synergy across disciplines, and engagement of a diverse scientific community.
Specific activities include the organization of meetings and workshops;
dissemination of research findings and opportunities through the website and
publication of a newsletter; identification of new opportunities for
collaboration with major international and national programs; managing database
activities; assisting with logistical and scientific activities; and serving as
a liaison between NSF and the GeoPRISMS community.