* 1606577
* I-Corps: Development of an Audio Forensic Analysis Tool
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2016,03/31/2017
* Hafiz Malik, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 03/31/2017
* USD 50,000.00

The use of digital multimedia (images, audio, &amp; video) as evidence is
rapidly growing in multiple civic applications, including legal proceedings and
law enforcement. Verifying the authenticity and integrity of digital evidence is
a complex and a challenging task given the ease with which digital information
can be copied and altered using widely available editing tools. In particular,
in the absence of helping data (i.e., digital watermarks) and if the only input
is the media itself, authentication poses unique problems for digital forensics.
Until now existing state-of-the-art is unable to uniquely link a given digital
recording to "the" microphone, link an audio recording to the location it was
made, or detect traces of anti-forensic processing. The proposed audio forensic
analysis tool enables a forensics analyst to provide authoritative answers to
basic forensic investigation questions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims
to demonstrate effectiveness of the audio forensic analysis tool capable to
detecting forgeries in digital audio recordings. The proposed tool relies on
acoustic cues, microphone nonlinearity traces, and post-processing artifacts
left in the digital audio recording. The proposed tool uses statistical data
modeling and feature extraction techniques to capture these fingerprints, and
use them for linking a given recording to "the" acquisition device and to "the"
acoustic environment. This team believes that the proposed audio forensic
analysis tool, when successfully commercialized, could provide forensic
examiners, traditional media, news outlets, social media, and law enforcement
personnel a very powerful, computationally efficient, scalable, and reliable
tool to perform online (as well as offline) forensics analysis, to determine
authenticity of the digital media object, localize forgery (if any) in the
digital media object.