* 1606836
* The Fundamental Limit of Fiber-Optic Sensors in the Infrasonic Region
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2016,04/30/2021
* Lingze Duan, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Standard Grant
* Ruyan Guo
* 04/30/2021
* USD 340,314.00

Abstract Title: The Fundamental Limit of Fiber-Optic Sensors in the Infrasonic
Region&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical: Fiber-optic sensors have been widely
used in industry and research. However, one of their fundamental properties, the
intrinsic limit of sensitivity, has not been fully understood. Specifically, at
infrasonic frequencies (below 20 Hz), there has been no direct observation of
the inherent noise in fiber-optic sensors, and the available theories remain
inconclusive. The proposed project aims to address this problem by devising a
set of experiments to probe the sensitivity-limiting noise in optical fibers and
supporting the experimental study with advanced theoretical modeling. By
uncovering the physics underlying the ultimate limit of sensor performance at
low frequencies, the research will substantially deepen the understanding of
infrasonic fiber-optic sensing, allowing future sensor designers to exploit the
full potential of fiber-optic sensors at an unprecedented level of sensitivity.
Moreover, the novel sensor designs used in the experiments will serve as
blueprints for future ultra-sensitive distributed infrasound sensors, which are
critical for monitoring mass-destruction weapons, earthquakes, volcanic
eruptions, glacial motions, etc. The project will directly fund multiple
students at both undergraduate and graduate levels and will generate capstone
and summer research opportunities for college and high school students. It will
also help create a new research thrust, precision fiber-optic sensing, at the
University of Alabama in Huntsville, and improve the presence of NSF in the
state of Alabama.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: The overarching goal of the
planned research is to understand the physics that sets the ultimate limit of
fiber sensor sensitivity at low frequencies. The investigation will primarily
focus on direct measurement of the spontaneous thermal noise generated by
optical fibers in the infrasonic region. A parallel effort will also be
dedicated to the development of a three-dimensional visco-elastic model with
concentric structures to describe the thermomechanical noise in optical fibers.
To address the challenges facing the measurement of the minuscule thermal noise
at infrasonic frequencies, a new sensor design based on a Mach-Zehnder-Fabry-
Perot hybrid interferometer will be employed. Preliminary theoretical analysis
has shown that such a scheme is able to raise the sensor sensitivity by a factor
of 104, hence extending the thermal noise-dominated spectral region to well
below 1 Hz. The scientific merit of the proposed research rests upon its primary
goal toward uncovering the fundamental physical law of fiber thermal noise. The
mystery surrounding the 1/f behavior of fiber thermal noise has puzzled
researchers for two decades. There is an urgent need within the fiber-optic
sensor community for a thorough investigation specifically targeting the low-
frequency characteristics of thermal noise. By leveraging new sensing concepts
such as hybrid interferometers, the proposed work will completely transform
optical sensing for low-frequency signals and open up a new paradigm of
infrasonic technologies.