* 1606040
* Deep ocean internal wave generation in weak stratification
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2021
* Julie Crockett, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 07/31/2021
* USD 232,183.00

PI: Crockett, Julie&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1606040&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
concentration of salt in the ocean changes with depth. This fact generates waves
within the water that are called internal waves. The breaking of these waves
drives much of the mixing in the deep ocean, defining mixing rates of
pollutants, greenhouse gases, ocean nutrients and maintaining a balanced
temperature distribution. It has been estimated that 2.1 terawatts of mixing
power is required to maintain critical ocean mixing. Over half of the necessary
power is postulated to come from internal waves generated by tidal flow over
rough topography. The waves propagate through interactions with other waves and
with ocean currents, until they convert to smaller scale, breaking waves. The
focus of this proposal is to use laboratory experiments to study this process of
internal wave generation and to understand how internal waves are generated and
propagated within the ocean system. Findings from this research could lead to
the development of new large scale ocean models that are important for the
prediction of aquatic life migration patterns, for the prediction of the
dispersion of pollutants in the ocean (like the dispersion of the radioactive
spill from the Fukushima accident) and for the prediction of weather and climate
patterns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An unexpected contributor to internal wave
generation is tides flowing over topography in regions where the stratification
is too weak for internal waves to be generated directly above the topography,
yet internal waves can be observed well above the topography in a region where
the stratification has increased. These waves may contribute to the conversion
of tidal energy from large to small scales, which has important environmental
consequences for wave-breaking and resultant mixing. The work proposed here is
an experimental and analytical effort to characterize a relatively unexplored
method of internal wave generation - the generation of internal waves due to
tidal flow over topography in regions of weak stratification (where internal
waves are not predicted to propagate) which radiate into strong stratification
regions with implications for characterizing the internal wave energy spectrum
throughout the ocean. It is proposed to: 1) explore internal wave generation by
both uniform and tidal flow over topography in a two-layer stratification
profile using experimentation; 2) characterize the effect of variations in
stratification profile on internal wave generation, where for all stratification
profiles the topography is in a region of weak stratification, such that
internal waves are not expected, with a stronger stratification above; and 3)
create an analytical model of the energy propagation from the topography through
the variable stratification including the region representing evanescent to
propagating waves. The project will contribute to the development of
experimental methodology and understanding of stratified flow dynamics which
will inform large scale modeling systems, resulting in better wave generation,
propagation, and dissipation estimates. On the educational side, the project
will support a research program of a professor from an under-represented group
and training of graduate and undergraduate students in the ideas, concepts and
practice of fluid dynamics, physical oceanography, internal wave theory,
experimental methodology, and data analysis. The research will also be
highlighted in high school and lower-division outreach activities and in upper-
division courses.