* 1606362
* NSFSaTC-BSF: TWC: Small: Horizons of Symmetric-Key Cryptography
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Chris Peikert, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 08/31/2018
* USD 499,997.00

Symmetric-key primitives are the lifeblood of practical cryptography, and are
critical components of nearly any computer security system. The cryptographic
community has developed a rich body of work on theoretically sound symmetric
objects, but they are many orders of magnitude too slow for realistic usage.
Thus, practitioners use fast primitives that have been designed to withstand
known attacks, but which lack rigorous security guarantees based on natural
mathematical problems. Recent results demonstrate that symmetric primitives
based on theoretically sound designs can also enjoy realistic levels of
efficiency. This project leverages this insight to demonstrate the feasibility,
efficiency, and broad applicability of a wide array of new symmetric objects to
enable new security applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of this project
is the design of theoretically sound and computationally efficient symmetric-key
cryptographic schemes. These will range from basic primitives like pseudorandom
functions and block ciphers; to applications like proof systems, digital
signatures, functional encryption, and broadcast encryption, and will also
include practical implementations such as fully homomorphic evaluation of
symmetric-key primitives. A core theme of this research is to exploit the
algebraic structure, and to demonstrate feasibility of symmetric-key objects in
settings where public-key ones appear significantly more difficult (or
impossible) to obtain. The project will also develop open-source software
library that exhibits these constructions in practice, and facilitates further
implementations.