* 1606988
* RUI:  Continuation of Support for Short-range Tests of Gravity at Humboldt State University
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Charles Hoyle, Humboldt State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 07/31/2020
* USD 156,000.00

Humboldt State University (HSU) is a federally-recognized Hispanic Serving
Institution in a predominantly rural area of Northern California, and the
Gravitational Physics Laboratory (GPL) is the only dedicated hands-on physics
research laboratory in the Department of Physics and Astronomy. This award
ensures that HSU undergraduates, many of whom are first-generation college
students and members of underrepresented groups in STEM fields, gain valuable
research skills necessary for the pursuit of graduate studies or careers in
industry. Undergraduates will also be sent to perform research at the University
of Washington through a collaboration formed with a gravity research group
there. This collaboration gives the students experience working in a world-class
research environment. Alumni of the laboratory have secured prestigious graduate
fellowships and industrial positions. This award greatly contributes to the
expansion of research at HSU in the STEM fields. Within the major program,
software and hardware developed for this project will be transferable to
educational opportunities in the upper division classroom. This award also
allows undergraduates to participate in valuable dissemination efforts through
presentations at national and regional conferences, as well as publication of
research results. Finally, tests of gravity are of great interest to research in
diverse fields ranging from astrophysics and cosmology to particle physics and
precision measurement science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This award supports high-
precision experiments that will test the Weak Equivalence Principle (WEP) of
General Relativity and the gravitational Inverse-Square Law (ISL) at
unprecedented levels. The WEP will be tested at the millimeter scale and the ISL
will be probed over sub-millimeter distances with unmatched sensitivity down to
approximately 25 microns. Both tests use a novel parallel-plate torsion pendulum
and attractor mass design. In recent years the study of the gravitational
interaction at short (sub-millimeter) distance scales has gained much attention
due in a large part to unification scenarios arising in string or M theory that
require more than three spatial dimensions, some of which could be macroscopic.
Short-range tests of gravity and the WEP also investigate possible proposed
mechanisms that attempt to explain the accelerated expansion of the universe,
generally attributed to Dark Energy. Finally, such tests present the possibility
to search for hypothetical new interactions due to exotic particles or other
phenomena. Many scenarios concerning these effects predict a violation of the
WEP or ISL at short distances. Since 1999, experimental limits have improved
dramatically so that the ISL has proven valid over distances down to
approximately 55 microns. A dedicated test of the WEP, however, has not been
performed below the millimeter scale. The work described in this proposal will
probe the WEP for test mass separations at the sub-millimeter scale. This
measurement will be accomplished with a parallel-plate torsion pendulum design
that will provide an essentially null experiment and use multiple composition
dipole combinations. Similarly, an unparalleled test of the gravitational ISL
will be pursued by decreasing the pendulum/attractor test mass separation to 100
microns.